 A person’s name is written in the Chinese way, surname first, such as Mao Zedong . The name of a person in China is written first in the way, first being a surname .
 China represents one of the oldest civilizations in the world with a recorded military history of 4,500 years . China's military history dates back to 4,000 years .
 China’s military tradition emerged from strategic concerns, war experience, civil-military relations, and technological development . Based on its unique geographic setting, demographic characteristics, and political structure, China's military tradition has emerged .
 China has frequently been involved in border conflicts, territorial expansion, civil wars, and invasions . As the largest country in Asia in both population and territory, China has had its own border conflicts .
 China’s war-fighting experience has become intertwined with Chinese history . China's war experience has been intertwined with its history .
 Each imperial dynasty and modern government came to power through military struggle . Each of these came from a military struggle, and came from around the world .
 Chinese military history is pivotal for a better understanding of Chinese civilization, political institutions, and foreign policy . Chinese history is crucial for understanding of China's foreign policy, history, culture .
 Whether China would ever go to war with the U.S. is a perennial foreign policy topic . China's relationship with the United States is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 Most pundits forget that, in fact, both nations already fought 60 years ago . Both countries fought in the first World War II .
 Over the next three years, more than 3 million Chinese troops battled the U.S.-led United Nations Forces . The Korean War was a conflict between China and the United States . Over the years, China fought U.N. forces in Korea .
 Facing vastly superior firepower, China suffered 1. million casualties . China suffered more than 1 million casualties in battle against superior firepower .
 While the American intent was to secure Korea through its police action, the U.S. intent was not to secure the country .
 North Korean tenacity and China’s intervention created a bitter stalemate on the Korean peninsula . North Korea tenacity, China intervention created stalemate in the Korean Peninsula .
 China created dominant power status in Asia as a new communist state . Having just been founded in October 1949, it created its dominant power in Asia .
 Not only was China capable of fighting the world’s most powerful country to a draw, but it also proved that Chinese society was secure enough to withstand a terrible conflict .
 The Soviet Union and after the Sino-Soviet split, the United States sought Beijing’s favor . Those factors brought first the Soviet Union to seek the U.S. favor . The United States also sought Beijing's favor .
 Even today, the world’s most powerful nations measure their standing in Asia by their relations with China . China is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 It has become the second-largest economy in the world by 2011, only after the xv XVI Preface United States . The United States is the only nation not to have a large economy .
 The PRC is also modernizing its military, the People's Liberation Army . The army, navy, air force, and strategic missile force are modernizing the PRC's military .
 Many Americans and peoples of other nations are concerned about China’s future course, especially in the area of its expanding military power . China is expanding its military power, particularly in the areas of its growing military power.
 The U.S. government and American schools are dedicating more resources to the study of the country’s evolving modernization .
 American policy makers emphasize the development of a civil society and meeting international standards as a step toward transforming China into a democratic society . U.S. policy makers say they want to change the relationship between the army and the party .
 Historians and experts are attempting to determine if China threatens America and security in the Pacific region in the present and future . U.S. military historians and experts have been trying to determine whether China threatens the United States . China is one of the most powerful countries in the world and has
 According to the China threat proponents, China’s dramatic economic development will inevitably result in the expanding of its military power . The China threat is said to be the result of the country's dramatic development .
 Any country that insists on the maintenance of peace will find it hard, if not impossible, to become a real power . Conversely, they assert, they say, any country that . insists on maintaining peace will struggle to become an . real power.
 The lack of political democratization in China and the distinct possibility of a war between the mainland and Taiwan make the future of China uncertain, unpredictable and, therefore, extremely menacing . Furthermore, the possibility of war between Taiwan and the mainland makes the future uncertain and unpredictable .
 Both sides of the argument link military modernization and political democratization . Nevertheless, both sides are on the side of the debate .
 Some of the American and Western military experts, however, are hindered by limited access to Communist sources . Some Western and American military experts have been unable to access Communist sources in China .
 In China, scholarly research on the Chinese military takes a more social approach, paying more attention to the links between the military, politics, and society . The Chinese military is a major source of influence in the country's military .
 Recent research in China focuses on the soldier’s efforts to define his place within a socialist society .
 Moral issues, family values, individual concerns, a bureaucratic system, and educational factors were emphasized in academic discussions during the reform movement led by Deng Xiaoping (Deng Hsiao-ping) in China .
 Chinese scholars still have a long way to go before objective, truthful, and scientific research on the history of Chinese military can be published in their home country . For political reasons, Chinese scholars have not been able to publish their research in their own country .
 Broader coverage of the Chinese military is needed to render an objective study of the country's military .
 This encyclopedia offers students and general readers the opportunity to examine historically and better understand the key issues of Chinese military . It offers students the chance to examine the history of China's military .
 These issues include strategy, sovereignty, national defense, national security, technology, and technology, among others .
 Each entry provides a brief history of the topic with a solid, up-to-date foundation for learning about China’s military in an accessible manner .
 The volume explores at the strategic level by examining how the leaders, whether emperors or presidents, made decisions and mobilized the country for war . Told through a Chinese perspective, the volume explores the strategic .
 It reveals how the leadership debated strategic decisions about objectives . It also reveals how they debated strategic choices about objectives for the future .
 It examines the Chinese military structure, bureaucratic function, and technological development . It also examines the country's military structure and bureaucratic function .
 Another focus of the book is on the Chinese operational experience at the strategic and tactical levels . The book is also a look at the Chinese military experience in China .
 It provides insights into Chinese battle planning and preparations, campaign organization and execution, tactical decisions, technology, and performance .
 China at War looks into inner circles of the Chinese military that have defined the army’s characteristics and changed through history .
 The Chinese army acted according to its own tradition, consistent logic in military affairs, says the Chinese army . China's military has been criticized for its actions in recent years .
 The war experience often changed the direction of the country, and had a strong impact on China’s economy, politics, culture, and society . War experience often had a large impact on the country's economy and society, says historian .
 The values, concepts, and attitudes influenced their security concerns, strategic decisions, and approach to war . The values and attitudes of the U.S. were influenced by their values, attitudes and attitudes, the author says .
 Comparing Chinese with Western views of war is a popular topic of discussion among military experts and the general public . Comparing China's views on war with the West is also a popular discussion topic of debate .
 Scholars in Europe and in America have studied the 4,500-year Chinese warfare and military thought, from Sunzi’s (Sun-tzu, or Sun Zi) classic The Art of War and Mao Zedong .
 Mao’s military theories, which drew heavily on ancient classics like Sunzi's, remain a vital component of the Chinese military history and expertise . Mao's military theories are still a vital part of the military history .
 This consistent history reflects Chinese methods for conducting a war, some of which are diametrically opposed to the Western approach to war . China has a consistent history of conducting its own war, which is against Western methods .
 China at War shows several major features unique to the Chinese that are worthy of consideration, even if they may not constitute a separate way of war . The film is based on the book "China at War" by China's former president and prime minister .
 Chinese warfare is conducted by a political power center that can generate popular support for war, says CNN.com's John Defterios . He says China's political power centers are key to its success .
 That power center could be a dynasty, government, rebel army, or political party . It could mobilize the entire country and concentrate its economic resources on war through a highly centralized, well-organized institution .
 Chinese belief in human superiority over technology suggests a different attitude toward war and battle . Shaped by military culture and traditional religions, the Chinese belief is different from technology .
 The idea that a soldier or a warrior, because of his godliness and virtue, can vanquish stronger opponents is very traditional to the Chinese army . The idea of a soldier who is godly and a warrior vanquishing stronger opponents can be traditional to China .
 Chinese operational culture emphasizes secrecy, surprise, and deception . Thirdly, the Chinese military emphasizes secrecy and surprise .
 The Chinese do not consider protracted war as a favorable situation in traditional war fighting . The Chinese are wary of protracted war .
 The entries indicate that the Chinese military classics recognized the detrimental effects incessant warfare had upon the state . The entries show that the military classics were aware of the detrimental effect incessant war had on state .
 This one-volume encyclopedia details the most important and influential people, events, ideas, battles, and battles in Chinese military history . This one volume encyclopedia details most important events, people and ideas in Chinese history .
 It provides a comprehensive resource on China’s warfighting experience in more than 4,500 years . It provides an overview of the country's war experience in 4,000 years .
 The book expands beyond the conventional military perspective . It addresses the Chinese view of war, their values, concepts, and attitudes . The book also addresses the values and attitudes of war .
 It includes entries by scholars from China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Canada, Great Britain, and the U.S. It also includes entries from Canada, Canada and Great Britain .
 I am grateful to David A Graff, Kenneth Swope, Harold Tanner, Maochun Yu, and Xiaoming Zhang for their advice and support .
 Guan Zhichao, Niu Jun, Wan Qing, Major General Wang Baochun, Yang Kuisong, and Zhang Pengfei for their help .
 First, I would like to thank Provost William J Radke, Vice Provost Patricia A LaGrow, Dean of the College of Liberal Arts Pamela Washington . Dean of Jackson College of Graduate Studies Richard Bernard, and Associate Dean Gary Steward .
 "They have been very supportive of the project over the past three years. They have had to be very supportive," said the mayor . "They are very proud of their efforts," said Mayor David Cameron .
 The UCO faculty merit-credit program sponsored by the Office of Academic Affairs and College of Liberal Arts research grant provided funding for my research .
 The UCO student research, creative, and scholarly activities grants sponsored by the Office of Research and Grants also made student research assistants available for this project during the past three years .
 Special thanks go to UCO professor Stanley J Adamiak who proofread and reviewed part of the manuscript . Special thanks also go to Professor Stanley J.
 UCO graduate student Michael Molina managed the entire project through the years . He managed the project with the help of a graduate student at UCO .
 The active UCO Rho Lambda Chapter of the Phi Alpha Theta international history honor society provided assistance in outreaching to contributors through its network . The active members of the U.C. Lambda chapter provided assistance .
 UCO professors Jeffrey Plaks and Michael S Springer as UCO Phi Alpha Theta faculty sponsors supported this project from the beginning . UCO is a member of Phi Alpha theta .
 Several graduate and undergraduate students at UCO contributed to the book, including Justin Burch and Jia Chen .
 I also wish to thank Andrew McCormick at ABC-CLIO, who patiently guided this project . I wish to give a full transcript of the video .
 Any remaining errors of facts, language usage, and interpretation are my own . The author of this article does not condone any of these errors .
 China possesses rich historical documents, ancient relics, and folklore . Xiaobing Li introduces China as one of the earliest civilizations in the world . China's history is rich in ancient relics and ancient relics .
 Early Chinese military traditions evolved gradually through its prehistory, ancient, and classical periods . The Chinese military tradition has evolved slowly through prehistory and ancient periods .
 China’s army acted according to its own consistent inner logic in its military affairs . China's army acted . according to the country's own consistent internal logic, says state-run media .
 Chinese strategic issues, institutional characteristics, and operational behaviors created some general patterns through centuries of change, revolution, and war . Through its history, China's strategic issues and institutional characteristics have created general patterns .
 The ancient Chinese army experienced important transitions from warrior clans, to slave soldiers, and then to peasant soldiers . The transition occurred during the development of a more unified civil government .
 Relics showing how primitive Chinese people lived in gens communes have been found in many parts of central China along the Yellow River . The cradle of Chinese civilization and military tradition .
 Warmer weather. improved tools, and domestication of some animals in 12,000-8000 BC led to agricultural development and expanding populations . Warmer . weather . improved tools and domesticated some animals led to . agricultural development .
 The people had already acquired the skill of making stone and bone instruments and weapons . They had already learned to make stone and bones .
 In approximately 3000 BC, many clans along the Yellow River developed patriarchal society . In approximately 3,000 BC, men were dominant in society .
 This period marked the beginning of Chinese military history with the first soldiers, whose stone weapons and defense works protected the clans . Stone weapons were used to protect clans .
 Among the five emperors was the Yellow Emperor . He led many tribes in the Huaxia group along the western Yellow River . The Yellow Emperor was one of the five .
 In 2250 BC, the Yellow Emperor’s forces defeated the eastern army at Zhuolu . The Yellow Emperor was defeated by the eastern forces . The eastern army was defeated in the same battle .
 The Battle of Zhuolu was the first recorded battle in Chinese military history . The battle was fought in Zhuolou in the early years of Chinese history .
 Huaxia group eventually conquered and unified Chinese territories . Through three generations of military leadership, they conquered and conquered China .
 Stone was still the major material for making tools and weapons . Copper weapons appeared in the 1800s .
 Production of various kinds of tools and weapons had increased . Progress made in the division of labor and the exchange of commodities sped up the development of the institution of private property .
 Chinese rice productivity along Yellow and Yangzi Rivers generated enough wealth and food to support large numbers of troops .
 The Xia emperors also developed maps highlighting roads, rivers, and towns on their legendary “nine big tripods” for their commerce and military . The Xia emperor’s maps were also developed to highlight their military and commerce efforts .
 Revolts toppled the Xia empire, leading to the creation of a new dynasty, the Shang dynasty . The Xia empire was ruled by the Xia dynasty, but was ruled out of existence .
 Relics discovered in the Yin ruins indicate a structured government and well organized army . Relics found in the ancient city of Yin indicate a structure government and army .
 Shang writing has been found incised on ‘dragon bones,” actually the under-shells of tortoises, the scapulae or shoulder blades of cattle, and other flattish bones . Inscriptions occur on some early bronzes, but most Shang writing
 By the late Shang, continuous military expeditions, aristocrat factions and corruption, and hard punishments weakened the dynasty . The Shang dynasty was founded by the Shang Shang, but ended in 2011 .
 The area under Shang control became smaller and smaller . Vassal or even rival states emerged, and the area was under control .
 Zhou was one of the Shang’s subordinate states in the west (modern Shaanxi Province) Zhou rose rapidly in terms of economy, military, and population . Zhou became one of Shang's subordinate states .
 On February 4, Zhou’s troops arrived at Muye, a small town about 30 miles from the capital . The Zhou's troops arrived on February 4 at the town .
 Shang emperor led 170,000 troops, most of them slave soldiers, to meet the Zhou at Muye . Most of the troops were slave soldiers . The Shang emperor was led by most of the soldiers .
 The Zhou king attacked the Shang’s center, the elite aristocratic troops . The next morning, the Zhou king launched the attack on the Shang's center .
 Most of the slave soldiers dropped their weapons and fled or joined the Zhou . When the Shang’s elite troops fell back, most of the slaves fell back and fled .
 Shang emperor fled Muye and committed suicide in his palace that night . Shang emperor committed suicide after fleeing Muyo and committing suicide in the palace .
 After the Battle of Muye, the Zhou king ended the Shang dynasty and established the Zhou dynasty . The Zhou king established the state of Zhou after the battle .
 Zhou adopted a system of fiefs whereby land and people were awarded to various dukes or princes . All land technically belonged to the emperor, even though all land was technically owned by the emperor . Land was awarded to the dukes and princes, but land was given to the princes
 Supported by aristocratic warriors, the lord ruled over the peasant masses and the slaves . Supported by his aristocratic . warriors, he ruled over . the peasants and the . slaves .
 According to official records, 71 city-states were created in this manner . 71 cities-states have been created by this method .
 Because of the lack of central control and increasing competition among the rival states, philosophy, strategic theory, and literature flourished . Confucianism, Daoism, and Sunzi’s military classic, Sunzi, was Sunzi's military classic .
 Confucianism justified an authoritarian family pattern as a basis for social orders in political as well as in domestic life . Confucanism justified authoritarian family patterns as basis of social orders .
 The role of emperor and his officials was merely that of the father writ large . Emperor and officials were merely the role of the emperor writ large, he said .
 It explains human nature or the natural laws of human beings through an ethical approach . Greek philosophers did so through logic, mathematics or physics, or religious approaches .
 Confucianism as a school of philosophy focuses on individual moral conduct, family relations, and moral government in the context of the society . Confucanism focuses on individuals' moral conduct and family relations in context of society .
 Confucian and Daoist thoughts blended with Buddhist thought into the Chinese worldview . Confucians and D.aoist thought blended with Buddhists in the modern Chinese society .
 Continuing social disorder and endless warfare spurred philosophical and strategic debate . Continued social disorder led to endless warfare in the U.S.
 Sunzi argued that the differences between a skillful strategist and a boorish commander were that the former had wisdom, but the latter only bravery . Sunzi argues that the difference is between wisdom and bravery, and the latter is wisdom .
 Bravery without wisdom leads to sure failure; wisdom without bravery, with smart planning, may be successful . Wisdom without bravery may be necessary, but smart planning may be smart planning .
 The most dangerous military leader is not a brave commander, but a skillful strategist, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Most dangerous military leaders are not brave commanders but skillful strategists .
 The Art of War is the first important work on strategy and theory in world military history . It is the most important work in the history of the world's armed forces .
 His philosophical interpretations of the war and combat tactics have made his book a timeless bible for the Chinese military in the past 2,500 years . The book has been translated into more than 300 pages .
 Qin embarked on a dramatic conquest of ancient China’s separate kingdoms . During the Warring States Period, among the seven states, the king of Qin embarked upon a dramatic conquasiation . Qin was one of China's seven states .
 Having drafted a massive infantry army, he had an efficient military machine under strong commanders . He drafted an efficient infantry army under strong command .
 Instead of using chariots, his army possessed cavalry, superior iron weapons, and the crossbow, all comparatively new developments at the time . The king's army was equipped with superior iron and crossbow technology .
 "His attacks on the others, especially sieges, became much more forceful and merciless," he said .
 Qin dynasty established a highly centralized regime, the first of its kind in Chinese history . Qin was the first to establish a state of its own in China .
 This central monarchical or imperial system lasted for more than 2,000 years without significant changes . The central monarchs or imperial systems lasted without significant change .
 The empire was based upon two main social groups, taxpaying peasants and rich landowners . It was based on the social status of the peasants and wealthy landowners .
 The Qin terminated the separate city-state system and transformed land ownership from dynastic families, relatives, and lords to private owners . The Qin ended the city state system and turned land ownership into private ownership .
 The tax-paying peasants and . XXII Introduction landowners supported the entire empire and imperial system . The tax payers and peasants supported the . entire empire .
 He was also required to spend one month per year working on roads, canals, palaces, imperial tombs, or military duties . Besides, he was required to work on roads and canals .
 Shi Huangdi used 2 million peasants to build the Great Wall and defend the frontier . The Great Wall was built by peasants to defend the Chinese frontier . Shi Huangd used 2 . million peasants .
 Externally, it was built for defense against the “northern barbarians,” including the nomadic Xiongnu, Turks, Khitan, Mongols, Xianbei, Jurchen, and Manchus . It was built to defend against nomadic nom
 Internally, it walled Chinese society and created a political central gravity of the emperor . The emperor's rule was created to create a central political center in China .
 The Great Wall stretches for 2,000 miles, beginning in the western desert and ending in the eastern coast of China . It is the longest of the Great Wall, stretching from the west to the east of China's eastern coast .
 China's population reached 54 million by the end of the Qin, at a time when the population of the Roman Empire was no more than 46 million . China’s population of 54 million was at the time when Roman Empire had 46 million people . The population of China was 46 million
 In Qin draft system, all 21-year-old male peasants were required to register . The Qin draft is a draft system .
 Many of them served for two years, between their twentythird and fifty-sixth birthday . Many of the men served between the ages of 20 and 50 years .
 Shi Huangdi’s sponsoring of Legalist policy, he influenced the whole future Chinese conception of law, he says . Huangdi's sponsoring of legalist policy influenced the future Chinese law .
 The law in imperial China was the tool of the empire in its determination as a general scale of worthiness and unworthiness, merit and demerit . The law was used to determine the scale of a person's worthiness .
 When they passed through Daze (southwest of today’s Suxian, Anhui Province), there was a sudden downpour, and they could not arrive in time . They could not reach Daze in time.
 Qin soldiers decided to start a rebellion after late arrival for military duties was punishable by death . They decided that they might as well start a revolt .
 They staged an armed uprising at Daze and quickly occupied Chenxian , Henan Province . The armed uprising was staged at the Daze base in Daze Province .
 They called on all the peasants in China to revolt against the Qin regime . The Qin regime was overthrown by the Qin dynasty .
 The Qin dynasty was ruled by peasants who had only hoes and clubs as weapons . It was this kind of violence, spearheaded by peasants, that eventually toppled them .
 Change began a cycle of dynasties in China that would continue for the next 2,000 years . This change began a dynasty that would last for more than two centuries .
 The Han dynasty continued the conscription system through its provincial and county recruiting offices . Emperor, Peasant Army, and Dynastic Cycle .
 The Han rulers of the Han paid particular attention to the promotion of agriculture . Having witnessed the power of peasants during the period of the rebellion .
 A policy of this kind has benefited economic and military development, it has been said .
 Han soldiers began to wear armor made of lamellar, overlapping leather or metal plates sewn onto a cloth . The Han soldiers wore armor made from lamellars made of overlapping leather .
 The armor provided better protection during the frequent offensive campaigns . Light and flexible, it was light and flexible . The armor was light, flexible and flexible.
 The successful military expeditions and territorial expansion convinced the Han emperors and the Chinese people of their superiority in civilization and institution .
 The Han emperors believed that China was the “Central Kingdom,” which was superior to any other people and nation under heaven . China occupied a central position in the known universe, the Han believed .
 It justified Han Wudi’s military invasions that incorporated the ‘barbarian’ people into Chinese civilization through a continuous process of acculturation . The “barbaric” people were incorporated into Chinese culture through the continuous process .
 The Han's success became a benchmark for future leaders in terms of territory and geopolitics . The Han’s success was a benchmark . His success was seen as the basis for future Chinese leaders .
 To secure China’s central position in Asia, Han emperors maintained a large army of over 1 million men . Han emperor's army was one of the largest armies in history .
 The conscription system, however, did not meet the extraordinary demands of frequent wars . The limits of ages had been expanded from 23 to 56 to between 20 and 65 years old .
 The emperor and his imperial system promised the peasant opportunities and protection . The emperor's system promised to protect the peasants, but the system failed to reach them, says historian .
 The peasant sustained traditional ideas, ethical codes, and a mutual obligation between the emperor and himself to serve the empire . Therefore, the peasant sustained . traditional ideas and ethical codes .
 For more than 2,000 years, the Chinese peasant was subordinate to the will of the emperor and tried to meet his duties and service . The Chinese peasant is subordinate to his will to the emperor .
 The late Han emperors also began to incorporate criminals and accept mercenary recruits in the army . The late emperors began incorporating criminals and accepting mercenary recruits .
 The former were those who committed a crime and were sentenced to service as punishment; the latter served for money . The latter were those convicted of a crime who were sentenced as punishment for money.
 These measures failed to stave off the dynasty’s decline . Its efforts to create an Asian empire had drained its resources without any significant economic return .
 Last emperors, who lost the Mandate, were not only considered weak, but often described as evil . Usually, the last emperors were considered weak and often described evil .
 During the Sui dynasty, although the emperors reunified the country, they squandered public treasure in building palaces for their own comfort and vanity . The emperors built palaces in China for their comfort, vanity and comfort .
 Several million peasant draftees served as soldiers and laborers for the military expeditions . They attempted to reconquer Korea three times .
 Sui peasants were exhausted and the Sui treasury nearly empty . As a result, the peasants had to leave their hands on the peasants . The Sui people were exhausted .
 The burden on the peasants had become unbearable, so they rebelled, dealing severe blows to the Sui regime . They rebelled against Sui's regime .
 While the flames of peasant uprisings burned across the country, local landlords gained authority to recruit and occupy specific parts of China . Landlords recruited and occupied specific areas of China in order to recruit locals .
 These warlords safeguarded and then extended their power by extending their influence . Warlord's power was then extended by extending his influence in the Middle Ages .
 In 617, an aristocrat, Li Yuan, and his son Li Shimin attacked and occupied Chang’an, the Sui capital . Li Yuan and his sons were the sons of the aristocrat who attacked Chang'an .
 Sui emperor was assassinated by one of his bodyguards, marking the end of the Sui regime . Next year, he was assassinated . The Sui Emperor was assassinated next year, ending his reign .
 Li Yuan assumed the imperial title at Chang’an and called his new regime the Tang dynasty . The Tang dynasty became one of the most successful dynasties and made China once again central to Asian affairs .
 Tang emperor needed a self-sustaining army in order to prevent bankrupting the dynasty . The Tang emperor had to rely heavily on his own army to protect his dynasty .
 Tang rulers carried on the fubing system, a peasantsoldier reserve system established by the Northern Wei dynasty in 550 . To secure necessary manpower and economic resources, the Tang rulers used the system to secure manpower .
 The men in the fubing system were peasants in peacetime and reported to the local headquarters in times of war . They reported to their local headquarters during the war . The men were peasants and peasants during peacetime .
 In local administration, the two-tier system of provinces and counties prevailed, except for border and strategic areas, which were administered by garrison commands . The two tier system of provincial and county administration prevailed .
 The chief executive of each command was responsible for military as well as civil affairs . The governor-general was responsible in charge of the military and civilian affairs .
 The power of military governor-generals increased through the Tang dynasty . From then on, the power of governors-generalors increased .
 China’s development of gunpowder was first recorded in some books in the midTang dynasty . Gunpowder was developed in China during the Tang dynasty .
 The formula for gunpowder was discovered by Daoist alchemists when they attempted to make pills of immortality . Gunpowder was first discovered by the Daoists in an attempt to make immortality pills . The formula was discovered in China in the early 1900s .
 Afterward, some Chinese artisans produced black gunpowder using a mixture of niter, sulfur, and charcoal in a certain proportion . The formula is said to have been used by artisans in China .
 Gunpowder was first used to produce firecrackers and fireworks, and began to be applied to the military much later . Gunpowder is now being used in the military .
 Between 1225 and 1248, gunpowder was introduced to Arabia and then to Europe . It was extensively applied to the weapons industry, but also served various purposes such as construction . Gunpowder was first introduced to Europe in 1225 .
 Chinese military culture runs counter to the Western Way of War in that the emphasis is on technology . China's military culture is more focused on technology than the Western way of war .
 While gunpowder was developed in China, it was not used in the same manner there as it was in the West . Gunpowder developed in the country but was not developed as much as the West.
 When it was brought to the West, it became a catalyst for change and revolution due to the outward nature of warfare . The West saw it as an opportunity for change, revolution and change .
 In imperial China, the development of gunpowder was controlled by the government, and its use in military engagements was sidelined to the employment of traditional military weapons .
 The impact of such technologies was limited, since their spread internally could spell disaster for the emperors . Political considerations limited the spread of more advanced military technologies and kept the Chinese military in a state of technological stagnation for centuries .
 The first Song emperor, Zhao Kuangyin, took several measures to prevent the reemergence of separatist local regimes and concentrate all power in the central government . Zhao took measures to stop the re-emerging local regimes .
 The central government took the authority that previously belonged to the military govemors-general . Only civil officials could be appointed heads of local military and administrative affairs .
 The domination of the civilian bureaucracy in military affairs contributed to the Song army’s defeats by the Mongol invading troops . The domination led to the defeat of the Song Army .
 Mongols destroyed the Chinese army and ended the Song dynasty in 1279 . In 1279, the Mongols killed the Chinese soldiers and destroyed the army .
 Mongols based their forces on cavalry whose speed and mobility made them formidable . Mongols were the most powerful medieval military system, with the cavalry system .
 Their male population had all been trained since childhood as horsemen and mounted archers, a mode of fighting that had been dominant in central Asia steppes for centuries . The men were trained to be horsemen, archers .
 Their tremendous Introduction | xxv stamina and speed dazzled their Chinese opponents . Their stamina and strength dazzled them with their Xv stamina .
 They also used ferocious terror tactics, sparing cities that offered no resistance but often massacring all inhabitants of those that did . They also spared cities that offer no resistance and often massacred all inhabitants that did not .
 Mongol rulers founded the Yuan dynasty in China, and controlled Xinjiang and Tibet for the first time in Chinese history . The Mongol rulers ruled Xinjiang, Tibet and Xinjiang .
 Yuan made China, once again, central to Asian economy and politics . Yuan has made China once again central to Asia's economy, politics .
 Mongol rulers forcibly took large amounts of land from Chinese peasants . The Mongol rulers distributed them among garrison troops and temples . The land was distributed to garrison troops, temples .
 Many Chinese peasants in the north, after losing their land, became serfs to the Mongols . The Mongols took over their land from the Chinese peasants .
 Yuan rulers divided all the people into four classes . To sow discord among the various nationalities, the rulers divided them into four classes .
 The highest class belonged to the Mongols, followed in order by the Semu people, followed by the Uighurs and the Han people . The Semu was followed by Xia people, including Xia people and the U.ighurs .
 This division prevented people of the other nationalities from forming a united front against the Mongols . This division kept people of all nationalities out of form of unity .
 In 1351, the Red Turban Army, arose in Yingzhou, Anhui, and peasants in many other places joined . The army was formed in 1351 .
 The new ideas and new technology remained minor elements in the broad stream of Chinese military tradition . China's military tradition has seen the rise of new technology and new ideas .
 Ideas of change were spreading very slowly in the Ming dynasty, which shows a common pattern in terms of gunpowder and navigation technology . Ideas of new technology were spreading slowly in China .
 In each case, the Chinese military was inspired by the new technology but had to be superimposed on old indigenous institutions, which persisted so strongly as to slow down the demand for innovation and application .
 Large-scale peasant rebellions often undermined dynasties like that of the Ming rulers . In Chinese history, large-scale peasants rebellions frequently undermined dynasts .
 Government corruption went from bad to worse as eunuchs and court officials competed with one another for more power and privileges . Toward the end of the Ming dynasty, government corruption got worse . The eunuch and court official were among the most corrupt court officials .
 In 1627, northern Shaanxi experienced a severe drought, and not one kernel of grain was harvested . The drought lasted for 1627 and lasted for almost two years .
 As thousands of them starved, the survivors raised the standard of revolt . As thousands starved, they raised the standards of revolt against the government .
 From Shaanxi and Gansu Provinces, peasant leaders emerged, such as Li Zicheng and others, who commanded dozens of insurgent armies jointly . Li's father, Li, is a former president of China's Guangxi province .
 Not only the Han, but also the Mongolians and the Hui peasants, supported this rebellion . The Han, as well as Mongolians, supported the rebellion, according to the historian .
 Li raised the slogan of “equal landownership and zero taxation,” which reflected the poor peasants’ pressing needs . Li said the slogan reflected the needs of poor peasants in China . Li: The slogan of equal landownership was "zero taxation"
 Chongzhen (Ch’ung-chen, reigned 1628-1644), the last Ming emperor, committed suicide by hanging himself at the Coal Hill behind the Forbidden City . Having no place to flee, Chongzhen committed suicide at Coal Hill .
 Li led the grand army into Beijing, and the Ming dynasty came to an end . Li was one of the most powerful men in Chinese history . Li led a grand army to the capital, Beijing, in order to take over China .
 The Manchu state, which occupied northeast China, had been fighting the Ming army over the territory along the Great Wall for decades . The Ming army had been battling the Manchu for years .
 The Manchu leaders saw that the collapse of the Ming weakened Li’s military leadership . The collapse weakened Li's military leadership, according to the Manchu .
 At the time of the Qing, capitalism and industrialization rose dynamically in the Western world . The Qing era was a period of economic decline in China .
 Many countries expanded their empires by encroaching on Chinese territory . Many of these countries expanded empires by expanding their empires .
 Owing to the Manchu rulers’ closed-door policy, China’s policies became more and more passive on the whole . Owing . to the . Manchu rule, China's policies were more passive than ever before .
 Qing army improved Ming’s firearms technology and established a small naval force . Ming army improved its firearms technology in order to protect itself from enemies .
 Great Britain defeated the Qing army in the 1840 Opium War and partially opened China’s market . Yet, Great Britain still only partially opened the market in China .
 The Qing fought the British with outdated weapons and no cohesive plan or military structure . The Qing had no cohesive military structure or a cohesive plan .
 This allowed the British to maintain the initiative through the entire war . The British were able to keep the initiative throughout the war .
 Qing army also failed to take advantage of their superiority in numbers to the British . The Qing army failed to use their superior numbers to defeat the British.
 The Opium War changed the views and practice of the Chinese military in three ways . China's military has been involved in the war since it began in China in 18th century .
 First, China learned that Western forces were prepared to use force to gain trade concessions . China learned from the West that it was prepared to take advantage of the U.S. in the region .
 China came to understand its military forces were incapable of waging decisive warfare against determined resistance . Second, China learned it was not able to win decisive warfare in a war .
 The ruling Manchu minority lost power and prestige to the Han majority . And, third, they lost power, prestige to Han .
 Another large-scale Chinese peasant revolt was the Taiping Tianguo (Heavenly Peace Kingdom) Rebellion, 1851-1864 . The Taiping Tanguo Rebellion was a Chinese peasant uprising in 1851 .
 Taiping army began its military expedition from southwestern Guangxi Province against the Qing . Taiping began its campaign in Guangxi province .
 Many peasants joined the Taiping when the peasant army defeated the Qing army from the west to the east along the Yangzi River and took over a half of the country . The Taiping was defeated by the Chinese peasants in the early 1900s .
 From 1853, the Taiping Army, nearly 1 million strong, launched northern expeditions in order to protect Tianjing and enlarge the regime’s territory . The Taiping army, from 1853 to 1856, was nearly 1million strong .
 In 1856, the Taiping Army defeated the two Qing forces sent to control the insurgents’ capital by blocking the northern and southern approaches to Tianjing . The Taiping army defeated the Qing forces in Tianjing in 1856 .
 At least 25 million people died during the Taiping Rebellion, making it the most destructive civil war in Chinese history . 25 million died in the war, including 25 million during its brutal period .
 In the late nineteenth century, frequent peasant rebellions, foreign invasions, and anti-Manchu movements undermined the Qing dynasty’s power . The Qing dynasty was ruled by the Qing Qing dynasty until the Second World War .
 China was defeated by Japan in 1895, losing its central position in Asia . In 1895, China lost its position in the region .
 The turn of the century marked major changes in the Qing military organization, institution, and technology .
 Qing dynasty established a ‘new army’ in 1897, hiring German instructors and purchasing modem firearms from European countries . To survive, the Qing dynasty hired German instructors, purchased modem firearms .
 By 1906, the New Army consisted of five infantry divisions, totaling 50,000 men . The New Army was one of the largest units in the world .
 It established five officer training schools and military academies . It also established five officers training schools . The country also established a military academy .
 The Manchu rulers refused to reform military institutions besides purchasing Western weapons . Unfortunately, the New Army did not save the empire .
 New recruits were soon disillusioned by the government’s corruption, mismanagement, and, worst of all, its failure against European and Japanese forces during the 1900 Boxer Rebellion .
 Foreign concessions in treaty ports and foreign nations all gave shelter to Chinese rebels . Meanwhile, the foreign concessions in the treaty ports gave shelter .
 Sun, the founding father of Republican China, organized the Tongmenghui (or T’ung-meng Hui, the United League) in Japan . Sun was the founder of Republican Chinese Party Party in 1905 .
 Among the 1,000 early members were liberal students, Christian merchants, and New Army officers trained in Japan . Among the early members of the New Army was liberal students .
 Sun and his secret society spread their revolutionary ideas and organization from Japan to the world . Sun established offices in San Francisco, Honolulu, Brussels, Singapore, and many branches in 17 of the 24 provinces of China .
 The success of the Wuchang uprising led many officers to join the revolution . Many officers were involved in the uprising . The revolution was the first of its kind .
 In the next two months, 15 provinces proclaimed their independence from the Qing Empire . 15 provinces declared their independence in the following months .
 The rebellious provinces and Tongmenghui joined forces, setting up a provisional government at Nanjing . It was the first time a Chinese government had been formed .
 The provisional government elected Sun and inaugurated him as provisional president of the Republic of China on January 1, 1912, at Nanjing, China .
 A breakthrough in Chinese history, this ended 2,000 years of monarchy and built the first republic in Asian history . The first republic is the first in Asia's history, ending the monarchy and building a republic .
 The Qing court’s hopes rested with Marshal Yuan Shikai , commander of the New Army . The New Army was the first Chinese army to enter China in China in 18 years .
 In an attempt to avoid civil war, Sun and other revolutionaries negotiated with Yuan and offered him the presidency of the new republic . Yuan was the first Chinese leader to be elected to the presidency in the early 1900s .
 Yuan forced the last emperor, only six at the time, to step down, ending the Qing dynasty . Yuan made the decision in 1912, forcing the last Emperor, six of whom were only six, to resign .
 Yuan was elected by the provisional government the president of the Republic of China on February 14, 2013 . Yuan is the current leader of the country .
 Yuan, however, tried to establish his own dictatorship and monarchy . Yuan fought against the revolutionaries until his death in 1916 . Yuan died of his injuries .
 Although it ended the Qing dynasty, the revolution failed to turn China into a truly independent and democratic country . The revolution ended the dynasty but failed to make China truly independent .
 After Yuan’s death, the country entered the Warlord Period . Military commanders of different armies controlled a province or a region . The period was known as the Yuan period .
 Five or six major warlord armies divided the country and waged wars against each other . Among them, five or six warlords waged war on each other in Afghanistan .
 Warlord armies competed for XXVIII to seize control of the whole country . They used human resources by drafting young peasants into their armies .
 Some 500,000 men served in the warlord armies in 1916, increasing to 1 million by 1918, and about 1. million by 1924 . About 1 million men were involved in the armies in the early 1920s .
 In the early twentieth century, the ideas of Marxism and Leninism seemed as effective as liberal democratic and republican ideas to inspire outright revolution in China . In the 1930s, the idea of Marxism, Leninism and republicanism seemed to be more effective than liberal democratic ideas .
 Communist movements became an alternative solution to problems facing angry peasants and urban poor, a large proportion of the Chinese population . Communist movements were alternative solutions to problems faced by angry peasants, urban poor .
 In exchange, the Soviet government would help the GMD with its military establishment and officer training . The GMD would also receive help from Soviet government in exchange for training .
 On January 26, 1923, Adolph A Joffe, a top Soviet diplomat, and Sun issued their “Joint Manifesto,” a pledge of Soviet support for China . The ‘Manifesto’ was signed by Sun in 1923, when the Soviet
 In January 1924, the GMD National Congress enacted a new constitution and allowed Communists to join the organization . Communists were allowed to join GMD as individuals as individuals .
 On June 16, 1924, the Whampoa Military Academy was founded, with the Soviet assistance . It was founded with the help of the Soviet Union .
 Jiang reorganized all the military units under the National Government into the National Revolutionary Army (Guomin gemingjun) Jiang was the commander in chief of the army . He reorganized the army in 1924 .
 Jiang established his new National Government of the Republic of China under GMD control in Nanjing in April 1927, launching China’s Republic Period 19271937 .
 Communist movement’s rapid growth across the country worried the right wing, who controlled the GMD Executive Central Committee . However, the Communist movement's rapid growth in the country and its increasing influence in GMD worried right wing .
 Jiang pressured Jiang to terminate the GMD-CCP coalition and purge Communists across the country . They pressured Jiang's government to terminate GMD, CCP coalition .
 After the ‘white terrors’ of 1927, the military became absolutely necessary for the CCP’s survival . The military is necessary for survival, says the author of the book .
 On August 1, 1927, Zhou Enlai and Zhu De led the Nanchang Uprising and created the CCP armed force . Zhou En lai, Zhu De, He Long and other CCP leaders led the uprising .
 The party mobilized the peasants, trained the officers, and received instructions and aid from the Soviet Union . Party mobilized peasants and trained officers .
 Mao and Zhu joined the force at the Jinggangshan in 1928 . They reorganized their troops into the Red Army and created a military center, or a base area, for the Communist revolution .
 Mao's base region became the center for all CCP Soviet governments in 1931 . Mao’s base region was the center of all Soviet governments . In 1931, Mao became the leader of the Communist Party Party .
 Zhu and Mao also developed guerrilla strategy and tactics during these formative years . Mao and Zhu developed guerrilla strategies to win battles, Zhu and Zhu were Maoists .
 By the end of 1931, the Red Army had 150,000 men and had expanded its areas of operation . The Red Army was in control of the Soviet Union .
 The rapid growth and expansion of the Communists alarmed the GMD government . The government was alarmed by the Communists' rapid growth .
 ROC president Jiang and the GMD high command centralized army control . From 1930 to 1934, the ROC launched five encirclement campaigns against Communist areas . The ROC was defeated by the Communists in 1934 .
 Survivors of the Red Army forced to leave their base areas in central China and begin their Long March . The Long March began in October 1934 and forced survivors to leave central China .
 The First and Fourth Red Armies arrived in northwestern Shaanxi Province in October 1935 . They arrived in northwest Shaanix Province in 1935 . The Red Army was the first and fourth Red Army to arrive in China .
 Over 13 months, they traversed 11 provinces and covered nearly 8,000 miles . Over the course of 13 months they covered almost 8,500 miles . The team is based in New York City .
 By 1936, the Red Army maintained approximately 30,000 troops after the Long March, a huge decline from 150,000 men in 1931 . By the end of that year, there were only 30,500 troops in the army .
 The CCP-GMD civil war in 1931-1934 had weakened China’s security and sovereignty . World War and Civil War in China had weakened the country's security .
 On September 18, 1931, the Japanese Kwantung Army in Northeast China seized Shenyang, provincial capital of Liaoning . The Japanese Kwantsung Army seized the city of Shenyang in September 1931 .
 Incident began Japan’s aggression in four provinces of northeastern China . Incident began in northeastern China in 1995 .
 In the mid-1930s, Japan threatened movement south of the Great Wall and invading central and eastern China, an immediate threat to Jiang Jieshi's control .
 On July 7, 1937, the Japanese Imperial Army attacked the GMD troops at the Marco Polo Bridge southwest of Beijing . The bridge was attacked by the Imperial Army .
 On August 13, Japanese troops attacked Shanghai and threatened Nanjing . Nanjing was attacked by Japanese troops on August 13 .
 In November, Japan concentrated 220,000 troops and began an offensive campaign against Nanjing and Shanghai .
 Jiang and the GMD high command deployed nearly 700,000 troops to defend the Nanjing-Shanghai region . Jiang: "We are committed to protecting our country's sovereignty and our people's interests"
 On November 7, the Japanese Tenth Army successfully landed at the Hangzhou Bay . The Japanese army landed in Hangzhou on November 7 .
 In December, they seized Nanjing, the capital of the ROC, forcing the GMD government to move its capital to Chongqing (Chungking), southwestern Sichuan Province . The GMD has been forced to relocate its capital from Nanjing to Chongquing (
 Jiang lost 1 million men, while inflicting 250,730 Japanese casualties . From July 1937 toNovember 1938, Jiang lost more than a million men .
 Jiang's Nationalist army withdrew to China’s southwest and northwest to conserve some of its troops . Jiang withdrew to conserve troops in the region .
 By 1941, the GMD had lost the coastal and other port cities that once had been its bases of power . The GMD was forced to withdraw from its base in 1941 .
 When Jiang lost some of his best troops in the war against Japan, Mao’s Communist guerrillas successfully recruited a large number of peasants into their forces . The peasants were recruited by Mao's Communist guerillas .
 Red Army, then located in the northwest and numbering 46,000 men, became the Eighth Route Army of the National army in August 1937 . The Red Army was located in northwest and was located near the city of Moscow .
 In the south, the Red guerrilla troops were reorganized into the Nationalist army’s New Fourth Army . The Red guerrilla forces were reorganized into 10,300 men, totaling 10,000 men .
 Eighth Route Army carried out guerrilla operations and established military and political bases in enemy-held areas . Units of the Eighth Route army carried out guerilla operations .
 Eighth Route Army increased from 46,000 men in 1937, to 220,000 in 1939, and to 500,000 behind the enemy line in 1940 .
 With Nationalist forces, Communist guerrillas, and an uncooperative Chinese population, the Japanese military sought to wear down Chinese resistance and cut off China from outside assistance, chiefly from the United States .
 In September 1940, Japanese XXX Introduction forces moved into northern Indochina, and in July 1941, they moved into southern Indochinas .
 U.S. retaliated against Japan in the form of an economic embargo on certain critical war materials, especially oil . These steps were part of an effort to cut the Chinese off from United States aid flowing from India . The embargo was meant to cut China off from aid flowing to India
 This triggered Japan’s decision to go to war against the United States. In turn, this triggered the U.S. decision to invade Japan .
 Japan’s December 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor and its war with Britain and the Netherlands broadened the conflict into a general Pacific war . The war severely strained its capability to conduct offensive operations in China .
 Jiang and his GMD army received direct American aid and military training . In the wake of the Allied Forces’ campaign against the fascists and militarism across the globe, Jiang received direct U.S. aid .
 New divisions were created to replace standard divisions lost early in the war . The new divisions replaced standard divisions .
 The average GMD division had 5,000-6,000 troops, the equivalent of a Japanese division . The average army had 10,000 soldiers, an average of 15,000 . GMD divisions were more than Japanese divisions .
 At that time, at least 40 Chinese divisions had been equipped with European or Americanmade weapons and trained by American or Soviet advisers . At the time, China had been trained by Soviet or American advisers .
 In 1944, some of the elite armies had an armored regiment or battalion equipped with Sherman tanks . The Sherman tanks were used in World War II . Some of the world's elite armies were equipped with tanks .
 On August 8, 1945, the Soviet Union declared war on Japan, and its Red Army attacked the Japanese in China’s northeastern provinces .
 The Chinese people, after eight years of bitter struggle, finally won victory in the Anti-Japanese War . China's anti-Japanese war was won by the Chinese people .
 Jiang’s Nationalist army lost 2. million men, Mao's Communist forces some 600,000 men, while the civilian death toll was estimated at more than 10 million lives . The civilian deaths were estimated at over 10 million .
 Jiang found himself facing an unprecedented challenge from Mao . After Japan’s sudden surrender in August 1945, Jiang faced a challenge from the Maoist .
 They occupied all of the large cities and controlled most of the railroads, highways, seaports, and transportation hubs . They occupied the cities and control most of their railroads and highways .
 The CCP’s regular army had grown from 56,000 in 1937 to 1.27 million men in 1945, supported by militias numbering another 2.68 million . The CCP's regular army was supported by militia numbers as well as regular army .
 U.S. president Harry S Truman dispatched General George C Marshall as his envoy to China in December for further mediation . General Marshall was the secretary of state, secretary-of-state, as secretary-general of state .
 Jiang and Mao made no political compromises and refused to cooperate with each other . Mao and Jiang signed a cease-fire agreement in Chongqing, China, in 1960 .
 China’s full-scale civil war resumed between the GMD and the CCP in June 1949 . The full scale civil war began in 1949 and ended in 1949 .
 Jiang launched an all-out offensive campaign against Mao’s “liberated regions” in central China in 1946 . The first phase of the campaign began on June 26, 1946, when Jiang launched his offensive campaign .
 Mao’s strategy was to avoid a total defense of all CCP-occupied regions and concentrate a superior force in order to destroy one GMD unit in one of the regions . Mao was trying to avoid total defense and concentrate superior forces .
 CCP Central Committee transferred 110,000 troops with 20,000 party cadres from central and northern China to northeast China in 1946 to stop the GMD’s offensive campaigns there . For example, the CCP Central Party Central Committee .
 Through 1947, the CCP troops successfully saved most of the ‘liberated areas’ in Manchuria during Jiang’s all-out offensive campaign .
 Jiang’s strategy changed from broad assaults to attacking key targets in the second phase of the civil war . Jiang changed his strategy to attack key targets . Jiang was one of the leaders of China's most successful statesmen during the war .
 Between June and September 1947, the CCP force began its operations in GMD-controlled areas . The force began operations in the GMD areas .
 The third and final phase, from August 1948 to October 1949, was a CCP offensive to seize the cities . The final phase of the CCP offensive was the August 1948-October 1949 offensive .
 The CCP gained control of all of northeast, most of north, and central China areas north of the Yangzi River . The CCP gains control of most of northeast .
 The reorganization transformed the CCP military from a regional level to a national level . CCP military was transformed into a national military system .
 In the spring of 1949, the PLA had a total of 17 army groups, including 58 infantry armies, numbering 4 million men . In 1949, China had 4 million people, including 4 million Chinese soldiers .
 The PLA continued its drive into northwest, southwest, and central China . The PLA continues to expand its operations in the region .
 By September, the PLA occupied most of the country except for Tibet, Taiwan, and various offshore islands . The PLA is now occupying most of China's land, including Tibet and Taiwan .
 Mao declared the birth of the People’s Republic of China and the alliance with the Soviet Union on October 1, 1949 . Mao declared China's independence in 1949 .
 After 22 years of military struggle, the CCP and the PLA had acquired the experience, vision, and self-confidence to create a new communist state in the world . The CCP and PLA are now in charge of creating a new state in China .
 Mao declared the “lean-to-one-side” policy, which stated the new republic would favor the Soviet Union . Mao declared that the new state would join the socialist and communist camp in the world .
 Mao signed the ‘Sino-Soviet Friendship and Mutual Assistance Treaty’ with Joseph Stalin in February 1950 . Mao visited Moscow in December 1949, 1949, and signed the treaty with Stalin . The treaty was signed in 1950 .
 The alliance between Beijing and Moscow was the cornerstone of the Communist international alliance system in the 1950s . The alliance was the backbone of the communist-led Communist international alliances system .
 China began to move into the center stage of the global Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States . China became the world's center stage during the Cold War . The two camps headed by the two superpowers were seen as one of the two sides .
 PRC’s alliance with the Soviet Union and North Korea pulled China into a foreign war in Korea that changed the Chinese forces forever . The PRC's alliance with North Korea and Soviet Union led China to a foreign invasion of Korea .
 China's intervention in the Korean War of 1950-1953 was the byproduct of the Cold War . China’s intervention in Korea was the result of a Cold War by-product .
 Beijing's leaders regarded the United States as China’s primary enemy . An important task of the Chinese revolution was to support international communist movements, especially those in Asian countries .
 China could be isolated by the Soviet Union in the Communist bloc, if Beijing had refused Moscow’s request to send Chinese troops to the Korean War in October 1950 .
 On October 19, the Chinese People’s Volunteers Force crossed the Yalu River in China .
 After October 1950, the Korean War essentially became a conflict between China and the United States . The Korean War then became essentially a conflict with China and U.S.
 China surprised the world when its troops launched a massive offensive south of the Yalu in early November . The offensive was launched by China's troops in the early months of November .
 Douglas MacArthur, Commander of the UN Force, reported to Washington that they faced ‘an entirely new war” in Korea . General Douglas MacArthur said they faced an ‘all new war in Korea’ in 1950s . Douglas MacArthur: ‘An entirely new new war'
 The Korean War was the first time Chinese armed forces engaged in large-scale military operations outside of China .
 The Chinese military went all-out in engaging one of the best militaries in the world . Except for the thinly disguised title of “volunteers,’s ‘Volunteers’, the Chinese military engaged in the battle .
 Korean War was the only meaningful reference point for sustained PLA contingency operations beyond China’s border . The Korean War is the only reference point to sustained Chinese contingency operations .
 North Korea saved North Korea’s Communist regime, prevented a perceived U.S. invasion of China, gained more Russian military and economic aid, and established the PRC’“World Power" status as a world power . The PRC gained more than $1 billion
 According to Chinese military records, the nation suffered 152,000 dead, 383,000 wounded, 450,000 hospitalized, 21,300 prisoners of war, and 4,000 missing in action . China suffered 1,010,700 casualties in total, totaling 1,000,700 .
 Of the 21,300 Chinese POWs, 7,110 returned to China, the remainder went to the Republic of China on Taiwan . Of the rest of the POWs that went to Taiwan, the majority went to China .
 Korean War of 1950-1953 intensified the significance of East Asia in the Cold War . The Korean War was a major source of tension in East Asia .
 Since the founding of the PRC in 1949, China had assisted the North Vietnamese Army (NVA, or the People’s Army of Vietnam) against the French . The NVA was the People's Army of the Vietnamese Army .
 Chinese military advisers participated in NVA battle planning, operations, and assessments in major campaigns such as the Border Campaign of 1950, Red River Delta offensive from 1950 to 1951, and Dien Bien Phu Campaign of 1954 .
 In 1951-1952, China armed and trained the NVA’s 316th, 320th, 325th Infantry, and 351st Artillery and Engineering Divisions . China trained and trained them in the 1950s .
 By the end of 1952, China had equipped six NVA infantry divisions and one artillery division . China also equipped six artillery divisions and six infantry divisions .
 From 1950 to 1955, China had shipped 155,000 small arms, 58 million rounds of ammunition, 3,600 artillery pieces, 1.08 million artillery shells, 840,000 hand grenades, 1,200 vehicles and 1.1 million uniforms . China also shipped 14,000 tons
 China sought to secure its southwestern border by eliminating a Western power’s presence in Vietnam . China wanted to eliminate a Western presence in the country's southwestern border with Vietnam .
 China's military assistance guaranteed North Vietnam’s victory over the French forces . It maintained Beijing's influence in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia . The French forces were defeated by North Vietnam .
 China’s increasing political ambition and rising international position demanded more military to defend itself against any invasion, keep its neighboring countries out of Western imperialist control, and enhance its prestige and influence in the international arena . China is seeking to keep its neighbors out of the imperialist control .
 To meet these goals, the PLA reforms and modernization continuing through the 1950s aimed to transform the PLA from a peasant army to a professional force .
 Following the Soviet model, reforms centralized the command system, improved technology, advanced training and educational programs, reorganized defense industries, established a strategic missile force, and developed nuclear weapons .
 Centralization and bureaucratic power guaranteed the success of China’s nuclear program through the 1970s . The centralization of the nuclear program was key to China's success .
 China launched its first missile in 1960, tested its first atomic bomb in 1964, and its first hydrogen bomb in 1967 . China also tested first atomic bombs in 1964 and tested first hydrogen bombs in 1967.
 China feared an expanding American presence in Southeast Asia . Despite its growing strength, China still feared an expansion of the U.S. into Southeast Asia.
 During the Vietnam War of 1964-1973, the PLA again intervened in the war . The PLA intervened in Vietnam again during the war. During the war, the Chinese government intervened .
 In July 1965, China began sending its troops to North Vietnam, including surface-to-air missiles, antiaircraft artillery, railroad, engineering, minesweeping, and logistics units . China sent its troops in July 1965 .
 Chinese forces operated ant-aircraft guns and SAM sites, built and repaired roads, bridges, railroads, and assembled factories . Chinese forces operate ant-gun, SAM sites and built roads and bridges .
 Chinese participation enabled Hanoi to send more NVA troops to the South to fight Americans . China's involvement in the Vietnam War allowed the NVA to fight the U.S.
 Between 1965 and 1968, China sent 23 divisions, including 95 regiments, totaling some 320,000 troops . China sent some 300,000 Chinese troops in the period .
 Richard Nixon’s visit to China in February 1972 profoundly reshaped the Cold War world . China and the United States in the Twenty-First Century . Richard Nixon visited China in 1972 .
 The U.S. and China have been at odds for 25 years . Relations between the world's most powerful country and its most populous nation have been strained .
 Beijing and Washington condemned Hanoi and Moscow's invasion of Cambodia in 1979 and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1980 . China and Washington's reactions were compatible, they both condemned the invasion of Vietnam .
 Both emphasized that interconnectivity between the events in Cambodia and Afghanistan, and both supported resistance movements in these two countries . Both also emphasized that . both also emphasized the interconnection . between the . events in Cambodian and Afghanistan .
 Between 1972 and 1989, the PLA experienced tremendous fluctuations that corresponded with international as well as domestic politics . The PLA experienced a period of instability between 1972 and 1988 .
 With the Cultural Revolution sweeping across China, the PLA moved to the center of the national politics in 1967-1971 . The PLA became the most powerful military force in the country .
 After defense minister Marshal Lin Biao’s death and a series of purges, the PLA moved out of the political arena . Then, after defense minister . Marshal Lin . Biao died and the PLA has since been stripped of political power .
 Mao brought back some of the government officials who had been purged during the Cultural Revolution . Mao brought them back in 1972-1973 . Mao's government officials were purged from the Communist Party .
 Deng Xiaoping (Deng XXXIV Introduction Hsiao-ping) was rehabilitated by Mao and appointed a member of the Central Committee in 1973 . Among others, Deng Xiaop was also rehabilitated and made a member in the Communist Party Central Committee .
 Deng tried to “repair the damage” done to the PLA during the Cultural Revolution . Deng announced new military reforms in 1975 and tried to "repair" the damage done .
 Deng launched an unprecedented seismic reform in 1978 and opened China to the outside world in order to bring about the ‘Four Modernizations,” including the defense modernization . After Mao’s death in 1976, and on his third return in 1978, Deng launched unprecedented seismic reforms .
 This comprehensive reform and modernization effort cut across every facet of PLA activity . The PLA is undergoing a major overhaul of its operations in the past decade .
 Information-based capability is key for China's military modernization, says new chairman . New chairman made the PLA’s information-based capabilities the key for modernization .
 He also said that promoting a “Revolution of Military Affairs’ with Chinese characteristics would bring about profound changes to every aspect of the Chinese army . He said a revolution of military affairs would bring changes to the army .
 Hu Jintao became the party chairman and the country’s president in 2003 . He is now the chairman of the party and the president of the country .
 Hu became the new civilian commander in chief of the PLA in the twenty-first century . Hu was the first Chinese civilian leader in command of the Chinese military .
 Hu nurtured a relationship with the PLA by supporting a greater professionalism that emphasized educational credentials and merit-based promotion . Hu was promoted by the PLA to be promoted to a higher rank .
 He reaffirmed the PLA’s modernization and transformation into an army with cuttingedge technology for the information age . He also reaffirmed his commitment to the PLA's modernization .
 Hu made these efforts to operate against the backdrop of Jiang’s legacies, Hu said . Hu said: “I’m trying to make sure we don’t repeat the mistakes made by Jiang in the past .
 He knew that his taking over the CMC chair did not eliminate the need to define the new style, scope, and depth of his own ties with the military . He knew he needed to define a new style .
 Hu removed some of the old-guard generals and improved the chain of command . He reduced forces by 200,000 men in 2004-2005 to rebalance the ratio between officers and men . Hu also made changes to the chain-command .
 China’s foremost task in its drive toward military modernizations depends on its successful completion of market economy reforms . China's foremost task is the completion of its successful market reforms .
 To build a modern army, the U.S. must build an industrial and sustained economy . To build an army, it must build a sustained economy, says President Obama . The U.N. must also have a sustained economic growth, he says .
 China has doubled its defense budget in the past 30 years, purchasing new weaponry and importing high tech from Russia and the West . The Chinese government has been able to close the technology gap between the PLA and West .
 China’s international standing related primarily to a reduction in global and regional threats, he says . Perhaps the most important among the factors for Chinese military modernization, and the most effective for the long term, is the significant improvement in China's international standing .
 Chinese strategic analysts and military experts have an optimistic view of the country’s current national security in the near future . China is optimistic about the country's national security .
 Historically, it was also known as the First Revolutionary Civil War or the Land Revolutionary War . The Land Revolution War was fought in 17th century and 18th century .
 With the military victory of Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kai-shek) in the Northern Expedition, the CCP became a political and ideological threat to his authority . The CCP became an ideological and political threat to the Chinese leader .
 Jiang terminated the CCP-GMD coalition and outlawed the Communist movement in China in 1927 . On April 12, 1927, Jiang terminated a coalition that banned the Communist Party in China .
 After the ‘white terror’ of 1927, the CCP moved into rural areas and fought against Jiang and the GMD government . The CCP moved to rural areas after the 'white terror' of 1927 . After the "white terror" of 1927 the CCP began to fight against Jiang
 The CCP began to organize its independent armed force, which became absolutely necessary for the CCP’s survival . The force was necessary to protect the CCP, which began to be necessary for its survival .
 The army protected the Communist base areas and eventually seized state power for the party . It eventually defeated the GMD army on the mainland by defeating the army .
 Mao led the peasants’ Autumn Harvest Uprising later that month in Hunan and Jiangxi Provinces . Mao was the leader of the Nanchang Uprising on August 1, 1927 .
 Zhu De joined forces with Mao in 1928, they reorganized their troops into the Red Army . Zhu De created a military center, or base area, known as the Jinggangshan (Jinggang Mountains) Revolutionary base area . The base area is known for the Communist revolution .
 Mao made his base region a government center for all CCP soviet governments . Mao was elected chairman of the Executive Committee of the Chinese Soviet Republic in 1931 . Mao's base region is now the headquarters of all CCP governments .
 Mao's strategy and tactics became the basis for the Communist military revolution . Mao’s strategy and . tactics became . basis for . the Communist . revolution . The Chinese Communist Party was founded by Mao in 1959 .
 The Fourth Army initiated a land reform in the mountainous area in 1928-1930 .
 The army usually sent an officer with a couple of men to a village to help the poor peasants by reducing their rents and taxes . The army would usually send a small group of officers to help reduce their taxes .
 The officer took land from the rich landlords and redistributed it among the poor and landless peasants by small allotments .
 The land revolution movement became attractive to the peasants in this mountain region, one of the poorest areas in the country . Land revolution movement is attractive to peasants in the region .
 Officers helped peasants organize a peasant association, a new government, and a self-defense militia . Officers also helped the peasants to organize a new militia with some weapons and basic training .
 The base area, or so-called red region or Soviet region, was founded . With the soviet government, a base area was founded in the Soviet-era Soviet region . The base region was founded by the Soviet government .
 The army received material and human resources from their base areas . They provided protection for the local Soviet-style governments to continue their land reform movement .
 By the summer of 1930, the Communist governments and the Fourth Army secured their base areas in Jiangxi-Hunan Provinces, including nine counties with a total population of 2 million . The Chinese Communist governments secured their bases areas in the region .
 Mao and Zhu laid some groundwork for the Communist army . During this formative period, Zhu and Mao and Mao also laid groundwork for Communist army.
 The Fourth Army operated in remote, mountainous areas . The guerrilla warfare strategy worked in remote areas, the army says .
 By the end of 1931, the Red Army had 150,000 men and expanded its areas of operation . The Red Army was in control of the Soviet Union in Russia .
 The rapid growth of the Communist troops and expansion of their controlled regions alarmed the GMD government . GMD said it was alarmed by the rapid growth .
 In the summer of 1933, Jiang concentrated 1 million GMD troops and launched his fifth suppression campaign against the Red Army . Jiang concentrated his troops in the summer, 1933 .
 In October, the Red Army gave up their central region campaign and retreated westward . The Red Army was forced to give up its central campaign in October .
 Survivors began their Long March toward northwest China on October 10, 1934, 1934 . They finally arrived in northern Shaanxi in October 1935 .
 By 1936, the army maintained a contingency of approximately 45,000 troops after the Long March . The army maintained an army contingency of 45,500 troops .
 GMD government came to an agreement with the CCP on joint resistance in the Anti-Japanese War in 1937 . In 1937, GMD and CCP agreed to joint resistance against Japan in the anti-Japanese war .
 By then, the CCP Agrarian Revolutionary War against the GMD government was over . The GMD Government was overthrown by the CCP .
 The American Volunteer Group was organized in mid-1941 by General Claire Lee Chennault to assist China’s Anti-Japanese War .
 As an advisor to the Chinese Air Force, Chennault witnessed the disastrous damage inflicted by Japanese air bombings on the Chinese . He witnessed the devastation inflicted by the Japanese Air Force .
 Two squadrons were sent to China, and the third participated in the Battle of Rangoon in Burma . The squadron was one of three sent to Burma .
 The first air battle inside China fought by the AVG occurred on December 20, 1941, near Kunming, Yunnan Province, during which the AVG scored their first victory by shooting down some Japanese planes .
 The AVG was dissolved in mid-1942, but some of its pilots remained in China as part of the China Air Task Force which was further integrated into the Fourteenth United States Air Force in 1943 .
 In the following two years, Chennault’s Fourteenth Air Force shot down or damaged 2,600 Japanese planes, sunk 44 warships, and killed 66,700 enemy troops throughout East Asia .
 The AVG was a group within the Chinese Air Force, while the U.S. Air Force was a formal United States air force . The difference between the two is that the AVG was an air force group within China's Air Force .
 Anti-Japanese War; Chennault, Claire Lee; China-Burma-India Theater; Jiang Jieshi; Stilwell, Joseph; Nationalist Army.
 An-Shi was one of the generals of the Chinese military . During the Tang dynasty, he was a member of the Tang army .
 Emperor Xuan Zong was forced to flee the country . The rebellious army made its way to the capital city and forced the emperor to flee . The rebellion forced the Emperor to flee China .
 An Lushan crowned himself the new emperor and proclaimed the founding of the Yan dynasty . The Yan dynasty was established in the early years of the Chinese dynasty .
 An Qingxu was killed by Shi Siming , who next became the emperor, but in the year 761 he was killed in 761 by his own son Shi Chaoyi . Shi was the last emperor to be killed by his son .
 At the beginning of the Tang dynasty, the emperors took measures to extend their rule . The Tang dynasty was known as the first dynasty to extend its rule .
 Chinese painting in the Tang ‘blue and green’ landscape style, The Flight of the Emperor Mingjuang to Shu . Chinese painting .
 Painting depicts Emperor Xuan Zong, or Ming Huang, and imperial concubine Yang Guifei and his entourage when fleeing to Sichuan from the An Lushan Rebellion of 755 .
 The second emperor, Tai Zong, along with his successor, Gao Zong , initiated campaigns to solidify their reign and expand their power . The second and third Chinese emperor, who died in 2011, was known as the second emperor .
 An economic crisis hit the country by the time of the next emperor, Rui Zong , and the Tang dynasty found itself in dire need of funds . The Tang dynasty was forced to rely heavily on the money of its rulers .
 In order to save money, the imperial government asked each state to organize its own regional military command . Each state has a regional command of its own .
 The action created a factional regional power that would soon see the country plunged into war . Although intended to protect the economy, this action created the factional power . The action was intended to create a protective regional power .
 Emperor Xuan Zong assigned generals to rule the regions along the border . In an effort to strengthen their centralized rule, he assigned the generals to control the regions .
 An Lushan, a frontier general, was one of three commanders stationed in the regions of Pinglu, Fanyang, and Hedong in Hebei and Shanxi Provinces .
 He carried out his duties during his time as general, though conditions in the empire would soon allow him to play an even greater role in the history of China . The Chinese emperor was a general in the early 1900s .
 The court of Emperor Xuan Zong had caused much discontent among the people . Emperor's court of court was caused by his court of discontent . The court was ruled by the Emperor of China .
 Xuan Zong allowed her to fill the imperial court with many of her relatives, including cousins, brothers, and parents . Falling in love with his favorite concubine, Yang Guifei , he filled her with her relatives .
 Lady Yang manipulated the emperor in this manner and held great influence over him . Lady Yang was able to manipulate the emperor's influence .
 The government became inefficient and corrupt as a result, though Xuan Zong would not listen to any complaints against his concubine . The government was inefficient and corruption was rampant .
 In 752, it was discovered that there was counterfeit coinage in circulation in circulation . It was discovered in 752 that there were counterfeit coins in circulation.
 The premier was about to make public the false coins Anti-Japanese Military and Political College | 5 scandal, but Yang Guozhong (Yang Kuochung), Yang Guifei’s brother, intervened . The false coins were found in the anti-Japanese military and political
 The counterfeit coins were brought to the capital and paid out there at the expense of the imperial court . The counterfeit coin was brought to London at expense of imperial court, it was said .
 This caused many merchants to become distressed and resentful of the government . This led to many merchants becoming distressed and becoming resentful .
 The people’s unhappiness increased with the onset of drought in the valley of Wei in 754, 754 . The people were unhappy with the drought .
 Other natural disasters continued to plague the kingdom and, coupled with economic distresses, fostered an ever-growing discontent toward the emperor .
 Emperor Xuan Zong assigned General Bi Sichen to guard the capital of Loyang . But An Lushan defeated the imperial forces that were hastily assembled .
 Xuan Zong retreated over the mountains into the upper valley of the Han River and rested one day at Mawei . When An Lushan won the battle of Tongguan, Shaanxi Province, he retreated to Mawei.
 Escorts mutinied and demanded the execution of the Yang family, who they saw as primarily responsible for all the troubles . The Yang family was responsible for the troubles, according to the escorts . The escorts mutined and demanded that the family be executed .
 Xuan Zong continued his flight into Sichuan Province . Meanwhile, his son Li Heng fled in the other direction to Lingzhou .
 Su Zong’s generals Guo Ziyi and Li Guangbi were able to recover territories in Heybiei that were protected by one of An Lushan's generals, Shi Siming . The war raged on, and the war continued .
 Yan dynasty continued to face further troubles as the rebellion wore on . The Yan dynasty faced further troubles .
 In the year 757, An Qingxu killed his father An Lushan and proclaimed himself emperor . In 757 he proclaimed himself as emperor .
 Following this, a struggle ensued for the throne that would leave a history of violence in its wake . After this, there would be a struggle for control of the throne .
 Shi Siming next became the emperor, but in the year 761, he was killed by his own son Shi Chaoyi . He was the first emperor of China to be killed by the son of the emperor in 761 .
 Shi Chaoyi fled to Mozhou in the Tang dynasty . In the next year, Hui Qi, general of Emperor Dai Zong, recovered Loyang . Shi was forced to flee to Mozou .
 Forces of the Tang dynasty marched on Mozhou, and Shi Chaoyi, last emperor of the Yan dynasty, committed suicide . The Tang dynasty died in Mozhou . The last emperor committed suicide after the defeat .
 With this act, the rebels were crushed, putting an end to the rebellion of An-Shi . The rebels were defeated .
 Fubing: Han Dynasty; Mongols; Song Dynasty; Tang Dynasty . Tang Dynasty: Tang Dynasty; Yuan Dynasty: Yuan Dynasty . Han Dynasty: Mongols: Song Dynasty . Song Dynasty: Song, Song Dynasty, Tang Dynasty.
 At the outset of the Long March, Red Army College cadres and students were organized into special “cadre regiments” in preparation for the exodus from Ruijin .
 The third section was merged with schools from the Red Second Front and Fourth Front Armies . That November, the Northwest Anti-Japanese Red Army College College First School was named .
 Those enrolled were primarily soldiers and military cadres, but also included educated young people from North and Northwest China, and overseas Chinese from Southeast Asia .
 Resistance College played a vital role in the replenishment of party and army ranks during the years of war with Japan and north China "puppet" armies . Of eight classes graduated during the nine-year period, the four largest were comprised of approximately 5,000-6,000 political
 Up to 13 additional campuses were established in the north China base areas under Communist control . In addition to the central college, up to 13 other campuses were set up in the region .
 Resistance College provided a bridge to the further expansion of Communist party and army ranks during the Chinese Civil War (19461949) with the Nationalists and subsequent Anti-Japanese Military and Political College | 7 seizure of power that resulted in the founding of the People's Republic of China .
 Mao described “national liberation and social emancipation” as Resistance College’s guiding principles . Mao: “To Be Attacked by the Enemy Is Not a Bad Thing but a Good Thing”
 The educational policy of the college is to cultivate a firm and correct political orientation, an industrious and simple style of work, and flexible strategy and tactics .
 These are the three essentials in the making of an anti-Japanese revolutionary soldier . The three essentials are being taught to be a revolutionary soldier.
 It is in accordance with these essentials that the staff teach and the students study, says the school's principal .
 The progress and development of the college over the past few years have been accompanied by certain shortcomings, the college says . The progress has been accompanied with some shortcomings, it says .
 The main difficulty is the shortage of funds, teachers and teaching materials, teachers, says the school's principal .
 There are no such things as difficulties for Communists, for they can surmount them, says the Communist Party leader . "There are no problems for Communists," he says .
 Anti-Japanese War Struggle between Japan and China was fought for control of China . The war was fought in China .
 The AntiJapanese War was sometimes known as the Second SinoJapanese War to distinguish it from the war between these two states in 1894 and 1895 . The anti-Japanese war was sometimes called the Anti-Japanese War .
 Previously, an uneasy truce had held, despite Japanese encroachments into Manchuria, Inner Mongolia, and the Chinese provinces outside the Great Wall .
 As Japanese forces moved onto the north China plain, the situation became more volatile, however, and a confusing three-sided conflict emerged until the Japanese surrender of August 1945 .
 First began with the Mukden Incident, in which intelligence officers of the elite Japanese Guandong Army in south Manchuria blew Chinese soldiers in surrender to armed Japanese soldiers in 1938 .
 Japanese forces drove into the heart of China between 1937 and 1939, despite strong resistance . Despite strong resistance, Japanese forces were able to get into China despite resistance .
 Anti-Japanese War | 9 up a portion of track on the rail line at Mukden, Liaoning Province . The war was fought in China's first war .
 They blamed it on the Chinese and used it as an excuse to occupy all of Manchuria, an area roughly the size of Texas . The area is a major resource base .
 In succeeding years, the Japanese occupied more territory in north China outside the Great Wall . The Japanese concentrated on ‘extermination campaigns’ against Mao’s Chinese Soviet Republic .
 Jiang pursued Communist forces through China’s hinterlands to Yan’an in what became known as the Long March . From October 1934 to October 1935, Jiang pursued communist forces through the hinterland .
 Jiang ordered local warlords, nominally loyal to him, to continue the campaign against the Communists instead of concentrating on resisting Japanese expansion . When Mao’s forces reached the relative safety of Yan’an in northeastern Shaanxi Province, Jiang ordered warlords to continue their campaign
 The Xi’an Incident in December 1936, a coup staged by two GMD generals, forced Jiang to accept a United Front against Japan . The Xi'an Incident helped focus Chinese nationalist fervor against the Japanese .
 The Lugouqiao or Marco Polo Bridge Incident began the second phase and marked the start of the larger conflict . The incident occurred in the early 1900s in China .
 On July 7, 1937, Japanese army troops demanded entry into the town of Wanping about 10 miles west of Beijing in Hebei Province . The town was 10 miles away from Beijing in China .
 When GMD troops denied entry to the Japanese, who were supposedly looking for a lost soldier, the Japanese threatened the use of force at Lugouqiao . The Japanese threatened to use force if the GMD soldiers denied entry .
 In the aftermath of the Japanese demand for entry into the town and the Chinese refusal, Japanese forces began shelling Wanping and attacking the bridge . Japanese forces attacked the bridge in the aftermath .
 Larger Chinese units held their positions and even drove the Japanese back . Larger units held on to their ground .
 Negotiations then began, used by both sides to concentrate additional forces in the north China plain . Both sides then concentrated additional forces on the area .
 On July 28, the Japanese attacked and seized control of the bridge . Shortly thereafter the Japanese captured both Beijing and Tianjin . Local Chinese commanders decided to abandon these cities rather than risk their destruction .
 Not until November, after three months of hard fighting involving the best Nationalist troops, did Shanghai fall . Shanghai was finally taken over by the Nationalist in November .
 Japanese forces then advanced up the Yangzi River, and in December they took Nanjing . Nanjing was also in Jiangsu Province, where they committed wide-scale atrocities . In Nanjing, they committed atrocities .
 Nationalist forces withdrew deep into the Chinese interior to Chongqing . Jiang established his new capital in Sichuan Province, where he established his capital .
 Japanese forces conquered much of northern and east-central China . Over the next several years, Japanese forces captured much of the country .
 The Japanese moved somewhat predictably along railroad lines and major waterways in order to facilitate troop transport and resupply . The Japanese move along major waterways to aid troop transport .
 In theory, this should have aided the Chinese defenders, since it reduced the element of surprise . This should have helped them to defeat the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 China, however, did not present a truly unified front because it was more unified in theory than in fact . China's "unitary front" is more unified than in theory, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Jiang possessed the most modern Chinese military force, but his armies were less powerful than 10 Anti-Japanese War those of the Japanese .
 Other Chinese commanders were regional military leaders, military leaders . Warlords were unwilling to risk their troops and thereby weaken their position relative to other Chinese warlords .
 "All too frequently, poorly led Chinese troops fought well for a brief time, but then they fled with escaping civilians," says Yang . Yang: All too often, poorly-led Chinese troops fight well, then they flee with fleeing civilians .
 By 1940, the Japanese controlled northern and eastern China, and the Chinese Communists dominated northwestern China . The Chinese Communist Party controlled northwestern China.
 Late that year, the Communists launched the Hundred Regiments Offensive against Japan, but they were defeated by the better-equipped Japanese . The Communists were defeated late that year .
 Communists switched to guerrilla warfare against Japanese positions in northern and central China . The Communists then switched tactics against Japan .
 This policy led to Japanese reprisals against both the Communists and the civilian population . This policy was led to the deaths of both Communists and civilians in Japan .
 Guerrilla warfare did not drive out the Japanese, but it did help disrupt their control . It served to establish the Communists as dedicated opponents of Japanese rule, enhancing their political position .
 By 1940, the situation had stabilized, and a third, somewhat quieter, phase began . Also by 1940, there had been a third quieter phase .
 Few major battles occurred in the three-sided conflict that had emerged after 1937 . There were regular skirmishes between the two sides of the war .
 The Japanese occupied most of the eastern third of China, its major ports, and the bulk of its industrial areas . The Japanese occupy most of China's eastern third and most of its eastern third .
 The Japanese-controlled territory included the majority of Han ethnic Chinese people . The majority of the territory was occupied by Japan .
 The Japanese established a puppet regime under Wang Jingwei (Wang Ching-wei) Wang was a left-wing member of the Guomindang who was forced from power in December 1935 .
 None of the three main contending armies could afford a major and costly campaign . The three main armies could not afford to take part in a major campaign .
 Mao’s Communist forces carried out a social revolution in the areas under their control, introducing land reform and seeking to improve the lot of the peasantry in health care and education . Mao's Communist forces introduced land reform in areas under control .
 They also sought to identify landowners and other members of the Chinese upper classes with the hated Japanese occupiers . They also wanted to identify .
 Mao kept many of his best military units in a blockade of the Communist base area around Yan’an . Mao remained vigilant against Jiang’s armies, since the Chinese president continued to keep many of the best units .
 Communist forces attacked troops and sought to convert peasants to their cause in areas only weakly held by the Japanese . Typically, Communist forces attack troops and seek to convert the peasants .
 Jiang also proceeded cautiously, for he intended to conserve Nationalist military strength to continue the civil war and crush the Communists once Japan had been defeated . Jiang also wanted to conserve military strength for continued civil war .
 The Soviet Union and the Western powers provided aid to Jiang, despite logistical challenges . For a time, the Soviet Union provided assistance to Jiang despite logistical difficulties . Jiang is now a leader of China's democracy .
 The Soviets sought to keep Japan occupied in China to forestall any invasion of Siberia . A Japanese-Soviet Neutrality Pact signed in April 1941 eased Moscow’s fears of Japanese expansion . It enabled Soviet leader Joseph Stalin to concentrate on the threat posed by Germany .
 France, and the United States also provided assistance, but the German conquest of France reduced that aid to a trickle . The United States gave highest priority to assisting Great Britain in its time of greatest peril .
 The civil war was never far from the surface, as evidenced in the so-called New Fourth Army Incident, or the South Anhui Incident of January 1941 . Civil war never ended in China, but civil war never did .
 Jiang permitted Mao to reorganize his Anti-Japanese War | I I I armed units into the Eighth Route Army and later authorized formation of the New Fourth Army . As part of the United Front against Japan, Jiang allowed Mao to re-organize anti-Japanese units .
 GMD armies surrounded and attacked the New Fourth Army on January 6, 1941, badly mauling that smaller force and compelling the surrender of 2,000 of its troops . GMD forces surrounded the smaller force, and forced the surrender .
 In September 1940, Japanese forces moved into northern Indochina, and in July 1941, they move into southern Indochinas . Meanwhile, in September 1940 and July 1941 they moved into the southern part of the country .
 Jiang, confident of ultimate Allied victory, continued his policy of largely avoiding pitched battle with major Japanese military units . Jiang reluctantly agreed to commit some divisions to assist in operations against Japanese forces in Burma .
 Chinese Communist forces continued their pattern of securing the loyalty of the peasants in areas they controlled while engaging in small-unit attacks against the Japanese .
 The general Nationalist military inactivity against the Japanese aided the Chinese Communists in that it helped them secure the mantle of Chinese nationalism . The Chinese Communists were able to take over the mantle from the Nationalist Nationalism .
 The Japanese “Three-Alls’s” reprisal policy also assisted the Communists . The Japanese 'Three Alls' policy also helped the Communists.
 Many of the survivors turned into new recruits for the Communists . Their policy turned many of them into new recruiters for Communists .
 China was a distant part of the China-Burma-India Theater . U.S. aid to the Nationalists increased after December 1941 .
 In April 1942, Japanese forces in Burma took Lashio and cut the Burma Road, Nationalist China’s only land route to the outside world . The road was the only way to get to China from China, and was cut by Japanese forces .
 U.S. aid had to be flown over ‘the Hump’ of the Himalayas to reach Chongqing . Thereafter, American aid was flown over the Hump to reach the city .
 Jiang’s U.S. military advisor, Fieutenant General Joseph Stilwell (1883— 1946), tried to train and organize new Chinese divisions equipped by the United States . Jiang refused to commit them to fight the Japanese in Burma or in southeastern China .
 There was also disagreement among United States generals about aid to China . U.S. generals also disagreed with U.K. policy on aid to the region .
 Major General Claire Chennault wanted to build on the success of the Flying Tigers and their high kill ratio against Japanese pilots to commit most aid to the new U.S. Fourteenth Air Force in China .
 In October 1944, Stilwell was recalled at Jiang’s request . The China-Burma-India Theater was separated into the China Theater and the Burma-India theater .
 Final phase of Sino-Japanese War (late 1944 to August 1945) highlighted the corruption and inefficiency of Nationalist forces . This final phase of the war highlighted the inefficiency and corruption of Nationalists forces .
 The United States had provided sufficient aid to build a modern army of 30 divisions . The U.S. had also created the Fourteenth Air Force .
 Anti-Japanese War contemplated using eastern China or Taiwan as staging point for invasion of Japanese home islands in 1943 .
 Early planning assumed that the new Chinese Nationalist divisions would reopen the Burma Road and contain Japanese forces in China proper . Chinese Nationalists hoped to re-open Burma Road .
 It assumed that the Fourteenth Air Force would be able to subject Japanese coastal defenses to attack . The U.S. Air Force also assumed that it could attack Japan's coastal defenses .
 The U.S. amphibious forces in the southwest and central Pacific reduced the importance of China as a staging area against Japan . The success of United States submarines in cutting the flow of food and raw materials, especially oil, from the Japanese-conquered territories .
 At the same time, Japanese forces in China launched a twopronged offensive that demonstrated continued Chinese military weakness . The offensive demonstrated continued military weakness, according to the Japanese military .
 Operation Ichi-go was conducted from April to December 1944 . It aimed to cross the Burma-India border through south China to seize Allied airfields . It also aimed to capture key north-south railroads in China .
 Allied forces in Burma broke the siege of Imphal and then went on the offensive . The attack on Assam failed, as Allied forces went on to attack .
 The Japanese first won control of the key north-south railroad between the Yellow River and Yangzi River . They then seized the airfields used by the Fourteenth Air Force . Later in 1944 they secured Guilin , Nanning, and Fiuzhou in Guangxi Province .
 Chinese Nationalist forces not only fought poorly, but peasants attacked them as they retreated, demonstrating the huge divide between the Chinese masses and the government . The battle was the first of its kind in China .
 Japanese did not attack Communist base areas in northern and north-central China . Some observers speculate about a de facto Japanese-Chinese Communist truce that benefited both sides .
 The Ichi-go operation was the high point of Japanese military operations in China . Operation was the Japanese military's highest point of its operations in the country .
 Thereafter, Tokyo began transferring its best divisions from China and Manchuria to meet the U.S. drive across the Pacific into the Philippines and later the Bonin Islands and the Ryukyus .
 Remaining Japanese forces in China were badly overextended, and Japanese commanders sought to consolidate, especially by summer 1945, to face a possible Soviet attack .
 The weight of corruption and inefficiency was beginning to sink Jiang’s Nationalist regime . Meanwhile, the weight of the inefficiency and corruption began to sink the regime . The weight began to be the beginning of the collapse of Jiang's regime .
 Japanese troops occupied the populous and most productive part of China . The Chinese government had limited financial resources because of the occupation .
 Jiang’s regime responded by printing more and more paper money, driving down the value of paper and leading to dramatic inflation that wiped out much of the middle class . Jiang's regime responded to the devaluation of paper money and inflation . The middle class was wiped out .
 Mao’s Communist forces emerged from the war in a much stronger position because of their apparent honesty and commitment to the welfare of the peasants and resistance to the Japanese . By contrast, Mao's Communist forces were seen as honest and committed .
 In August 1945, Red Army troops invaded Manchuria in overwhelming force and quickly occupied that Chinese province . The invasion honored Joseph Stalin’s pledge at the February 1945 Yalta Conference that the Soviet Union would enter the war against Japan “two or three months” after
 The fighting in China had tied down some Art of War, The 13 1 million Japanese troops, with some 396,000 killed . 1 million troops were killed in China .
 China sustained military casualties alone of more than 3. million, with more than 1. million dead . China had sustained military losses alone of over 3.million, with over 1.million dead .
 The end of the long Sino-Japanese War did not bring peace to China . Unfortunately for the Chinese, the war did not end in peace .
 Jiang moved troops to Manchuria to secure that key province before the Communists in north China could do so .
 Fighting broke out between the Nationalists and the Communists that led to a Communist victory in September 1949 . The long years of Chinese Civil War and international war to end ended in 1949 .
 Art of War, The Credited to Sun Zi, is a military treatise that provides objectives for managing tactics and winning military engagements . Sun Zi is the author of the book, which is credited with the work of Sun Zi .
 Over time, additional clarifications and commentaries were added to the original text by military philosophers such as Li Quan and Du Mu .
 The end result of the revised work retained the title The Art of War . Sun Zi still credited to Sun Zi .
 The state itself was just east of the main state of Chu and was considered a 14 Art of War, The semibarbarian state by ancient Chinese historians . The state was considered one of China's greatest states .
 Sun Zi began to successfully employ concepts critical to military tactics and overall strategy in his reign .
 Sun Zi compiled the original 13 chapters of The Art of War . Sun Zi then compiled all aspects of how warfare was to be conducted effectively .
 The Art of War covers every aspect of military strategy that was being employed at that time . It covers the discipline of soldiers, tactics, strategy, logistics, and the responsibilities of the general .
 The early kingdoms of this dynasty were fragmented into various warring states, each with separate rulers and laws . Each state was vying for domination over its rival neighbors .
 Innovations in strategies and tactics were being explored in reaction to these conflicts . Innovations were being investigated in response to the conflicts .
 In response to large cavalry formations being used by the various nonChinese groups of the north, the northern state of Jin began to create defensive cavalry units .
 An understanding and appreciation of cavalry tactics were recognized by all the warring states . Gradually an understanding of the cavalry tactics was recognized .
 The period also witnessed improvements on the fortifications of cities and massive defensive walls that spanned great distances . The period was also seen as a period of fortifications .
 As a result of these defensive measures, armies had to have sufficient manpower and new techniques for attacking such fortifications . The result of the defensive measures is that armies have to have enough manpower to attack such fortresses .
 Large-scale military engagements combined with military innovations inspired the emergence of prominent individuals with a deeper understanding of critical issues of warfare . These large-scale . engagements combined . combined . with military . innovations, military innovations .
 The Art of War is by no means the only work of this period that outlines military sieges or how to maintain an army . It ranks as the most significant because it encompasses an understanding that tactics and strategies are dependent on the environments to which they are applied .
 A majority of situations and environments a military commander will face are neither constant nor controlled . The book argues persuasively that a plan of engagement is subject to change over time .
 A military commander must know the limits of his own capabilities and understand the excessive costs of prolongd warfare, Sun Zi says . Sun Zi: A commander must be decisive from the beginning of his actions .
 The Art of War remains one of the most influential works for the study of warfare in the Far East . It remains an influential work of the book about warfare in Asia .
 It has become a philosophical model for gaining the advantage in both political and business conflicts . Not only credited with exclusive strategies concerning warfare, it has also become a philosophy model .
 Despite centuries of innovations in military technology, the basic concepts of The Art of War remain relevant to conflicts on both a large and small scale . Art of war is still relevant to military strategists, commanders, historians, and business executives worldwide .
 Guerrilla Warfare; Han Dynasty; Qin Dynasty; Shang Dynasty; Sun Zi; Warring States Period; Zhou Dynasty . Zhou Dynasty. Zhou Dynasty; Zhou dynasty .
 On August 7, 1927, the CCP Central Committee convened a meeting in Hankou, which corrected Chen Duxiu’s capitulations to the GMD . The meeting decided on the general principle of carrying out agrarian revolution .
 The main task of the party was to mobilize the peasants to launch the Autumn Harvest Uprising . It also decided that the main task was to mobilise the peasants .
 Mao was appointed secretary of the South Hunan Special Committee . Mao was also appointed secretary . Mao is a member of the Central Committee’s plan, according to plan .
 Mao insisted on postponement of the rebellion because the Central Committee’s plan did not rely on regular troops, a necessity for success . At the provincial party committee meeting, however, Mao insisted that the rebellion should be postponed .
 Mao argued that the peasants held no interest in such a large-scale rebellion unless the party was willing to center the movement in their areas, where a victory would benefit the peasants . Mao argued the peasants would not be interested in a large scale rebellion .
 Armed workers, CCP-controlled troops, and security units were moved from the cities to the countryside to support the peasants’ rebellion . They moved the armed workers, . workers, and . security units from the . cities to . support the . peasants' rebellion . The armed workers and
 The focus of the Communist military efforts shifted from urban uprisings to rural rebellion in Hunan and Jiangxi . The 16 Autumn Harvest Uprising new strategy .
 Mao seemed more concerned about the peasants’ mobilization and benefits for his region than his region . Mao seemed to be more concerned with the peasants' mobilization . Mao was concerned about his region’s welfare and economic prosperity .
 South Hunan, than the revolutionary movement in the provincial capital and other cities, than in other cities . South Hunans is more popular than other parts of the province .
 CCP shifted focus from an urban-centered revolution to a rural-centered military movement . Thereafter, the CCP shifted its focus from urban revolution to rural military movement.
 In late August, Mao organized the First Division of the Chinese Revolutionary Army of Workers and Peasants with three regiments and 5,000 men . Mao's first division was formed in late August .
 Following the Central Committee’s orders, on September 11, the division launched the Autumn Harvest Uprising along the Hunan-Jiangxi borders . Following the orders, the Autumn harvest Uprising was launched .
 The GMD and local selfdefense troops organized by the landlords, who were the target of the peasants’ rebellion, counterattacked . Soon the GMD, local self-defense troops .
 On September 29, the badly damaged division reorganized into a single regiment with 1,000 men at Sanwan, Jiangxi . The division was reorganized in September 29 .
 The rebellion's outcome was a failure because of the lack of heavy weapons and poor experience of the revolutionary fighters, as well as the defection of the fourth army group . The rebellion’s outcome was the result of a failure, according to the rebels .
 "All these factors contributed to near complete annihilation of the revolution," says Mao Zed Zedel .
 Mao was forced to retreat to the Jinggangshan on the border between Hunan and Jiangxi Province, from which emerged an army of miners . Mao was then forced to withdraw from the area . Mao's forces were miners .
 This was the first armed uprising by the Communists, and it marked a significant change in their strategy . The uprising was a major change in the Communist Party's strategy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The emphasis for the Communists in fomenting rebellion was no longer in the big cities, but switched to the countryside . The emphasis was on the countryside, rather than the cities, according to the Communists .
 The change helped Mao build strong rural revolutionary bases and the Red Army . Mao's rural base helped Mao to build strong urban revolutionary bases . The change was important to Mao's success in China .
 Mao and Zhu De developed a rural based strategy that centered on guerrilla tactics . Zhu De made famous the strategy called “surround the cities from the countryside” paving the way for the Long March of 1934—1935 . Mao and Red Army founder Zhu De (1886—
 People's Liberation Army fought bandits from 1949 to the end of 1953 . Bandit Extermination Campaigns were led by the People’s Liberation Army .
 During the Chinese Civil War, they boasted huge numbers and wide influence . During the . Civil War , they boasted . huge numbers . They boasted huge . numbers and influence .
 Well organized and well armed, they were actively engaged in rural areas by robbing local businesses and residents, and attacking villages and small towns . They were well armed and well-armed .
 Bandit troops occupied many areas and established strong connections with the local police and local GMD officials . The bandit troops had established strong ties with local police .
 The bandit forces were composed mainly of the remnants of the GMD troops that could not flee to Taiwan after Jiang Jieshi lost the mainland to the CCP during the Chinese Civil War . Local militias organized by landlords to protect their real estate .
 In June 1949, Mao Zedong (Mao Tsetung) called the PLA at the Third Plenary Session of the Seventh CCP Central Committee for a new campaign to eliminate all the bandits in the country . In June . 1949, chairman of the CCP, called the . Third Pl
 Zhu De issued orders to four army groups to sweep off the bandit forces . Zhu De (1886— 1976), commander in chief of the PLA, issued orders for the sweep off .
 In early 1950, the PLA started the nationwide bandit extermination campaign . The campaign focused on southwestern, northeastern, northwestern, northwestern and eastern regions .
 After the Korean War broke out on June 25, 1950, the bandit extermination campaigns became the most urgent task to protect the new regime and secure the domestic order necessary for China .
 In the southwest, the PLA campaign began in February 1950 under the command of Deng Xiaoping (19041997), Liu Bocheng (18921986), and He Long (19921986) The campaign was launched under the leadership of three leaders .
 The Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Eighteenth Army Group deployed 37 divisions for the campaign . They deployed 13 armies and totaling 37 divisions . The campaign included 13 armies .
 By the end of 1950, killed, captured, and surrendered bandits totaled 850,000 in the southwestern region . In the 1950s, killed and captured bandits in the southwest region totaled 750,000 .
 From 1950 to 1953, the PLA exterminated 1.16 million bandits in the southwest of China . The Chinese army exterminated more than 1 million bandits between 1950 and 1953 .
 The PLA fought the bandit forces in this region for three years 17 Banner System with considerable success . The PLA has been fighting the bandits in the region for more than three years .
 In the first year, the PL A eliminated more than 30,000 bandits after the new local governments were established . The PL A was established in 2003 .
 PLA army commands worked with local authorities by mobilizing the masses to join the bandit extermination campaigns . Then the PLA army commandos mobilized the masses by mobilising the masses .
 Villages and small towns established Communist militia by arming peasants . Local governments identified and made contact with the bandit families, who identified and . made contact .
 PLA wiped out major bandit forces out by September 1951 and annihilated more than 53,000 bandit troops in the northeastern region . The Chinese government wiped out most of the major forces out in September 1951 .
 In the northwestern region, the PLA started the campaign in November 1949 with 11 armies, including 37 divisions plus one brigade . In the northwest region, China's military has 11 armies and 37 divisions in total .
 They engaged the bandit forces in Shaanxi, Gansu, Ningxia , Ningxia, Qinghai , Qinghai, and Xinjiang Provinces .
 In the first half of 1950, the PLA Northwest China Command added more than 19,000 troops to the bandit extermination campaign . In the 1950s, the Chinese military added 19,500 troops .
 By July 1953, the campaign in the northwestern region was completed with the killing of more than 91,000 bandit troops . The campaign was completed in July 1953 with the death of 91,00 bandit soldiers .
 In the eastern region, there were an estimated 120,000 bandits in July 1949 . In July 1949 there were estimated to have been 120,500 bandits .
 PLA East China Command and the Third Field Army Command deployed 14 divisions to fight bandit forces in Zhejiang and Fujian Provinces in 1949 .
 After more than one year of the bandit extermination campaign inland, the PLA annihilated more than 5,400 bandit forces . The PLA has annihilated over 5,000 bandits in the area .
 Chen Yi (1901— 1972), commander of the East China Command and the Third Field Army, reinforced five divisions to Fujian to fight against bandits . In 1950, Chen Yi reinforced five division to fight the bandits in Fujian .
 By June 1950, the PLA exterminated 114,000 bandits inland of the eastern region . The PLA was able to exterminate more than a million bandits in the region .
 The PLA moved the bandit extermination campaign from land to sea and fought the bandits on the offshore islands along the eastern coast .
 By the end of 1953, over a period of four years, the PLA had eliminated 246,000 bandits in the eastern region . The PLA had been eliminating 246,00 bandits over four years .
 By the end of 1953, the PLA annihilated more than 2. million bandit troops . The PLA was able to annihilate 2.2 million bandits .
 The PRC was able to exterminate the remnants of the GMD forces, eliminate GMD agents and spies, destroy secret societies, and disarm local landlords and peasants . As a result of the extermination, the new government of the PRC eliminated GMD .
 The victory of the PLA bandit extermination campaigns consolidated the CCP regime and secured the domestic order for many years to come, says the author of the book .
 Banner System was the military, political, and social organization created by the Banner System | 19 Manchus led by Nurhaci in the early seventeenth century . The banner system was the political, social, military, and military organization created .
 It was used as a military tool for the Manchu conquest of China and the Qing Empire . It later incorporated the Mongols and the Chinese, serving as a backbone of the Qing empire .
 Jurchens led by Nurhaci started to consolidate power in northeastern China . As the Ming dynasty waned, the Jurchens began consolidating power .
 Nurhaci monopolized the trade in the region . He recognized the importance of creating an effective military apparatus in order to unify the Jurchens .
 The whole system functioned as a military force as the banners served as a tool in wars, and a membership in a given banner symbolized the status as a warrior .
 The stratification of the banner into three levels facilitated effective commandership as all banner men were required to be loyal to Nurhaci . The stratified structure of the banners was designed to ensure effective leadership . The banner was created in order to ensure loyalty to the king .
 Nurhaci’s descendants added eight Mongol and eight Chinese banners in 1634 and 1642 . To strengthen fighting capability, Nurhici’ descendants added 8 Mongol and Chinese banners .
 The banner system was also a political polity as well as a social organization . It was used as a political system for political and social purposes .
 All Manchus, Mongols, and the Chinese who surrendered early were banner men .
 The distinction between soldier and civilian was vague, and they were identical in many cases . The distinction is vague, but it was clear that soldiers were soldiers .
 Banner men engaged in farming and receiving military training . They were dispatched to the front once a war broke out . Banner men were sent to war in the early 1900s .
 When the Manchus conquered China in 1644, the total number of soldiers in the banner system reached 168,900 . In 1644 the number of troops in the system was 168,000 .
 By the end of the seventeenth century, the number of banner men totaled a quarter million . A stable figure until 1912, the banner men were a stable figure .
 Roughly half of all banner men and their families were stationed in Beijing as defenders of the capital . Roughly . half of . all banner . men and . their families was stationed in . Beijing .
 A garrison inside a major city was called the “Manchu City” separated from Chinese civilians to avoid direct confrontation . A garrison in a city called Manchu City was separated from civilians . The garrison was called a “manchu city’s”
 The garrisons remained one of the prominent institutions of the Qing dynasty . Being in those isolated colonies, they remained a prominent institution .
 The banner troops originally were fierce fighters, but their life in a new environment in vast Chinese land eventually debilitated their militant spirit .
 The emperors often issued edicts to remind them of preserving tradition . But the banner system was gradually eroded by banner men’s indulgence in an enjoyable life .
 In 1735, barely a century after the Manchu conquest, Emperor Qianlong started to rely on the Chinese Green Standard Army to suppress bandits .
 banner men continued to be a state-sponsored military force, but they were no longer a regular army . The banner men are now known as banner men .
 By the end of the nineteenth century, the rise of the New Army Beiping-Tianjin Campaign disfranchised the banner system .
 As imperial decay continued, the banner system became a burden to the Qing government . As the state funding diminished, the state of China's banner system also became a problem .
 Banner men lived in poverty and were encouraged to seek self-support . Banner men were encouraged not to live in poverty, but to seek their own support .
 Banner men in urban areas such as Beijing were absorbed into the urban labor force . Those who lived in frontier regions such as Heilongjiang Province became farmers . Banner men were absorbed in the labor force, while those in frontier areas were farmers .
 The Chinese Revolution of 1911 and the abdication of the last Qing Emperor Xuantong declared the demise of the banner system . The Chinese revolution of 1911 declared the end of the system .
 Beiyang Army; Chinese Revolution of 1911; Ming Dynasty; Manchuria, Manchus; Mongols; New Army; Opium War, First; Qianlong, Emperor; Qing Dynasty; Sino-Japanese War; Taiping Rebellion; Xiang Army .
 The battle took place primarily in Hebei and the municipalities of Beijing (Peking, or Beiping) and Tianjin (Beiping) from late October 1948 to January 31, 1949 .
 Lin Biao’s Northeast Field Army destroyed the Nationalist army in Manchuria (Liaoning-Shenyang Campaign) and turned their attention toward Fu Zuoyi’�s General Headquarters for Bandit Suppression in north China . The Communists turned their
 Mao Zedong and the Communist leadership believed it was imperative to destroy this army as soon as possible . Fearing that Fu would try to escape the impending trap, Mao Zedongs and the . Communist leadership feared that Fu might try to . escape the . impending trap . Feared that Fu
 Nie Rongzhen's (Nieh Jungch’en) North China Military District was not strong enough to block Fu’s army on its own, especially as it concurrently laid siege to Taiyuan . However, the nearest Communist force, the Nieh
 The only other unit in the vicinity was the NFA, but it had not yet had a chance to rest and refit after the Liao-Shen Campaign . The NFA was the only other units in the area, but had yet to refit .
 Fu had no intention of abandoning his position despite Communist fears . Fu said he would not abandon his position in the country .
 By November, he had determined that the NFA was not ready to move south, and he planned Beiping-Tianjin Campaign | 21 . He planned to stall the Communists for as long as possible in north China .
 Unaware of Fu’s intent, the Communists scaled back their attacks on Taiyuan and prolonged the Huai-Hai Campaign to project the illusion that Fu was not yet completely isolated .
 Mao Zedong and the Secretariat, the CCP political and military high command, also were determined that NFA would have to complete its deployment into north China by November 22 . NFA has been ordered to deploy to north China since November 22.
 Lin would have virtually no time to rest or reorganize his weary army . This meant that Lin would be left with little time to reorganize or rest . Lin would also have to deal with his weary troops .
 By November 23, the NFA seized Shanhaiguan and severed the Beijing-Tianjin railroad . The NFA also severed a railroad link between Beijing and Tianjin .
 The Nationalists were unaware that these forces were from the NFA and believed Lin’s army was still in Manchuria . The NFA was unaware that the forces were actually from the Nationalists .
 Nie deployed the Second Army, commanded by Yang Dezhi, and Yang Chengwu’s (Yang Ch’eng-wu) Third Army to attack Zhangjiakou . The NFA continued its infiltration .
 Fu dispatched his best force, the Thirty-Fifth Corps, to relieve the city, but this element was trapped by the Third Army at Xinbaoan . Fu dispatched this element to relieve his troops, but it was captured by the army .
 Two Yangs did not pursue their attacks for fear that this would force Fu to consolidate his defenses or evacuate . However, the two Yangs believed Fu would be forced to consolidate or evacuate his defenses .
 Fu insisted on staying put, believing the NFA’s main force was still a month away . Despite the danger, Fu insisted that he would stay put . Fu believes that the club's main force is still away from the club .
 The majority of Lin’s army had already assumed their assigned positions by December 12 . In this, he severely miscalculated as the majority of his army already had already been assigned positions .
 At this point, the Secretriat created the Beiping-Tianjin General Front Committee . Lin was appointed as commander in chief of the Chinese army .
 Communists surrounded and isolated the major strong points of the GMD defenses, the Communists began a series of secret talks to convince Fu to surrender . Fu was surrounded by Soviet Union troops and Soviet troops .
 Fu’s own daughter, Fu Dong, was a member of the Communist underground . Fu's own daughter Fu Dong was a Communist underground member . Fu Dong's daughter was also part of the underground .
 When negotiations reached an impasse on December 19, Lin unleashed the Second and Third Armies, which proceeded to destroy the Thirty-Fifth Corps and capture Zhangjiakou . The Second, Third and Fourth Armies then destroyed the 30th Corps .
 This action severed Fu’s escape route west and cost him another 60,000 men . This action cost him 60,500 more men . Fu was forced to withdraw from the camp .
 Fu returned to the bargaining table, but this time he was greeted with the Communists’ demand for unconditional surrender . Fu was greeted by the Communist Party's demand for surrender .
 Lin used transferred North China Military District armies east to reinforce the sieges of Beijing and Tianjin .
 Ping-Jin Committee decided to attack Tianjin and cut the Nationalists off from the sea . After Fu left the bargaining table for a second time, the Ping-jin Committee attacked Tianjin .
 The Communists captured the city on January 15, inflicting 130,000 casualties in a daylong battle . The Communists capture the city in January 15 .
 As the loss of Tianjin left Fu completely isolated in Beijing, he submitted to a new round of negotiations . The loss of the Tianjin port has left him isolated in China .
 Lin Lin believed the Nationalists were stalling for time . Nie argued that the talks were sincere, but Lin said they were not sincere . Lin believes the talks are sincere and that they are sincere .
 In the end, Nie was proven correct, partially because he had prevented Lin from issuing a premature ultimatum . Nie: "In the end of the day, I'm proven correct" Lin was proven wrong, but Nie had prevented Nie from issuing an ultim
 On January 22, Fu left Beijing and his army, still a quarter of a million men strong, were integrated into the Communist ranks . Fu's army was still a 25,000-strong army, but still has a quarter-million men .
 Ping-Jin Campaign ended the last major Nationalist force north of the Yangzi (Yangtze) River . Campaign also established an important precedent .
 Beiyang Army to become the pattern for the rest of the conquest of China, with most Nationalists opting for the Beiping method . This was 22 years later, the Chinese army was defeated by the Chinese Nationalists .
 Professionalism and Political Control in the Chinese Officer Corps, 1948-1964. Professionalism . Political control in the . Chinese Officer . Corps . 1948- 1964 . Professionalism, Political Control .
 A Western-style army was established by the Qing dynasty in an effort to modernize the Chinese military . The Beiyang Army was established in 1903 in China .
 In the late nineteenth century, the frequent peasant rebellions, foreign invasions, and domestic as well as overseas anti-Manchu movements undermined the Qing’s power .
 In 1895, China lost the war to Japan, and thereby lost its central position in Asia . China lost its position in the region in 1895 .
 The turn of the century marked major changes in the Qing dynasty’s military organization, institution, and technology . The Qing dynasty was known for its military organization and technology.
 Qing government established the Ziqiangjun (Self-Strengthening Army) in Hubei in 1896 . To survive, the Qing government set up the army in the city .
 Yuan Shi-kai was the founder of the Beiyang Army and first president of the Chinese Republic . Yuan Shikai established a new army, named ‘Xinjun” in Hebei or Zhili, in 1897 .
 He hired instructors and purchased modern firearms from Germany and other European countries . He hired German instructors .
 Yuan’s army was renamed the “Beiyang” (Northern Sea) Army, and by 1906, it consisted of five infantry divisions, totaling 50,000, near Beijing . Then Yuan's army was called Beiyang, and it was renamed "Beiy
 Yuan created five officer training schools and military academies in Baoding and Tianjin, Hebei Province . Yuan created the academies . He was born in China .
 Military education and formal training were promoted by both European instructors and new technology in the New Army .
 By the turn of the century, China’s New Army was a far more effective force . By the end of the decade, China's New Army had become an effective military force .
 The Manchu rulers refused to carry the reform into military institutions and organizations beyond buying Western weapons and hiring European instructors . The New Army could not save the empire because the rulers refused .
 The Manchu grandees’ refusal to further reform and brutal suppression of the reformers also alienated the regular men of the New Army and undermined their loyalty to the emperor himself .
 Early recruits were soon disillusioned by the government’s corruption, mismanagement, and, worst of all, its failure against European, American, and Japanese forces during the 1900 Boxer Rebellion .
 During the first decade of the twentieth century, the Qing dynasty’s political order and economic system crumbled under Western invasions and increasing domestic dissatisfaction, eroding Manchu authority in Beijing .
 The anti-Manchu movement founded its revolutionary center overseas . Meanwhile, the anti-China movement founded a revolutionary center in China .
 Sun Yat-sen, one of the anti-Manchu leaders, made Japan his revolutionary base . He made the country a revolutionary base in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Sun organized the Tongmenghui (or T’ung-meng Hui, the United League) in 1905, in Japan . In 1905, Sun led the Tongmanghui in Japan and organized the League in 1905 .
 Among the 1,000 early members were some of the New Army’s young officers trained in Japan . The New Army's young officers were among the early New Army members .
 On October 10, 1911, amidst an anti-Qing plot in Wuchang, some New Army officers revolted . The plot was set up in the wake of a revolt by the New Army .
 The success of the Wuchang uprising led many officers of the New Army to join the Revolution of 1911 . Many officers joined the revolution after the uprising .
 The provisional government elected Sun president of the government . He was inaugurated on January 1, 1912, at Nanjing, China .
 In an attempt to avoid civil war, Sun negotiated with Yuan and offered him the presidency of the new republic . Yuan died of a heart attack on Sun in 1877 .
 Yuan was elected president of the ROC by the provisional government on February 14 . Yuan has been in office since February 14, 2013, when he was elected as president .
 Yuan, however, tried to establish his own dictatorship and monarchy against the revolutionaries . Yuan's government was overthrown by the revolutionaries, but he was assassinated in 1941 .
 After Yuan’s death in 1916, the country entered the Warlord Period . Military commanders of different armies controlled a province or a region . The period was known as the Yuan period .
 Boxer Rebellion; China, Republic of of; Chinese Revolution of 1911; Li Hongzhang; Manchus; New Army; Qing Dynasty; SinoJapanese War . Sino-Japanese War; Self-Strengthening Movement; Sun Yat-sen; Unequal
 Boxer Rebellion occurred from November 1897 to September 1901 . The movement developed in northern China . Boxer rebellion occurred from 1897 to 1901 .
 Its objective was the removal of foreign influence over Chinese trade, politics, religion, and technology . Its objective is to remove foreign influence .
 Opium Wars of the 1840s and 1850s led to Western nations imposing on the Chinese what became known as the Unequal Treaties . Western nations had substantial control over China’s principal ports, dominance of the Chinese Customs Service and extraterritorial rights for Western citizens .
 Christian missionaries came to be seen as agents for the spread of Western influence in China . This environment provided Western businessmen a dominant position in the most lucrative parts of the Chinese economy .
 Christian churches often attracted miscreants who used the religion to invoke Western protection, further inflaming resentment against foreign influence .
 China’s humiliating defeat by Japan in the Sino-Japanese War of 1894-1895 was followed by still further demands for mining and railroad concessions and seizures of territory by Britain, France, Germany and Russia .
 In December 1897, the Russians seized Lushun, located in Liaoning Province, China . The Russians seized the city in December 1897 .
 The British joined in by occupying Weihai, Shandong, while the French seized Zhanjiang, Guangdong Province . The British also joined in with the French, occupying Zhan Jiang, Guangzhou .
 The Boxers came together as a nationalistic, antiforeign movement determined to reverse the expansion of Western influence in China and restore Chinese independence . They came together in China in the 1930s as an anti-Western movement .
 Its influence was greatest in northern China, where Western dominance was most widespread . Western influence was most pronounced in the northern China .
 The initial stages of the Boxer Rebellion were simultaneous with the Qing Emperor Guangxu’s Rebellion . The so-called Hundred Days’ Reform was an attempt to reorganize and make more efficient the imperial bureaucracy .
 Boxers were hostile toward the ruling Manchu Qing dynasty . The Boxers first fought against the Qing dynasty at first .
 Boxers were defeated by imperial troops in October 1898 . They focused on Christian missionaries and converts, whom they saw as Western imperialism .
 Growing strength of the Boxers encouraged Cixi to deploy them as a force to expel the Western powers from China . The Boxers were used to reverse the emperor’s reform program .
 Imperial Court issued edicts in January 1900 defending Boxers . Imperial Court was soon firmly under her control .
 By November 1897, the Boxers had begun to launch widespread attacks against Western interests in northern China . The Boxers launched widespread attacks on Western interests throughout the country .
 Western military forces began to build up their presence on the Chinese coast, beginning in April 1900 . Western forces began building up presence in China, starting in 1900 .
 The nations that sent troops included Japan, Russia, Great Britain, France, the United States, Germany, Italy, Italy and Austria .
 Some 2,100 troops (mostly marines and sailors) were dispatched to Beijing to aid troops already in place defending foreign embassies there . The following day, some 2,000 troops were dispatched, part of another international coalition force .
 Boxers, joined by elements of the Imperial Army, attacked foreign compounds inside Beijing . The imperial government ordered all foreigners to leave Beijing, and the following day the Boxers attacked the foreign compounds .
 The American, British, Dutch, French, and Russian legations joined together to form a fortified compound in Beijing . Staff of the Belgian and Spanish legations and other foreign citizens were able to flee .
 The German legation, however, was quite distant on the other side of the city and was stormed before the staff could escape . It was stormed by the staff of the legation .
 Imperial Chinese troops, in the meantime, had reinforced the Dagukou forts at the mouth of the Haihe River, cutting off the Allied fleet from the forces it had landed . Imperial Chinese forces cut off Allied forces by cutting them off .
 Joint Allied conference presented the Chinese with an ultimatum demanding the surrender of the forts . On June 16, a joint Allied conference was presented with the Chinese .
 Allied landing forces assaulted the forts on June 17, capturing them by 6:30 A.M. along with four destroyers seized by naval boarding parties . At 1:00 A.m. on June 18, a fierce artillery interchange between forts and shoal-draft elements
 The success at Dagukou established a beachhead to build up strong forces to relieve the troops at Tianjin and advance on Beijing .
 By early July, 51 warships from eight nations were deployed in the mouth of the Haihe River . 51 warships were deployed by early July .
 Allied force successfully assaulted Tianjin on July 13 and commenced its advance to Beijing on August 4 . Allied forces successfully attacked Tianjin and proceeded to Beijing in August 4.
 The march to Beijing was opposed by approximately 70,000 imperial troops and some 50,000-100,000 Boxers . The march was led by around 70,000 troops and around 100,000 people .
 Beijing fell on August 5, 1900, and the following day, U.S. and British troops prevailed in a fierce engagement at Yangcun .
 On August 14, the Allied force arrived at Beijing, where troops from the United States Army’s Fourteenth Infantry Regiment scaled the Tartar Wall and opened the way into Beijing .
 Allied forces successfully assaulted the Inner City, ending the siege of the legations . The following day, the Allied force successfully attacked the city . The siege was over for the first time since the Second World War .
 Allied troops spread out over northern China, breaking up Boxer concentrations . Allied troops captured Beijing in 1940s .
 On February 1, 1901, the imperial government officially abolished the Righteous and Harmonious Fists . The imperial government abolished the righteous and harmonious fists .
 On September 7, 1901, imperial officials had no choice but to sign the so-called Boxer Protocol . The Protocol was signed by the Eight-Nation Alliance and China . It is sometimes referred to as the Peace Agreement between the eight-nation Alliance .
 The Qing government was obliged to permit fortifications of foreign legations and the installation of foreign garrisons along the Beijing-Tianjin railroad .
 It also was compelled to execute 10 officials linked to the outbreak of the rebellion and pay war reparations of $333 million . The U.S. also was forced to pay reparations for the rebellion . It was also compelled to pay $333m in reparations to the rebels .
 Britain and the U.S. remitted much of their portion of the indemnity, allocating it for the education of Chinese students at overseas institutions . The United States also remitted some of the money to China .
 This humiliating defeat greatly contributed to the growth of Chinese nationalism and movements dedicated to the nation’s modernization and the overthrow of the foreign Qing dynasty . The loss of the Qing dynasty greatly contributed .
 This would lead to the 1911 revolution and the establishment of the Republic of China in 1912 . The 1911 revolution would be the first to lead to a revolution in China .
 In the short term, however, it also paved the way for aggressive foreign expansion into China, especially by Russia and Japan in the north . In the long-term, the short-term impact of the move will be seen in China's history .
 The large number of American troops and ships deployed in the Philippines after the Spanish-American War allowed the U.S. to make a significant contribution to suppressing the Boxer Rebellion .
 This success reinforced the importance of the Philippines in maintaining America’s interests in the Far East . The Philippines is one of the most important countries in the world .
 China, Republic of of; Eight Foreign Armies’ Invasion of China; Manchus; New Army; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Sino-Japanese War; Unequal Treaties . China’s invasion of China began in 18th Century;
 The Dramatic Story of China’s War on Foreigners That Shook the World in the Summer of 1900 . The War on foreigners that shook the world in the summer of 1900. The war was the first of its kind .
 Cao Cao was the son of Cao Song, a minor official in the Han court . He was born Cao Cao in 155, and died in the early years of his life .
 Cao Song is thought to have been the adopted son of an influential eunuch in the imperial court . Cao Song was thought to be the son of a powerful eunuc in China's imperial court.
 Cao Cao followed his father into the bureaucracy and spent his early years in a number of midlevel court and military appointments . Cao Cao was born Cao Cao, a son of Cao Cao and Cao Cao's father .
 An attempted coup by General Dong Zhou broke the power of the Han emperor in 189, sending China into civil war . In 189, an attempt by Dong Zhou to overthrow the Han Emperor broke the rule of China's Han emperor .
 A skilled tactician and a natural leader, he was soon able to pull together one of the most competent armies in northern China .
 Cao Cao was able to gain the upper hand by the mid-190s . Cao Cao had been able to take advantage of a number of warlords by force or treachery .
 First, he secured the loyalty of his officers and companion army troops . Then he secured his loyalty to his officers, and his troops .
 He gained control over the young Han emperor Xian and gave his administration legitimacy . Second, he gained control of Xian, and gave him control of the Han dynasty .
 Third, he instituted a system of military agricultural colonies on his territories . The colonies provided him with a ready supply of soldiers .
 Yuan Shao was an aristocrat whose family had held power under the Han administration . Yuan was the first person to hold power in China to take over from the Han dynasty .
 Cao Cao won a decisive victory that left him the de facto ruler of northern China . Cao Cao was victorious in a decisive battle in the early years of his rule in China .
 Cao Cao controlled all the real power under his self-appointed title of Imperial Secretariat . Although the puppet Han emperor Xian still officially held the imperial throne, Cao Cao held the real real power .
 Cao Cao extended his power north past the Great Wall of China and into the northern part of modern-day Korea . Cao Cao was one of the most powerful men in China to extend his power in the region .
 Liu Bei would later found the Kingdom of Shu in southwestern China, and Sun Quan would found the kingdom of Wu in southeastern China . Liu Bei later found a kingdom in Shu in southwest China, while Sun Quan found Wu .
 Cao Cao and the Kingdom of Wei provided a balance of power in China known as the Three Kingdoms . Cao Cao’s territory was Cao's territory, and the kingdom of Wei that would emerge out of his territory . Together, Wei and Cao Cao were able to provide balance in China
 In 213, the emperor officially granted him control of 10 cities in a region renamed the “state of Wei’s” Cao Cao . Cao Cao was named the duke of Wei after the emperor named Cao Cao the son of Cao Cao in 213 .
 Cao Cao himself was an accomplished poet, and during his reign, his state actively supported the arts . Cao Cao's state was actively supported by the arts during his time in China .
 Cao Pi deposed the emperor and declared himself the first emperor of the Wei dynasty . Cao Pi had been content to remain officially a subject of the Han emperor .
 The territory conquered by Cao Cao officially became the Kingdom of Wei . At that point, the territory was officially known as the kingdom of Wei.
 Cao Cao’s family held power for another 40 years until the Sima family, who briefly reunited China under the Jin dynasty, overthrew them . Cao Cao's family was overthrown in the Jin Dynasty, which ended in 2003 .
 In the classic fourteenth-century novel Romance of the Three Kingdoms, he is depicted as cunning and treacherous . He is also depicted as treacherous and cunning .
 Historians credit him with restoring order to northern China during a chaotic period . Classical Chinese literature generally portrays him in a negative light . Historians say he restored order to China during chaotic period of chaos .
 Chibi, Battle of; Eunuchs; Great Wall; Guandu, Battle . of; Han Dynasty; Northern and Southern Dynasties; Three Kingdoms; Three. Kingdoms .
 Cao was born in December 1935 in Wugang County, central Henan Province . Cao is the first person to be born in China's capital, Henan .
 He enrolled in the PLA’s Dalian Russian Language Special School from 1956 to 1957 . Then he enrolled in Dalian's Dalian language Special School .
 His Russian instructors offered training in Russian language skills, revolution history, and military doctrine and culture . He also offered lessons in revolution history .
 In September 1957, he was sent by the PLA to the Soviet Union for further studies in modem military technology . He was sent to Moscow to further studies .
 He attended the Advanced Artillery Military Engineering School of the Soviet Red Army’s Artillery Corps at Leningrad .
 Cao returned to China in 1963 after six years of study and training in Russia . Cao graduated from the Soviet Army Artillery Academy in 1963 .
 Cao became an instructor at the First Artillery Ordnance Technology School in Nanjing . Speaking fluent Russian, Cao spoke fluent Russian at the school . Cao is also an expert in the Chinese artillery artillery .
 In the late 1960s, he served as assistant head of the Ammunition Division of Ordnance Department of the PLA General Logistics Department in Beijing .
 GLD was established by Marshal Peng Dehuai, China's first defense minister, in October 1954 . The GLD is China's largest defense budget .
 As in the Soviet Red Army, the department supervised national defense budget expenses, defense industry, military supply, transportation, and medical services .
 The GSD served as the headquarters for all the armed services and was the most important department among them . It was the headquarters of the armed forces .
 The PLA carried out the staff and operational functions of the PLA and implemented military modernization plans . It carried out staff and . operational functions .
 GSD conveyed policy directives downward, translated national security and defense policy into specific responsibilities for subordinate departments . GSD oversaw policy implementation on behalf of the CMC, and commanded China’s military operations in wartime .
 GSD also performed important organizational functions such as procurement, operational planning, and intelligence . The GSD is responsible for procurement and operational planning .
 Cao’s study in the Soviet Union built a solid groundwork of military technology and personal connections that helped his military career . Cao's study helped him develop a solid foundation for his career in the military .
 In September 1988, when the PLA restored the military ranking system, he was given the rank of lieutenant general . He was promoted to lieutenant general in September 1988 .
 One year later he became the head of the Office of Military Trade of Central Military Commission . Then, one year later, he was the head . He became the . head of . the Office . of Military . Trade of . Central Military . Commission .
 From 1996 to 1998, he was the chairman of the Commission of Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense . He was also the chair of the commission of science, technology, and industry .
 The GAD, established in the spring of 1998, is in charge of PLA equipment, weaponry, and technology . GAD is responsible for the PLA's equipment and weaponry .
 He was the minister of the National Defense Ministry of the PRC until March 2008 . That year, he was the defense minister of China's PRC .
 Cao played an active role in China’s military diplomacy by visiting more than 20 foreign countries and met with military delegations from 60 countries . Cao visited 60 countries as defense minister and played a role in the country's military diplomacy .
 Cao established the direct “military hotline” between Beijing and Washington to further develop China's military exchange and communication . Cao met United States defense secretary Robert Gates and his delegation in Beijing in November 2007 .
 China established a similar ‘military hotline’ with Russia in 2008 . In 2008, China set up a similar hotline with Russia . The hotline was established in Beijing .
 During the Agrarian Revolutionary War, under the leadership of the CCP, the Third Army of the Chinese Workers and Peasant Red Army and the local militias in Hunan, Hubei and Jiangxi Provinces launched an armed rebellion against the GMD garrison in Changsha,
 Communist troops at that time numbered more than 20,000 men . The number of Communist troops in that time stood at that height .
 In early July, the Border Special Committee of the CCP decided to concentrate the Red Army troops to take over the city of Changsha . Some of the GMD troops were transferred out of town, when some of them were transferred .
 On July 22, the Red Army received information that the GMD had discovered the CCP’s rebellion plan and prepared to attack the CCP troops . The GMD is preparing to attack Red Army troops . Red Army: GMD has discovered the rebellion plan .
 CCP decided to launch the Chen Geng | 31 uprising earlier than planned . The CCP has launched the first uprising in China since 2008 .
 On July 25, the Third Red Army and local Communist militias attacked the GMD garrison at Shengguajian, an outpost of Changsha, China .
 After a brief battle, the Red Army killed more than 2,000 GMD defense troops . The Red Army was killed by the Soviets during a battle with GMD .
 Wei Xiuzhong, commander of the GMD troops in Changsha, decided to retreat to the Jinjing defense position in the city . He decided to withdraw from the city and move to a defense position .
 The Red Army continued their attacks on July 26 and successfully took over the Jinjing area . Red Army continues its attacks on the area until July 26 .
 Wei was forced to retreat to the last defense line of Changsha . Because of the disparity of the GMD troops, Wei retreated to Changsha, China .
 The CCP established the Hunan Provincial Soviet government, which confiscated the properties of landlords and distributed them to the poor peasants who helped the Red Army during the battle . The Hunan Soviet government confiscated the property of landlords .
 The victory of the CCP at Changsha shocked Jiang Jieshi , president of the Republic of China government in Nanjing . The victory for the CCP shocked Jiang .
 Jiang sent warships along the Yangzi River to support He Jian, GMD Governor of Hunan Province, to recover Changsha . Jiang sent GMD warships along Yangzi river to support Hunan province .
 Jiang also sent bombers and fighter to provide air support to He’s counterattacks . Jiang sent bombers, fighter jets and fighter jets to provide support for He's counterattack .
 In early August, the Red Army engaged in defense battles against the GMD reinforcements at the Hungtu and Emin Hills . The Red Army fought back against GMD forces in the Emin Hills and Hungtu Hills .
 The Third Red Army eliminated more than 1,500 GMD troops through its defense battle . GMD forces were eliminated by the Red Army in the battle . The Red Army was defeated by the GMD in the Battle of the Second World War .
 Without heavy artillery and effective defense work, the Red Army paid a disastrous price in the defense battles . Nevertheless, without heavy artillery, the Soviets paid a price in defense battles.
 Hunan Soviet government decided to withdraw the CCP forces from Changsha . To save the Third Army, the Hunan Soviets decided to pull the forces out .
 From 1931 to 1934, Jiang launched five large-scale offensive campaigns, the Encirclement Campaigns, against the CCP Red Army in Hunan and Jiangxi Provinces . Jiang launched a series of offensive campaigns against the Red Army .
 The Red Army withdrew from their base areas in 1934 after they lost their defense to Jiang’s Fifth Encirclement Campaign in Jiangxi . Red Army withdraws from base areas after losing their defense .
 Chen Geng (Chen Keng, 1903-1961) Senior general of the People’s Liberation Army . Chen Keng was one of the most experienced and dedicated Communist military leaders .
 Chen Geng was born in Xiangxiang County, Hunan Province on February 27, 1903 . He was the first Chinese woman to be born in China in 1903 .
 He ran away from an arranged marriage by his father in 1916 and joined the Second Battalion . He was forced to leave his father's arranged marriage in 1916 to join the army .
 Chen left the Xiang Army in 1921 and got a job at the Hunan Railway Bureau as a desk clerk . He took some training classes at professional schools in Changsha, capital city Hunan .
 He learned Communist ideas and participated in revolutionary activities at school, he says . He says he was inspired by the Communist Party .
 He was sent to the Soviet Union to study military science and intelligence in 1926 . He was also sent to Russia in 1926 for military science .
 Chen participated in the Nanchang Uprising on August 1, 1927 . After his return, Chen worked for Zhou Enlai and He Long . Chen was a member of the Chinese revolutionary movement .
 During the armed revolt, he became the commander of the First Battalion, Sixth Regiment, Third Division, Twelfth Army, under the command of He Long . During the revolt he was in command of the Second Battalion .
 In September 1931, he was transferred to the CCP Central Soviet Region in Jiangxi Hunan border area . He served as regimental and then division commander in the Fourth Army of the Red Army . He was transferred in September 1931 .
 After the Long March, he became the commander of the Thirteen Regiment of the First Army Corps in 1935 . He was also commander of a division in the First Division in the same year .
 His brigade launched guerrilla warfare against the Japanese troops in Shanxi and Hebei Provinces in 1938-1941 . His brigade moved behind the enemy lines and fought behind enemy lines against the enemy .
 After his brigade won several battles against the Japanese, he was promoted to commander of the Tai-Yue Military District Command in 1942 . He was elected member of the CCP Central Committee at the party's Seventh National Congress .
 During the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949, he was appointed commander of the Fourth Column . He engaged the Nationalist army in central China .
 When the PLA was established, Chen became the commander and political commissar of the Fourth Army Group in the Second Field Army . Chen was also the commander of the Second Army Group .
 He commanded his Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Armies . He took over several major cities such as Nanchang and Guangzhou in 1949 .
 After the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, he was appointed commander of the Yunnan Military District and governor of Yunnan Province in 1950 .
 Chen is the representative of the CCP Central Committee in charge of military advice in Vietnam . Liu Shaoqi (Liu Shaoch’i) appointed Chen as the representative .
 The Chinese offered Ho Chi Minh (1890— 1969) and the Viet Minh a Chinese model to mobilize vast sectors of the population and win the war against the French troops in the First Indochina War of 1946-1954 . The Chinese model was used as a model
 Chinese advisors participated in the Viet Minh’s battle planning, operations, and assessments . The Chinese advisors were involved in the Vietnam War .
 Chinese advisors and Vietnamese commanders often had sharp disagreements about how to conduct the battles . Chinese advisors, Vietnamese commanders were often at odds with each other's decisions .
 In some cases, Chen called Ho or even Mao Zedong in Beijing to explain why his plan was best for the Vietnamese . Chen Geng | 33 cases of Chen calling Ho or Zedong to explain his plan .
 He threatened General Vo Nguyen Giap repeatedly that he would resign if the Vietnamese did not accept his plan . He even threatened to resign if he did not get his plan accepted .
 In March 1951, he was appointed commander and political commissar of the Third Army Group of the Chinese People’s Volunteer in the Korean War . He was appointed Commander and Political Commissar .
 Chen worked as the acting commander of the Chinese forces in Korea . When the commander in chief of the CPVF, Peng Dehuai, went back to China, Chen worked in China . Chen is now the head of the military in South Korea .
 In June 1952, Chen was called back to China and appointed by the Central Military Commission to create China’s Military Engineering Academy in Harbin, Heilongjiang Province . Chen was appointed in June 1952 to create the Academy .
 Chen became the president and political commissar of the PRC’s first military academy in 1953 . On September 1, 1953, the Military Engineering Academy was established . Chen was the president of the academy's first military Academy .
 It became one of the most famous universities in China within a few years . The university is engaged in developing high-tech weapons .
 In September 1958, when the CMC reorganized the Aviation Industrial Committee of the Defense Ministry into the State Commission of Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense, Chen was appointed vice chairman . Chen focused on the ballistic missile program and nuclear weapon program .
 He fell out of favor during Deng Xiaoping’s reforms . He was demoted with other Maoist political and military leaders to the lesser Central Committee member status in February 1980 .
 Chen Xilian was born in Huang’an County, Hubei Province, to a poor peasant family . He joined the CCP Red Army in 1929 and the Chinese Communist Youth League a year later .
 During the Agrarian Revolutionary War (1927- 1937), he was political commissar of the Thirtieth Regiment, Tenth Division, Fourth Red Army . He was also commander of the Tenth Division of the Fourth Red army .
 Chen was commander of the 769th Regiment, 385th Brigade, 129th Division, Eighth Route Army . Chen was in the Anti-Japanese War during the Second World War .
 His successful attack eliminated the Japanese air threat on the Xikou front . His successful . attack eliminated . the . Japanese air . threat .
 Chen’s regiment participated in the Hundred Regiments Campaign near Taiyuan, Shanxi Province, in 1940 .
 In September, he became the commander of the 385th Brigade of the 129th Division . In September he was appointed as the commander .
 Chen was commander of the Third Column during the Chinese Civil War . He was also commander of Third Army Group of the Second Field Army . Chen was a member of the Chinese Nationalist Party .
 He participated in the Huai-Hai Campaign and the Yangzi River Campaigns . He is a member of the National Socialist Party .
 Chen’s army group moved into Zhejiang Province after the fall of Nanjing . Chen saw major action at Hangzhou and Shanghai in the spring 1949 .
 Chen Xilian was appointed first party secretary and mayor of Chongqing, Sichuan Province, in 1950 . He was first mayor and party secretary of Chongquing in 1950, after founding of the People's Republic of China .
 He later became commander of PLA East Sichuan Regional Command, commander of the PLA Artillery Corps . He was promoted to general in 1955, and later became president of PLA Academy .
 In 1959, after the fall of Peng Dehuai (P’eng Te-huai) Chen was sent to Manchuria, one of the most sensitive regions of the Sino-Soviet border . Chen served as the party secretary of the CCP Northeast Bureau .
 In 1971, Chen was the first PLA commander to denounce Lin Biao following his coup attempt against Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung) and subsequent death . Chen was also the first to denounce Biao's coup attempt to overthrow the Chinese leader .
 Chen Yi was reelected to the Politburo Chen Yi | 35 in 1973 . He became the commander of the Beijing Military Region Command in January 1974 . He remained in that post until January 1980 .
 Chen was acting defense minister and secretarygeneral of the Central Military Commission in 1976 . Chen was also secretary general of the central military commission in 1976, 1976 and 1977 .
 Chen was assigned to the Standing Committee of the CCP Central Advisory Committee in September 1982 . During Deng Xiaoping’s reform movement, Chen left the political arena and was assigned .
 Chen Yi was born on August 26, 1901, in Lezhi County, Sichuan Province . Chen Yi is one of the world's most famous women .
 While studying in France, he learned socialist ideas and participated in radical movements led by overseas Chinese students, he said .
 Chen was sent back to China in October 1921 due to his active involvement in the socialist movement in France . Chen was then sent back home to China after being sent to France in 1921 . Chen became a prominent figure in China's socialist movement .
 Chen Yi joined the Chinese Communist Youth League in 1922 and became a member of the CCP in 1923 . After his return, Chen Yi returned to China and joined the Communist Party in 1922 .
 Chen participated in the Nanchang Uprising on August 1, 1927, and then led the Xiangnan Uprising in 1928 . During the Agrarian Revolutionary War, Chen was the leader of the Xiangan Uprising .
 In April, Zhu De joined forces with Zhu De (Zhu Teh) and Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung) at the Jinggangshan Revolutionary base area to form the Fourth Army of the Chinese Workers and Peasants Red Army .
 He was party representative of the First Division and then commander of the Twelfth Division, Fourth Army . He was a member of the Party representative of First Division .
 He was political commissar of the Third Army and commander of the Twenty-Second Army . Afterwards he became political commissar of the Third Army . He was also political commissioner and commander of Twenty-second Army .
 In January 1929, he led the troops of the Twenty-Second Army into the south of Jiangxi and west of Fujian Provinces . He led troops into Jiangxi, Fujian and Jiangxi Proprovinces.
 He was seriously wounded in a battle and was asked to stay behind in Jiangxi when the Red Army fled for the northwest during the Long March in 1934 . The Red Army was forced to flee to the northwest in October 1934 .
 During the Anti-Japanese War (1937— 1945), when the CCP-GMD coalition established the New Fourth Army, Chen was appointed vice political commissar . Chen was the vice political commissar during the anti-Japanese war . During the war, Chen
 In 1939, he expanded the New Fourth Army into Jiangsu Province and the areas between Nanjing and Shanghai . In 1939 he followed the CCP’s strategy and expanded his New Fourth army to Jiangsu .
 Chen Yi and Su Yu commanded the Battle of Huangqiao, a major southern campaign coordinated with the Eighth Route Army in the north . In October 1940, Chen Yi led the Chinese army in the battle of Huangquiao .
 In November, a joint headquarters for the New Fourth Army and Eighth Route Army was established with Chen as its deputy commander in chief . Chen has been the head of both the New and Eighth Army since November .
 Chen was ordered to the CCP Central Committee to reestablish the New Fourth Army Command and served as its acting commander . After the Wannan Incident in Anhui in China, Chen served as the acting commander of the new Fourth Army . Chen is a member of the CCP's Central
 Under his command, the New Fourth Army increased from four divisions in 1937 to seven divisions .
 In Jiangsu, the CCP troops numbered 90,000 men in 1940 and increased to 270,000 in 1945 . CCP troops in Jiangsu are now estimated to be at least 300,000 strong . In 1940, CCP troops were at the highest level in China .
 Chen Yi was commander of the New Fourth Army during the Chinese Civil War (19461949) Chen Yi also held a concurrent position as commander of Shandong Provincial Command . Chen Yi served in the Second and Third armies of China .
 In January 1947, he was appointed commander of the East China Field Army concurrent with its political commissar . He was appointed in January 1947 as commander of its field army . He died in August 1947 .
 In November 1948, he was one of the CCP leaders to command the Huai-Hai Campaign . He was a member of the Communist Party Party of China .
 Chen became the commander and political commissar of the Third Field Army, totaling 1 million troops, which took over Nanjing, Hangzhou, Shanghai, and many areas in southeast China . Chen was the commander of the 3rd Field Army . Later, Chen became a commander .
 Chen Yi was appointed mayor of Shanghai and commander and political commissar of the East China Regional Command . After the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, Chen Yi became president of Shanghai . Chen Yi is currently the president of the Shanghai University of Science Science and
 In 1954, Chen Yi was appointed vice premier of the PRC and vice chairman of the Central Military Commission . Chen Yi became vice-de facto leader of the Communist Party of China in 1954 .
 During the Cultural Revolution, the Red Guards, seeking to seize the Foreign Ministry and depose Zhou Enlai, attacked him . The Red Guards were trying to take over the foreign ministry . Zhou died at the age of 65 in 1953 .
 Chen Yi was hauled away in a struggle and beaten, but Zhou rescued him and led him to safety . Zhou rescued Chen Yi from the streets of the city . Zhou led Chen Yi to safety after he was dragged away by police and beaten .
 Chen lost his office, his freedom and his health, and died on January 6, 1972 . Chen died in 1972 after losing his office and freedom .
 Zhou Enlai, Zhu De, and Ye Jianying (Yeh Chienying) attended his funeral . Zhou Enrai was the first person to be buried in China to attend the funeral of his father .
 Mao Zedong, in failing health, even appeared at Chen’s funeral services clad in pajamas to show his concern for his longtime friend . Mao appeared at his funeral service clad in a pajama to show concern for Chen .
 This conflict was the first great battle between two states in the Yellow River valley and the states of the Yangzi River valley . The battle was fought in China's Yellow River Valley and Yangzi Valley .
 The exact location is unknown, but it is thought to have taken place in today’s Chenliu County, Henan Province, and the southwest part of present Juan County, eastern Shandong Province .
 The Battle of Chengpu showed for the first time a well-organized and professionally constructed military since individual combat began in the early history of Chinese warfare . The battle was the first of its kind in the history of China's military .
 Armies grew vast in size due to the newly installed system of conscription . Armies were much larger than they were before . The system was installed in 1903 .
 Two armies that went against each other had similar equipment, doctrines, organization, and tactics . The two armies were similar to each other .
 Each side had three divisions facing each other that included a center and two flanks . Each side was divided into three divisions, each having three divisions .
 The size of the Chu army remains unknown, but chariots were used along with infantry . chariots and infantry were used in Chu's victory .
 Since the latter half of the century, the use of chariots increased military strength by a factor of five . The strength of armies was measured by how many chariots or vehicles could be put into the battlefield .
 Chariots were armored with strong leather, fashioned for heavy duty, and outfitted with foot-long bronze blades attached to the outer portion of the wheels to cut down soldiers who were too close to each other .
 The chariot carried the usual aristocratic warrior crew consisting of a driver, archer, and striker as support . It was a chariot made of aristocratic warriors .
 The Jin army moved in by advancing both flanks, and Xu Chen, the left flank commander, attacked Chu’s right flank, which was thought to be the weakest . Xu Chen attacked Chu's right flank - thought to have been the weakest in the battle .
 Through the use of armored chariots, Chu’s right flank was easily demolished and their troops became scattered, making the attack extremely successful . The use of chariots was the key to the success of the attack .
 Jin’s left flank became the holding force that protected the Jin center division and maintained the Chu center and therefore removed Chu's center division's ability to support their left flank . Jin's left flank was a holding force protecting the Jin's center .
 The Jin right flank fought a small skirmish and faked a retreat by carrying the banners of the Jin commander . The Jin left flank meanwhile fought a skirmish with the Chinese army in the battle .
 Chu left division to follow in pursuit, but their vision became obscured by chariots dragging tree 38 | Chennault, Claire Lee branches to raise dust, which allowed time for time for the right flank to re-form . This led to the left division following in pursuit . Chu left
 Jin troops maintain a fixed position on the Chu center, still cutting off support to their enemy’s left division . Jin troops maintained a fixed . position on Chu center . The Jin troops kept their position .
 The Chu left attacked in an advance but was intercepted by Duke Wen’s division of close followers creating a flank . Duke Wen created a flank of the Chu left attacking .
 The Jin right wing reformed and was supported by a division of chariots . Jin's right wing reformed and supported by division of chariots .
 Zi Yu (also known as Cheng Dechen) of Chu ordered a retreat of all forces but was later executed by King Cheng of Chu for not following orders . Zi Yu was executed for refusing to follow orders and ordering a retreat .
 Duke Wen of Jin won hegemony for the state of Jin by being recognized by the King of Zhou . Jin's efforts kept Chu out of the north for another generation of generations .
 Qin Shi Huangdi, Emperor, Emperor; Warring States Period; Zhou Dynasty . Zhou Dynasty. Qin Dynasty . Qin Shi . Huangdi . Emperor . Warring . States period; Zhou . Dynasty .
 U.S. Army Air Forces general and leader of the Flying Tigers . Chennault, Claire Lee United States Army Air Force general and . leader of Flying Tigers, led the Air Force during World War II .
 Chennault subsequently founded Civil Air Transport, which later became Air America . He later founded Air America, which was later Air America's first airline .
 Claire Chennault was born September 6, 1893 in rural Louisiana . She was raised in rural Texas .
 He taught English and business at a number of southern colleges until August 1917 . He became a second lieutenant in the army reserve in 1917 .
 He remained in the U.S. during World War I, transferring to the Signal Corps and completing pilot training in 1920 . He completed pilot training for the Navy .
 Chennault commanded the Nineteenth Pursuit Squadron in Hawaii between 1923 and 1926 . An accomplished airman then held a number of assignments, among them in Hawaii .
 While serving as an instructor at the Air Corps Tactical School in 1935, Chennault wrote The Role of Defensive Pursuit, an important but controversial book about the need for fighter aircraft .
 In 1937, the army removed him from flying status because of a serious hearing loss . He was forced into medical retirement as a captain as a result .
 When the Japanese attacked China that September, he became a colonel in the Chinese Air Force . He began testing his tactical theories and began testing them .
 In late 1940, Chennault was allowed to recruit American military pilots for service in the Republic of China . Despite the strong opposition of the State, War, and Navy Departments, he recruited U.S. pilots .
 In April 1942, Chennault was recalled to active duty with the United States Army as a colonel . He was a colonel in the U.S. Army .
 A few months later, he was promoted to brigadier general and put in command of the newly formed China Air Task Force . The task force is a subordinate command of United States Tenth Air Force in India .
 In March 1943, the CATF became the Fourteenth Air Force, with Chennault promoted to major general . The CATF went on to become the Fourth Air Force .
 The CATF and the Fourteenth Air Force were economy-of-force organizations in a tertiary theater . They operated on a shoestring . CATF was the Air Force's most successful Air Force .
 Both organizations achieved combat effectiveness far out of proportion to their size and resources . Utilizing Chennault’s theories, however, both organizations achieved effectiveness .
 By 1945, the Fourteenth Air Force had destroyed some 2,600 Japanese aircraft . Thousands of tons of supplies were destroyed by the Japanese .
 During his time in China, Chennault conducted a long-running and public feud with Lieutenant General Joseph Stilwell . The U.S. commander of the China-BurmaIndia Theater was a stubborn and irascible United States .
 Chennault engineered Jiang's demand for Stilwell’s recall, but Chennaut himself was removed from command and forced into retirement for a second time on August 1, 1945 .
 In 1950, Chennault sold his interest in CAT to the Central Intelligence Agency . He remained the chairman of the airline’s board until 1955 .
 He died at Walter Reed Army Hospital in Washington, D.C., on July 27, 1958 . He died in 1958 .
 Only days before his death, Chennault was promoted to lieutenant general . Only days earlier he had been promoted to Lt. General .
 Chi Haotian General of the People’s Liberation Army was defense minister of the P.R. China from 1993 to 2003 . Defense minister of P.L. Republic of China .
 Chi Haotian was born in Zhaoyuan County, Shandong Province, in July 1929 . He was born July 29, 1929, in Zhoyuan .
 He served as battalion commissar and then deputy director of the Political Section of the 235th Regiment, Seventy-Ninth Division of the CPVF .
 After the Korean War, he was the director of the regimental political section and became a major in 1955 . He was a major at the time of his service .
 He transferred to the Synthesis Department of China’s Military Academy of the PLA to take up study on integrated warfare . Then he took up study in integrated warfare at the military academy of China .
 After he received a college diploma from the academy, he was promoted to the deputy political commissar of the 235th Regiment . He was head of the Political Department of the Seventy-Ninth Division in 1966 .
 From 1970 to 1972, Chi took the post of political commissar of the Eightieth Division, Twenty-Seventh Army . Chi was the political commissar of the Eighth Division, Twenty Seventh Army .
 Chi became the deputy political commissar of the Beijing Military Region in 1973 . He was also in charge of Renmin Ribao as the newspaper’s associate editor in chief .
 After the Cultural Revolution, he served as deputy chief of the PLA General Staff, and the director of the Political Department of the General Staff . He was also deputy chief .
 He was appointed political commissar of Ji’nan Military Region, chief of the PLA General Staff, and party secretary of the General Staff . Then he was appointed party commissary of Ji'nan military Region and chief of military region .
 In 1988, Chi was elected a member of Central Military Commission, and made the rank of general . Chi was made a general general in 1988 . He was elected to the Central Military Council in 1988 and made general .
 In April-June 1989, he played an important role in deploying the martial law troops that surrounded Beijing . He played a key role in the deployment of martial law forces in Beijing .
 Chi organized troops from the Beijing, Shenyang, and Ji’nan Military Regions and finalized their schedules to enter the capital city . Chi is the chief of staff of the military in China .
 Some of these troops were involved in the Tiananmen Square incident on June 4, 1989 . Some of the troops involved in that incident were involved .
 In 1993, General Chi became the defense minister and State Council member until 2003 . General Chi was also a member of the State Council in 2003 . He was also the Defense Minister of China .
 He was elected vice chairman of the CMC in 1995 and a member of the Politburo of the CCP Fifteenth Central Committee in 1997 . He has been elected vice-chairman of CMC since 1995 .
 China, People’s Republic of; Chinese Civil War, Chinese Civil . Civil War; Chinese Intervention of the Chibi, Battle of | 41 Korean War; . Chinese People's Volunteer Force; Cultural Revolution; Eighth Route Army; . General Departments of the PLA; General Dep
 Shambaugh, David L. Yang, Richard H Yang, and Council on Advanced Policy Studies . Yang, Yang, Liang, Yang are among the researchers .
 When the Han central government declined, generals developed personally accountable mercenary military troops . Large landowners established private armies to protect their holdings .
 The Han efforts to put down the rebellions left the generals in effective control of large territories backed by personally loyal troops . The Han forces were successful in putting down rebellions .
 Various warlords controlled the different territories of China . As a result, various warlords control the country's territories .
 Among the others were three powerful military leaders who established their domains separately and developed into territorial magnates . Among the other were three military leaders .
 Cao Cao gained control over northern China, Liu Bei claimed the provinces in the southwest, and Sun Quan controlled the central and southeastern parts of the country along the Yangzi River . Cao Cao won control of northern China and Liu Bei of the southwest .
 Yuan Shao, at the Battle of Guandu, gained control of the great plains of the Yellow River in central China . Yuan gained control over the Great Plains of Yellow River .
 Cao Cao continued his offensive campaign into south China by leading 300,000 troops toward Jingzhou in July 208 . Cao Cao's victory at Guandu was followed by the victory of Guandou .
 Cao Cao understood that his time was limited in his campaign against other warlords . Cao Cao knew that he had limited time to attack other warlord . He was able to defeat Cao Cao's enemies in his war .
 Jingzhou was far from secured, and he still faced very dangerous threats to his power in south China . Liu Bei and Sun Quan were still at the center of his power . Jingzhou still faced a very dangerous threat to him .
 Cao Cao had a much larger combined army and navy compare to the Liu and Sun forces . Cao Cao did have the advantage of a larger combined military and navy . The Cao Cao forces were able to outpace the forces of Liu, Sun and Liu .
 At the Changban Hill, Cao Cao’s army had caught up with Liu Bei's bulky baggage train of troops, supplies, and civilians . Liu Bei had captured Cao Cao's army, but Liu Bei was unable to reach the hill .
 Liu fought off Cao’s forces at first but had to retreat after several days of fighting . Liu fought back Cao's forces but was forced to retreat several days after fighting .
 The Cao 42 Chibi, Battle of army soundly defeated Liu’s entourage, and he barely managed to escape . Liu was defeated in the battle of army . Liu barely escaped from the battlefield . Liu's entourage was defeated .
 Cao pressed his advance into the Yangzi River area and prepared an attack on Sun Quan’s force . Cao pressed forward in October, Cao said . Sun Quan's force was defeated by Cao Cao in October .
 Sun decided to team up with Liu to defend his domain south of the Yangzi River . Liu is a former ruler of China's southern Yangzi region . Sun is one of the most powerful men in China .
 Cao’s 150,000 infantry troops marched along the northern bank of the river, while his naval fleet, totaling 70,000 troops, sailed east in the Yangzi River . Cao's army consisted of 150,00 infantry troops, 70,00 naval troops, and 150,
 Sun Quan sent General Zhou Yu, who commanded 30,000 naval troops and sailed west in the river to meet Cao Cao . Cao was defeated by Sun Quan and Sun Quan's forces .
 Zhou Yu's troops met Cao’s at Chibi (Red Cliff), which is located in liayu County, Hubei Province . Zhou Yu and Cao Cao's forces met each other at the Red Cliff (Chibi) in Chibi .
 When Zhou found that Cao’s infantry troops were crossing the river, he ordered an immediate attack . Cao's infantry troops crossed the river and attacked Zhou's troops . Zhou was killed by Cao's troops in the attack .
 Cao’s infantry lost the first battle and suffered heavy casualties . Cao was tired of consistent battles for months and unfamiliar with the southern weather . Cao's infantry lost their first battle .
 Northern veterans were both sick from the movements of the boats and diseased from the tropical climate in the south . Many northern veterans died from the movement of boats and disease from tropical climate .
 Cao had to withdraw his infantry troops back to the north of the river, and anchored his boats along the northern bank at Chibi . Cao's infantry troops were forced to withdraw from the river . Cao was forced to anchor his boats on the north bank of the River .
 Cao’s naval officers ordered the boats be chained together one by one . Cao's naval officers had to stabilize the large fleet in the river . Cao ordered the fleet to be chained to one side by side .
 Zhou Yu discovered another good opportunity to destroy Cao’s fleet of chain boats . Zhou Yu found a good way to destroy the chain boats in his quest to defeat Cao .
 He ordered his general Huang Gai to lead a dozen small boats loaded with plenty of firewood, flammable oil, and dry straws . He led the boats with firewood and firewood . Huang led the small boats to the island .
 When his fire boats got to the northern bank, they lit up the boats and smashed into Cao's fleet with flame . Cao’s fleet was smashed into with flame. Cao's fire boats were lit up by the fire boats .
 Thousands drowned, burned, or cut down as they fled once on shore . Thousands drowned or burned as they tried to escape .
 Cao took the remnants of his army and retreated north of the Yangzi River . With his fleet destroyed, Cao took his army out of the river .
 Zhou Yu's victory in which a weak army defeated a strong opponent became a classic in Chinese military history . Zhou Yu’s victory became a popular Chinese army victory in China's history .
 Zhou was in a position to stop Cao’s steamroll into southern China . With an experienced navy, especially in the Yangzi River, Zhou was able to stop the Cao's steamroll .
 The victory at Chibi can be attributed to Huang Gai's fire attack and Zhou’s tactical genius . Zhou's tactical genius was the key to the victory .
 This one battle at Chibi separated China into three parts for the next 22 years . It was the first battle to separate China from China for 22 years.
 Wei in the north with its capital at Luoyang under the control of Cao Cao; Shu in the southwest with its . Chengdu controlled by Liu Bei; and Wu in the southeast controlled by Sun Quan . Wu in southeast with capital at Nanjing under the . control of Sun Quan
 Each kingdom waged war against the others over territory, population, and economic resources for many decades to come . Each kingdom fought for control of territory and resources .
 Battle of; Han Dynasty; Northern-Southern Dynasties; Three Kingdoms; Zhou Dynasty . Zhou Dynasty. Battle of ; Han Dynasty . Han Dynasty. Three Kingdoms . Three Kingdoms.
 China has an estimated 2012 population of 1. billion, making it the world’s most populous nation . China is the world's most populous country, with an estimated 1 billion people .
 It covers a little more than 3.705 million square miles, just slightly smaller than the United States . It shares common borders with many states, and is just slightly larger than the U.S.
 To the north it is bordered by Russia and Mongolia; to the south by the South China Sea, Vietnam, Laos, Myanmar, India, Bhutan, and Nepal . To the west it is . Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Afghanistan, and Pakistan;
 During the Cold War period, the PRC promulgated several initiatives that led to its emerging from this period in a far more consolidated condition than the Soviet Union . The PRC emerged from the period to emerge as a more consolidated state .
 The PRC also developed more flexible external policies, with a strong focus on its relations with the two superpowers but also involving linkages with developing nations . China has also developed a more flexible approach to foreign policy .
 By the late 1960s, the PRC had become a significant player in the international arena .
 Even as the PRC consolidated internally and sought to secure its borders, it positioned itself for a larger role in Asia and beyond .
 The Soviet Union and its satellites immediately recognized the PRC, followed later by Burma, India, and Great Britain . The PRC became one of the world's most successful nations .
 Domestically, the PRC followed varied political and economic polices . The PRC combined considerable centralized political control with an increasingly decentralized market economy in the final stages of the Cold War .
 China's population more than doubled during 1945-1991 . The country's population doubled during the same period of 1945-91 .
 Despite ideological rivalry with the United States, the CCP tried to convey its message to the American public through progressive writers such as Edgar Snow, Jack Belden, William Hinton and Agnes Smedley .
 This and the Korean War set the stage for a Cold War freeze between the PRC and the U.S. that lasted for nearly 30 years . The PRC, the United States, were the two countries that fought in the Cold War .
 The situation was compounded by a series of restrictive trade policies enacted by the United States . The situation has been compounded by the U.S. trade restrictions .
 As the chances of building understanding with the United States during the last years of the Chinese Civil War declined . From 1949 onward, the PRC looked to the Soviet Union for support .
 During and after the Korean War, U.S. trade embargoes on the PRC, troop deployments to East Asia, and security alliances such as the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization made the Chinese more reliant on the Soviet Union .
 The United States and the Republic of China (ROC, Taiwan) signed a mutual security treaty in 1954 . After the treaty, cooperation between the PRC and the Soviet Union further increased .
 The Communist Chinese and the Soviets differed on several political and international issues, however . The Communist China and the Soviet Union differ on several issues .
 Soviet leader Joseph Stalin cautioned Mao against an open break with the Nationalists . PRC leaders felt slighted by the superior attitude with which the Soviets treated them .
 The leaders of the PRC and the Soviet Union disagreed sharply over who should lead the world Communist movement following Stalin’s death . The leaders disagreed over who would be the leader of the Communist Party .
 CCP sharply criticized the Soviet leadership for its de-Stalinization campaign and for the policy of peaceful coexistence with the U.S. The CCP also sharply criticized Soviet leadership .
 Soviet proposals for building a joint PRC-USSR nuclear submarine fleet and the construction of long-wave radio stations along the Chinese coast were seen by the CCP as infringements on its independence and further steps toward full PRC integration into Soviet orbit .
 The Sino-Soviet split led the PRC to distance itself from the two superpowers . The PRC became independent of the Soviet Union in August 1960 .
 The PRC leadership strongly denounced both of them, accusing the Americans of capitalist imperialism . The Soviets were accused of socialist imperialism and capitalism .
 Chinese leadership has identified with nations in the developing world, especially countries in Asia and Africa . This led to the Chinese leadership to identify with developing nations, especially in Asia, Africa .
 In 1964, China exploded its first nuclear weapon and became the world’s fifth nuclear power, after the United States, the Soviet LTnion, Great Britain, and France . China is now the world's fifth largest nuclear power .
 The PRC then developed long-range ballistic missiles for countering threats from the U.S. or the Soviet Union . China, People’s Republic of | 45, developed the missiles in response to threats from either the United States or Soviet Union.
 In 1954, China announced a good neighbor policy with the aim of building bridges along its periphery to counter what it saw as American encirclement efforts . China announced the policy in 1954 to build bridges along the periphery .
 In the mid-1950s the PRC, along with other Asian countries, also promulgated ‘Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence’ The PRC called for mutual respect of sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual nonaggression, noninterference in each other’s
 By the 1960s, the Chinese had signed border agreements with Mongolia, Nepal, Afghanistan, Burma, and Pakistan . The Chinese had also signed agreements with Nepal, Nepal and Afghanistan .
 China’s military engagements were mainly border disputes, such as in 1962 with India, in 1969 with the Soviet Union, and in 1979 with Vietnam . After the Korean War, however, China has been involved in several border disputes .
 Henry Kissinger secretly visited China in 1971, setting the stage for the Sino-American rapprochement . Henry Kissinger had secretly visited the country in 1971 . U.S. secretary of state Henry Kissinger visited China on a secret mission to China .
 President Richard Nixon made a historic visit to Beijing, opening the way for the normalization of relations . Nixon's visit to China in 1972 opened the way to normalizing relations with China .
 The Americans granted formal recognition to the PRC in 1978, and in 1979 both nations exchanged diplomatic legations . The PRC and the United States exchanged diplomatic relations in 1979 .
 Despite their differences, the U.S. and China worked together in opposing the Soviet Union’s 1979 invasion of Afghanistan . Despite differences on issues such as democracy, human rights, and the environment, the two countries fought together in the 1980s .
 1979 trade agreement between the U.S. and the PRC granted most favored nation status to each other . The 1979 agreement helped normalize relations in the economic sphere . Relations between the two countries have been strained for decades .
 U.S. defense secretary Harold Brown’s visit to Beijing in early 1980 opened the prospects for American arms sales to the PRC . President Ronald Reagan's 1982 decision to sell arms to the ROC put any such agreement on indefinite hold . Reagan’ 1982 decision .
 The status of Taiwan remained unclear after the U.S. recognized the PRC as the legitimate government of the Chinese people . Taiwan's status remained unclear as the status of the country remained unclear .
 A triangular strategic ambiguity thus came to exist in the relationship among the United States, the PRC, and Taiwan . The U.S. and PRC's relations with Taiwan have been at odds for decades .
 The PRC’s threats to use force against Taiwan prompted the passage of the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act by the U.S. Congress . While the 8,000 United States troops stationed on Taiwan were withdrawn, the PRC's threats prompted the act .
 This formula was also applied to Hong Kong and Macao in Chinese negotiations with the British and Portuguese . It was used in negotiations between the two countries .
 The U.S.-Chinese rapprochement also had an impact on the PRC’s relations with Japan, Southeast Asia, and Western Europe . The PRC's relationship with the United States has also had a positive impact on relations with Southeast Asia .
 The PRC and Japan signed a peace and friendship treaty in 1978 . In August 1978, the PRC signed a treaty with Japan .
 PRC leadership was highly critical of Japan’s occupation of Manchuria and much of coastal China during World War II . Nanjing massacre, Nanjing Massacre, Japanese history textbooks glorifying Japanese militarism .
 China badly needed Japanese financial and technological assistance during its economic reform and modernization efforts that had begun in the late 1970s .
 PRC granted incentives to Japan, Taiwan and Republic of Korea to locate industry in China . The PRC therefore granted incentives for Japan, as well as to Taiwan and the Republic of Korean .
 There was a thaw in Sino-Soviet relations after Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in the Soviet Union in 1985 . Relations thawed in 1985 after Gorbama became president .
 China conveyed to the USSR that rapprochement was possible if the Soviets were to withdraw their troop concentrations from the Sino-Soviet border and Mongolia, cease their support of Vietnam, and pull out of Afghanistan . The Soviets were also to withdraw troops from the border and Mongolian border
 After 1989, Sino-Soviet relations continued to warm as some of the Chinese demands were met . After 1989 China and the Soviet Union met some of their demands .
 Other demands were realized as a result of the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 The PRC initially implemented a strong command-style socialist system with the CCP as the driving political force . In the domestic political, social, and economic spheres, the PRC has a strong social and economic system .
 During the Cold War, the CCP held eight national congresses, from the Seventh Congress in April 1945 to the Fourteenth Congress in October 1992 . The CCP was founded in 1945, during the Second World War, during which it was formed .
 CCP membership grew from an estimated 1. million in 1945 to 39. million during the Twelfth Congress in 1982 . CCP membership now stands at an estimated 39.6 million members .
 Mao, Zhou, and Zhu De in the first generation; Deng Xiaoping (Deng Hsiao-ping) and Chen Yun in the second generation; and Jiang Zemin , Li Peng , and Qiao Shi in the third generation; . Jiang Xian-ping and Jiang Jiang
 Although there were eight other political parties, their role was quite limited. Although there was eight other parties, they were quite limited .
 PRC utilized competing political organizations and their leaders in the early years of postwar reconstruction . The PRC used competing political groups and leaders in early reconstruction efforts .
 A united front of all Chinese parties was reflected in the work of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, formed in September 1949 .
 CCP was clearly the only party that wielded political and governmental control . It held six conferences between 1949 and 1983, although the party still wielded power .
 They elect the president, vice president, and other highranking state functionaries . They in turn elects the president and vice president .
 The State Council is the executive body of the PRC . It includes the premier, vice premiers, councilors, ministers, and others . The PRC is based in Beijing .
 A similar dual political structure is reflected at the provincial levels of the country . A dual political system is reflected in the provinces of Pakistan .
 There are no direct national elections in the PRC, although at the village and county levels direct elections for some local officials were gradually phased in after the end of the Cold War .
 During the Cold War, several political campaigns were launched, which set the PRC’s political system apart from other socialist countries . The PRC's political system indicated its willingness to experiment with new ideas .
 The CCP carried out a campaign to suppress counterrevolutionaries during 1951-1953 . The CCP effectively ended opposition from remnant Nationalists, feudal lords, and other dissident groups . It effectively stopped opposition from remnants Nationalists and feudal lords .
 This period coincided with the campaign against corruption among government officials . This period also coincided with an anti-corruption campaign .
 In May 1956, the Hundred Flowers Movement was launched, inviting differing views from Chinese intellectuals . The movement was launched by Chinese intellectuals in 1956 .
 A barrage of criticism, however, led to the end of this program in the Anti-Rightist campaign of 1957 . The anti-rightist program ended in 1957 .
 As China crushed the Khampa Rebellion in Tibet in 1959, the Soviets withdrew nearly 10,000 of their engineers and technicians from Tibet in the latter part of 1960 . The Soviets withdrew 10,500 engineers, technicians in the last part of the decade .
 Mao's Great Leap Forward was a massive program of nationwide industrialization launched by Mao in 1958 . Mao was sharply criticized by defense minister Peng Dehuai at the 1959 Lushan Conference . This coincided with the disastrous failure of the Great Leap forward .
 In May 1963, Mao began the Socialist Education Campaign to counter the growing influence of capitalism . Mao wanted to end the corrupt practices of CCP cadres and inculcate the idea of self-sacrifice among the population .
 Many CCP leaders, including Liu Shaoqi, Peng Zhen, and Luo Ruiqing, were summarily purged from the party and zealously persecuted . Many of the party's leaders have been purged or expelled from China .
 Lin Biao (19061971) was anointed as Mao’s heir apparent . He was killed in a 1971 plane crash in Mongolia . Lin was killed by accident .
 An anti-Lin Biao rectification campaign was launched from 1971 to 1973 . Lin Biao was the leader of the Chinese state of China .
 The country underwent turmoil following the deaths in 1976 of Zhou in January and Mao in September . Several demonstrations were held in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, supposedly mourning Zhou but also challenging the political ascendancy of the Gang of Four .
 Within weeks of Mao’s death in 1976, Hua Guofeng ordered the arrest of the Gang of Four . The gang of four were tried and convicted of antiparty activities in 1981 .
 Deng introduced pragmatic policies of ‘seeking truth from facts’ and extensive economic reforms in 1978 . Deng was rehabilitated a fourth and final time in China . Deng is a former president of the country .
 The crisis resulted in scores of deaths, the resignation of Deng as the chairman of the Central Military Commission and the appointment of Jiang Zemin in his place . Scores of deaths were caused by the crisis, which resulted in the resignation .
 An antibourgeois liberalization campaign was launched after this incident . The incident was the first of a series of anti-bourgeian incidents to occur .
 In the economic arena, for most of the Cold War, China followed Soviet-style centralized Five-Year Plans . The plans were designed to guide its economic and modernization activities . In the 1980s, China was the world's most populous country .
 The PRC leadership undertook comprehensive measures in the reconstruction of the country in 1949 . Given the backwardness and war-ravaged nature of the economy in 1949, there was rampant inflation .
 PRC established nearly 4,000 state-owned enterprises during 1949-1989 . Some allowing for the gradual incorporation of private enterprise in joint firms or state enterprises after paying interest .
 In 1958, the Great Leap Forward was launched in part to increase iron and steel production by mobilizing the enthusiasm of the masses . It was launched by the Communist Party in order to increase the production of iron .
 State-controlled industrialization, the construction of transport and telecommunication networks, and trade with other socialist countries based on import substitution have all been part of the Maoist selfreliance model .
 The PRC’s economic prowess has also led to waste and increased bureaucratization, according to the Chinese government .
 China initiated a four modernizations program of opening up to the outside world in 1975 . In 1975, China began a four-decade modernization program .
 The four modernizations dealt with agriculture, industry, science and technology, and defense, in that order of priority . Agriculture, industry and defense were among those modernizations .
 The program also adopted special policies and flexible measures to attract foreign investments and technology sharing . Special economic zones in the coastal regions for wholly owned or joint enterprises to promote exports .
 In agriculture, the PRC immediately initiated land reform with the Agrarian Law of 1950 . The PRC also initiated land reforms in agriculture .
 The regime seized land from landlords and redistributed it to the landless, a process largely completed by 1952 . The landless were largely wiped out by 1952, when the regime took over .
 By 1953, after the end of the Korean War, the PRC introduced mutual aid teams and gradually imposed agricultural collectivization . The PRC gradually imposed agriculture collectivizing .
 Following the Great Leap Forward, these farming co-ops were converted into People’s Communes, combining industry, agriculture, trade, education, and the militia .
 More than 20,000 communes were established, although declining production and natural calamities limited their effectiveness . Decline and natural disasters limited the effectiveness of communes .
 In the post-197 8 reform period, the collectivization and communalization process was reversed, beginning with the institution of household land contracts, rural industrialization, and incentives to private enterprises .
 The main features of the new reforms included contracting land to private households, which would control land use . The reforms included increasing agricultural production, raising farmers’ income and shifting to commodity agriculture .
 The Cold War prevented destruction of the ROC and then placed it at the center of tension and conflict in East Asia . The ROC remained even after the fall of the Soviet Union, where it remained in power .
 The origins of the ROC date from the Chinese Revolution of 1911, which destroyed the Qing dynasty . The ROC was formed from the ashes of the Chinese dynasty .
 Yuan Shikai (1859— 1916) became president of the ROC after outmaneuvering Sun Yat-sen . Two years later, he became China’s first president .
 Rising opposition to his dictatorial rule, especially after he had himself named emperor, continued until his sudden death in 1916 . Rising opposition continued until he died .
 Local military leaders waged constant warfare with private armies to build regional political power . During the Warlord Period (1916- 1927) that followed, local military leaders wage constant warfare .
 Sun reorganized his Guomindang (GMD, or Kuomintang; the Chinese Nationalist) party at Shanghai . Sun supported protests against the Versailles Treaty during the May Fourth Movement of 1919 .
 He proclaimed reestablishment of the ROC in 1921 at Guangzhou . Based on his Three People’s Principles of nationalism, democracy, and livelihood .
 He also requested military and economic help and advice from the Soviet Union . He also formed a political alliance with the CCP .
 Sun created a military academy to train officers, appointing Jiang Jieshi as its head . Sun created the academy in response to chaos and instability .
 In July 1926, he launched the Northern Expedition, which reunited China when Nationalist forces marched into Beijing two years later . He launched the expedition in July 1926 .
 Jiang broke with the Communists after he broke with them in May 1927 . Not only had defeated the warlords, but he had eliminated or undermined the Communists .
 The GMD adopted a provisional constitution for the ROC as the basis for governing China during a period of tutelage that was to last for six years . In October 1928, following Sun’s plan, the GMD .
 With its seat of government at Nanjing , the ROC introduced monetary reform to modernize China’s financial system and promote modern industrial development . The ROC is the country's largest state-run economy .
 Western powers recognized the ROC, granting tariff autonomy and revoking many foreign concessions . The Western powers have since revoked many concessions to the country .
 The GMD neglected the land reform and rent reduction that would have helped the vast majority of the populace escape impoverishment and oppression . But the GMD did not help the majority of people escape oppression .
 Under the 50 China, Republic of . leadership of . Mao Zedong , the CCP built support among the disaffected peasants . The CCP built . support among disaffected . peasants .
 In September 1931, Japan began its aggression against China by taking over all Manchuria and transforming it into a puppet state . The Japanese began their aggression in September 1931 .
 Jiang concentrated on destroying the CCP, launching major assaults against the Communists and forcing the Communists to flee to Yan’an in Shaanxi Province . Instead of defending China, Jiang concentrated his efforts to destroy the CCP .
 His capture at Xi’an late in 1936 forced Jiang to join a united front against Japan as the price of his release . Jiang was captured at Xi'an in 1936 and forced to join the united front .
 GMD government fought as a partner in the war’s Grand Alliance in 1939 . After World War II began in Europe in 1939, GMD fought as part of the Grand Alliance . GMD went on to be a member of the NATO alliance .
 Japan installed Wang Jingwei as president of the ROC at Nanjing, while its troops carried out a repressive campaign against the civilian population . The ROC was ruled by the Japanese government .
 Fighting destroyed its best troops and bankrupted the government . Continual fighting destroyed the best troops of the country .
 Spiraling inflation devastated the urban middle class, eroding the GMD base of popular support . Spiraling inflation has erode GMD's support in recent years .
 In 1945, the Soviet Union signed a Treaty of Friendship and Alliance with the ROC rather than the CCP . Although CCP forces controlled large portions of the country, it controlled large parts of the Soviet-controlled territory .
 Civil war between GMD and CCP resumed following Japan’s defeat in August 1945 . Civil war resumed following defeat of Japan in the war .
 U.S. ambassador blames treasonous American diplomats in China for his failure to arrange a cease-fire and coalition government . United States ambassador Patrick J Hurley blamed his failure on treasonous US diplomats who wanted a CCP victory .
 General George C Marshall’s attempt at mediation in 1946 failed as well, creating anxiety for Americans over the prospect of a Communist China . In 1946, General Marshall's attempt to mediate with the Soviet Union failed .
 The ROC insisted that it was still the legitimate government of China, but the PRC considered Taiwan a renegade province . The PRC said Taiwan was still a "recession province"
 The U.S. delayed recognition because domestic political critics blamed President Harry S Truman’s administration for allowing the loss of China to the Soviet bloc .
 The United States accepted as inevitable that the PRC would destroy Jiang’s regime . But the U.S. was realistic in accepting as inevitable it would destroy the regime . The U.K. accepted that it was inevitable that Jiang would destroy his regime .
 The treaty that ended the Sino-Japanese War (18941895) made it part of the Japanese Empire . Ten years later, it was part of Japan's Empire .
 Following Japan’s defeat in World War II, China regained title to Taiwan in accordance with the Cairo and Potsdam Declarations . Following Japan's defeat in WWII, Taiwan regained title .
 Taiwanese initially welcomed officials that the ROC sent from mainland China . Celebrating liberation from colonialism from colonialism, the Taiwanese welcomed officials from the mainland China.
 The GMD government treated the island as almost a conquered territory, exploiting its people and resources . But the government treated it as almost an almost conquered territory . The island was exploited by the GMD .
 Rising friction between the China, Republic of | 51 ruling mainland minority and the native majority led to the systematic killing of thousands of Taiwanese leaders in February 1947 . Thousands of leaders were killed in a systematic killing .
 Two million Nationalist soldiers and civilians arrived on Taiwan in 1949 and soon depended on government stipends . Two million soldiers, civilians arrived in 1949 .
 Jiang Jingguo, Jiang Jieshi’s son and chief of the provincial GMD, ruthlessly crushed political opposition and then imposed a rule more harsh, dictatorial, and exploitive than that of the Japanese . Jiang Jyingguo's rule was more harsh than
 The official myth that the ROC was the legal government of China justified a political structure with a national party and government for all China and a separate provincial party for Taiwan . The myth justified a national political structure for China and Taiwan, including a separate province and government .
 Mainlanders dominated this national government at the capital in Taibei, but Taiwanese held most offices in local government . Mainlanders dominated the national government, with Taiwanese holding most local offices .
 Cold War security concerns in Asia caused U.S. military leaders to conclude early in 1950 that the United States must prevent Communist China from seizing Taiwan . The United States decided to take Taiwan in 1950 .
 Truman deployed the U.S. Seventh Fleet in the Taiwan Strait in June, 1950 . In June, the outbreak of the Korean War confirmed this emerging commitment when President Truman deployed this commitment .
 After the PRC sent troops to Korea, the United States signed a military agreement in 1951 with the ROC . The 1954 U.S.-China Mutual Defense Treaty provided the GMD government with $2.2 billion in military aid and $1.1 billion in economic aid from
 The Second Taiwan Strait Crisis intensified the Cold War in East Asia and caused the United States to strengthen its defense of Taiwan . Four years later, the U.S. strengthened its defense .
 The United States was able to secure enough votes at the UN to allow the ROC to retain its seat as China’s representative . By contrast, the U.S. secured enough votes to allow China to keep its seat at the United Nations .
 Jiang’s dream of returning to the mainland kept alive . But he could not prevent change on Taiwan undermining his authority . Jiang's dream was to return to China but he was unable to return .
 Taiwanese entered the GMD bureaucracy and gained election to the provincial assembly, but the National Assembly remained composed of legislators elected in Nanjing in 1948 .
 As these aging representatives passed away, replacements were made by appointment, ensuring that the assembly would not oppose the GMD dictatorship . The replacement of the aging representatives was made by appointments .
 Economic development and increasing social stability encouraged greater freedom . But economic development and social stability allowed greater freedom for freedom .
 In 1969, elections filled vacancies in the assembly, and a few Taiwanese won seats . Elections were held in 1969, but only a few seats were filled .
 Jiang Jingguo, who became ROC president in 1978, opened the political process further . Jiang became president of the ROC in 1978 . Jiang was the first female leader of the country to become president of China .
 Forty years of martial law ended in 1987, as did the ban on ROC citizens traveling to the mainland . The ban was lifted on mainland China in 1987 .
 When Jiang Jingguo died in 1988, Vice President Li Denghui became the first ROC president born on Taiwan . He promised more political reform and restored power on the mainland . The now widely admired Jiang was the first Chinese president born in Taiwan .
 The United States ended aid to the ROC in 1968 and reduced its Cold War commitments in East Asia . Economic growth on Taiwan and failure in Vietnam resulted in the U.S. ending aid to Taiwan in 1968 .
 The ROC was expelled from the World Bank in 1970 and from the UN in 1971 . President Richard Nixon sought normalized relations with the PRC to gain leverage against the Soviet Union . The PRC was expelled by the U.S. in 1971 and the ROC in 1970 .
 Nixon’s visit to the PRC in February 1972, along with the SinoUnited States Shanghai Communique that declared Taiwan a part of China, sent relations between the U.S. and the ROC on a downward slide . Nixon's visit to China in 1972 sent relations
 Recognition of the PRC led to abrogation of U.S.-ROC defense treaties and withdrawal of United States military personnel . In 1979, United States recognition of the ROC led to the withdrawal of military personnel from the United States of China .
 In April, continuing bipartisan support for the ROC in the United States Congress forced President Jimmy Carter to sign the Taiwan Relations Act . The act sought to build a new relationship based on wider economic ties .
 Washington placed increasing importance thereafter on improving its relations with Beijing . But Washington also advocated steps toward China's peaceful reunification .
 During the 1980s, the ROC improved its international standing as a fledgling democracy with one of the most industrialized and productive economies in the world . Despite apparent U.S. indifference, despite apparent United States indifference, the U.N. never gave up on China .
 In 1989, the Cold War ended without confirming the status of the ROC as the legal government of China . Communist rule on the mainland continued . In 1989 the Cold war ended without confirmation of the status .
 Beijing changed its policy from seeking liberation of the island in 1976 to calling for voluntary reunification . The PRC still claimed sovereignty over Taiwan, although after the death of Mao in 1976 Beijing changed policy after Mao died .
 Taiwan would have autonomy and the right to maintain its own government, military forces, and economic system . Within the framework of one China, Taiwan would be autonomous . Taiwan has autonomy and military forces and economic systems .
 The ROC rejected the offer and remained committed to regaining power on the mainland . The offer was rejected by the ROC and the mainland government .
 unofficial trade between Taiwan and the PRC through Hong Kong grew steadily . Unofficial trade between the two countries grew steadily in recent years .
 Taibei’s acceptance of expanded contact with the mainland reflected confidence that its progress toward democratization and socioeconomic opportunity as well as broader material comfort and a thriving cultural life on Taiwan had won the loyalty and support of its citizens .
 The GMD hoped that the Taiwanese would convey to mainland relatives a belief in the superiority of the ROC’s system .
 Other politicians argue for declaring Taiwan’s status as an independent nation . Beijing has warned it would prevent this course of action with a resort to force .
 During the 1990s, the ROC was at the center of what had become China’s Cold War . The ROC is now the world's largest state of state .
 China-Burma-India Theater is a geographic reference for the immersion of East Asia, Southeast Asia, and South Asia in the war against Japan .
 At the December 1941 Arcadia Conference in Quebec, British prime minister Winston S Churchill and United States president Franklin D Roosevelt agreed to set up the American-British-Dutch-Australian Command under General Sir Archibald Wavell in India .
 Separate from but nominally equal to the ABDA was the China Theater under Generalissimo Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kaishek) as supreme commander, in recognition of China’s role in fighting Japan since the start of the SinoJapanese War in 1937
 Lieutenant General Joseph Stilwell had more experience in China than any other senior U.S. Army officer . He spoke Chinese fluently and was senior Allied officer in the region .
 The chain of command was confusing because American forces in China came under the authority of Wavell’s ABDA Command . Wavell was in charge of the U.S. military in China, but was not in charge .
 Stilwell was repeatedly handicapped by Jiang's interference in military matters . Jiang was a key figure in the Soviet Union's first major military operation .
 In February, following the loss of most of the Netherlands East Indies, the ABDA command was done away with . The ABDA Command was replaced by the Dutch government in February .
 From that point forward, the Pacific became an American responsibility, with the British assuming authority from Singapore to Suez .
 Jiang continued to control the China Theater, and Wavell, headquartered in India, had authority over India and Burma . Wavell was based in India and had authority in Burma .
 The command included the small prewar U.S. military advisory group . Major General Claire Chennault’s American Volunteer Group (AVG) known as the Flying Tigers .
 Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten 54 China-Burma-India Theater as commander and Stilwell as his deputy . This command structure continued until the August 1943 Quebec Conference, when Churchill and Roosevelt agreed on the establishment of the more integrated SouthEast Asia Command .
 Operations in Burma were separated from those in India, now under command of General Claude Auchinleck . Operations in India now under . command of general in charge of Burma .
 Designed to improve Allied military operations in the region, the new command structure did not achieve that end . The new command system was designed to improve military operations .
 Jiang was the chief problem in Allied cooperation . Conflicts and different goals remained, with Jiang being the main problem .
 The British were mainly concerned with the defense of India and preventing the Japanese military from exerting an influence on growing Indian nationalism .
 London saw defeating the Japanese in Burma as the chief means to bring about that end, rather than as a means to channel supplies to China . London wanted to end the Japanese invasion of Burma .
 President Roosevelt saw China taking its rightful place as a major world power at war’s end . Burma would be a chief route for supplies to reach China . Burma was a major route for the U.S. to build up China's military strength .
 U.S. military planners also saw China as a potential location for heavy bombers to be used in the strategic bombing of Japan .
 These conflicting views were exacerbated by the personalities involved in the case . The case is the result of a series of high-profile interviews .
 Stilwell continued to feud with Jiang, and he also held that the British were more interested in defending their Asian empire than in fighting Japan .
 Stilwell wanted to recover Burma, and he worked hard to improve the fighting ability of those Chinese army units he could influence .
 The only way to get substantial military heavy equipment to China was by way of Burma . China's military equipment was essential if its fighting ability was to improve dramatically . Construction of the so-called Ledo Road became imperative .
 The U.S. undertook a massive logistical air supply operation to China from bases in India over “the Hump” of the Himalaya Mountains, the highest in the world .
 The ubiquitous C-47 aircraft was the workhorse for much of this year's campaign . The ubiquitous aircraft was a key component of the campaign .
 The new road ran through jungles, over mountains, and across 10 rivers . It ran across jungles and over mountains . It was the first road to be built in the Philippines .
 United States Army Brigadier General Lewis A Pick had charge of the vast project . The project was one of the major engineering accomplishments of the war .
 Jiang refused to yield operational command of the growing Chinese military establishment to General Stilwell . Jiang refuses to yield control of China's growing military establishment . Jiang refused operational command over the matter .
 Stilwell fervently believed that, properly trained and equipped, Chinese soldiers could be the equal of any in the world . But all of his efforts to eradicate corruption, weed out ineffective leaders, and end political interference in the military were rebuffed by Jiang .
 The Chinese Nationalist leader repeatedly promised reforms but delivered only sufficient compliance to keep up the flow of U.S. military aid . The Chinese government has been criticized for its lack of reforms .
 General Chennault and airpower advocates believed that Japan might be bombed into submission from bases in eastern China . Airpower advocates thought that Japan may be bombed by airpower from bases .
 Stilwell dismissed such views and pointed out that the Japanese could simply carry out an offensive to wipe out the bases . He said that such an offensive could be carried out by the Japanese simply .
 The first production B-29 Superfortresses were sent to China from India from India, and an ambitious base-construction program was undertaken . Nonetheless, the first production superfortresses are still produced .
 Ichi-go Campaign in mid-1944, during which all the bases were captured without significant Chinese ground resistance . China-Burma-India Theater was the only theater without significant ground resistance in China .
 Roosevelt now applied heavy pressure on Jiang to carry out the reforms advocated by Stilwell . Roosevelt now applies heavy pressure to Jiang to place an American general in command of the Chinese army .
 The U.S. has invested in the “leap-frogging’s” strategy of securing important islands as stepping stones toward Japan across the Central Pacific . Frustrated by its inability to turn China into a major theater of war .
 China was more and more marginalized and downgraded to a minor theater of war . It was important for its role in tying down a million Japanese troops . As a result of the war, China was less influential in the war effort .
 Stilwell, now at his wits’ end, reached an impasse with Jiang and was recalled to Washington in October 1944 . Jiang was the last person to reach a deal with the government .
 Jiang was replaced by U.S. Army major general Albert Wedemeyer . He was a far more tractable individual bent on getting along .
 In effect, CBI ended in October 1944 when it was divided into two spheres of command, India-Burma and China . The CBI was one of the largest military operations in the world .
 General Daniel L Sultan became the commander of United States forces in India-Burma . He directed the Allied military effort in northern Burma . General Sultan was the U.S. commander of the United States .
 LongRange Penetration Groups, more popularly known as Wingate's Chindits and Merrill’s Marauders, were created by the CBI . The CBI was the first branch of the CIA to establish a Long Range Penetration Group .
 British and U.S. commanders projected ground troops far behind Japanese lines, their communication and supply provided by air . British and United States commanders projected troops far back from Japanese lines .
 "Here and elsewhere, guerrilla operations were developed and intelligence and insurgency operations carried out," says the author of the book .
 William Donovan and the Office of Strategic Services were active in the theater . William Donovan was a member of the OSS .
 Early in the war, Japan had conquered and overrun much of China and most of the European and U.S. colonies in the Pacific .
 The arrival of Japanese forces in Indochina was a great blow to French influence . The defeat of the British at Singapore had an even more powerful impact on British prestige .
 President Roosevelt envisioned the end of colonization after the war, but with the arrival of the Soviet threat, new U.S. president Harry S Truman was less sympathetic .
 The process of decolonization was actually delayed in some areas, resulting in costly wars in the Netherlands East Indies and French Indochina . The Philippines, India, Burma, and some other states gained independence just after the war .
 American efforts by Roosevelt’s inept ambassador to China, Patrick J Hurley, to mediate between the Chinese Nationalists and Communists came to naught . That vast country soon disintegrated into civil war .
 The United States paid the price in influence when the civil war ended in a Communist victory in 1949 . The U.S. had already committed to Jiang .
 In 1945, Truman dispatched General George Marshall as his envoy to China in December for further mediation . Truman dispatched Marshall as Secretary of State and former head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Truman sent Marshall to China to void a collapse of the CCP-GMD coalition .
 Mao and Jiang made no political compromise and refused to cooperate with each other . Though both parties agreed to a brief cease-fire mediated by Marshall in early 1946, both refused political compromise .
 Marshall announced the failure of his mission in January 1947 . After full-scale civil war broke out in the summer of 1946, Marshall announced it was a failure . The mission was declared a failure by Marshall .
 The first phase of the civil war began on June 26, 1946, when Jiang launched an allout offensive campaign against Mao-held regions . Jiang launched the offensive campaign in June 1946, during an offensive offensive against Mao's regions .
 Jiang had military superiority in both manpower and weaponry . With U.S. aid, he was able to defeat the Soviet Union . Jiang was aided by United States aid and support .
 Party center also organized its best troops into 27 field columns and six field brigades as strategic forces . Party center: 610,000 men. Party center organized best troops in 27 fields columns, six brigades .
 The reorganization significantly changed the PLA’s structure, transforming it from a guerrilla force to an army capable of large-scale mobile operations . It was created in order to transform the PLA into a force capable of mobile operations, experts say .
 The Communist offensive campaigns started in the north and then swept into the south . Thereafter, the Communist . offensive campaigns began in the . north . The . Communist offensive . campaigns started .
 The GMD offensive turned into a CCP strategic offensive due to Jiang’s military setbacks on the front and political frustrations back home . The second phase of the civil war, from June 1947 to August 1948, turned the GMD .
 During the land reform movement from 1946 to 1948, the CCP confiscated land from the landlord class and redistributed it among the peasants . During the time of the movement, land was confiscated by the Communist Party .
 More than 96 million peasants in the CCPcontrolled areas supported the PLA or joined the army themselves . More than 100 million peasants supported the army or joined it themselves .
 In 1947, Jiang had to change from broad assault to attacks on key targets . Jiang's first attack was on targets in 1947, but he was forced to change tactics .
 Between June and September 1947, Deng Xiaoping led 120,000 PLA troops across the Yellow River . He led them to break through Jiang’s line and bring his offensive to an end .
 PLA regular forces increased from 1. million in June 1947 to 2. million by June 1948 . The PLA regular force was increased to 2 million by the end of the war .
 As a result of these campaigns, Jiang lost his main strength and Mao controlled the entire northeast, most of the north, and the central areas north of the Yangzi River . Mao controlled most of China's northeast and most of its north .
 PLA regular forces increased from 2. million in June 1948 to 5 million in 1949 . The PLA regular force grew from 2 million regular forces to 5million in June 1949 .
 Mao ordered 1 million PLA troops to cross the Yangzi River on April 21, 1949 . Mao refused Jiang’s request and ordered 1million PLA troops cross the river . Mao ordered the crossing of the river in order to protect his troops .
 The PLA then pressed on in its liberation drive into the northwest, southwest, and central China . The PLA is now in charge of the liberation of the country .
 By September, the PLA occupied most of the country expect for Tibet , Taiwan, and some other offshore islands . The PLA is now occupying most of China .
 GMD lost control of mainland China to the Communists in the civil war . GMD was in charge of the country's largest city .
 Jiang moved the seat of his government with 3 million GMD troops and officials to Taibei, Taiwan (Formosa) in the same year . The seat of the government was moved to Taiwan (Taiwan) in 2011 .
 American officials and public viewed the establishment in China of a Communist government sympathetic to the Soviet Union as a major Cold War defeat . The perception was enhanced by China’s intervention in the Korean War in 1950 . The establishment of China's Communist government was viewed as a defeat by the U
 Truman administration was blamed for ‘losing China’ and not giving the GMD enough support in their civil war . Truman administration blamed for not giving enough support to GMD in civil war in China .
 Truman refused to recognize the new Communist China and continued to support and aid Jiang’s government in Taiwan . He continued to aid and support the new government .
 According to the CCP Constitution, the party is the vanguard of the Chinese working class . Party is the faithful representative of the interests of Chinese people of all nationalities, says the constitution .
 The CCP takes Marxism-Leninism, Mao Zedong (Mao Tsetung) Thoughts, and Deng Xiaoping Theory as its guide to action . The CCP is based in China's capital, Beijing, and takes on China's Communist Party .
 In the early twentieth century, the ideas of Marxism and Leninism seemed as effective as liberal democratic and republican ideas in inspiring outright revolution in China . In the 1930s, the idea of Marxism, Leninism and republicanism seemed to be as effective .
 Russia’s October Revolution in 1917 had a profound impact on China . It provided a model for the Chinese revolution to follow . China's revolution was inspired by the Russian revolution .
 On July 25, 1919, the Soviet government announced the abolition of all unequal treaties with China . The treaty was abolished by Soviet authorities .
 The termination of all the former czarist privileges in China portrayed new Soviet Russia as a better nation than the old imperialist Western powers that had been dismembering China .
 Some radical liberalists were drawn to MarxismLeninism and the Russian experience . Some of the radical liberalism was inspired by MarxismLeninists .
 A representative of the Vladivostok branch of the Bolsheviks’ Far Eastern Bureau visited Li in Beijing and Chen in Shanghai, and discussed the establishment of Communist organizations in China .
 In August, Chen founded China’s first Communist group in Shanghai, with Li doing likewise in Beijing . Chen founded the group in August . Li did likewise in August, with Chen founding the first Communist Communist group .
 Dong Biwu in Wuhan, and others in Guangzhou , Japan, and Paris formed their own Communist groups . Dong Biwwu in China formed a group in Paris, Paris and Guangzhou .
 In November, the first issue of the party journal, The Communist, was published . The Communist Party Party Party is based in Russia .
 The party convened its First National Congress from July to early August in Shanghai . It convened its first National Congress in July .
 Most of the delegates as well as the early members of the early CCP members were intellectuals . Most of them were intellectuals, according to the CCP .
 Soviet advisor Hendricus Sneevliet Maring instructed the CCP to focus its effort on labor movements . Maring was the first official representative from the Executive Committee of the Comintern (Communist International Congress)
 Chen Duxiu was elected secretary-general of the CCP Central Committee . The party had its headquarters in Shanghai, China .
 The Communist movement’s rapid growth across the country worried the right wing and conservatives, who controlled the GMD Executive Central Committee . However, the growing influence of the Communist movement worried the conservatives .
 Jiang and the right-wing government began to purge CCP members in order to contain the increasing Soviet influence and left-wing activities in the GMD party and the Nationalist army .
 Li Dazhao and other CCP leaders were arrested, and Li was later executed . Li was one of the most prominent leaders of the Chinese Communist Party of China .
 The CCP organized its independent armed forces after the ‘white terror’ of 1927, the worst period in the party’s history . The party organized its own independent armed force after the 'white terror' of 1927 . The “White terror” of 1927 was the
 The party and the army established an interdependent relationship before WWII in order to create a center in rural areas for revolutionary authorities . Party and army established interdependent relations before WWII .
 The party mobilized peasants, trained officers, and received instructions from the Soviet Union . Party mobilized peasants and trained officers .
 The army protected the Communist base areas and eventually seized the state power for the party . It eventually defeated the GMD army on the mainland . The army then took control of the country .
 By 1936, the Red Army maintained a contingency of approximately 45,000 troops after the Long March . The Red Army kept a contingency in 1936 . The Long March was one of the biggest events of the Great Depression .
 Red Army changed its name to the Eighth Route Army and the New Fourth Army in 1937 . The Red Army became known as the Red Army during the Second World War .
 By the end of WWII, when the CCP and GMD ended their cooperation and resumed the Chinese Civil War in 1946, the Communist military forces grew to 1 million regular troops, augmented by an additional 2 million militia . The Communist military force grew to a total of 1 million .
 In 1949, when the PLA defeated Jiang Jieshi’s Nationalist army in the Chinese Civil War and controlled mainland China except Tibet, it totaled 5. million regular troops . The PLA was defeated by the Nationalist Army in 1949, and now controls mainland China .
 The Chinese Communist regime had adopted several high-handed measures in order to consolidate its power and fight the war . Following the Soviet experience, the Chinese Communist government had adopted a highhanded measure .
 In the early 1950s, state control depended on radical movements and mass political participation . In the 1960s, the state was controlled by state-controlled groups . The state was dominated by radical movements .
 The radical movements included the Campaign against Counter Revolutionaries in 1950, Three Antis and Five Antis Campaigns of 1951-54, and Anti-rightist Movement in 1957 .
 During the 1950s, the CCP carried out a Soviet-style social and economic reform . The party carried out an economic and social reform in China . The CCP was heavily influenced by the Soviet Union .
 The Chinese Communist revolution established this new socioeconomic system with a mixture of Marxism-Leninism and its Chinese version—Mao’s Thoughts . Mao's Thoughts .
 After founding of the PRC, the CCP developed an integrated plan for the nation’s economic recovery . The CCP developed the plan to help the nation's economic recovery.
 Mao's social reforms, based on Soviet doctrine, were modified for the Chinese situation . Mao’s social reforms were modified to fit the situation in China, he says .
 Chinese land reform, for example, followed after the Soviet ‘collective ownership’ model . Land reform in China followed the model of Soviet land reform .
 China emphasized the state’s new revolutionary and communist nature. As a result, China emphasized its new revolutionary nature. China emphasized state's revolutionary nature .
 Soviet financial, technological, and educational support aided China’s reconstruction and economic growth . It marked the ‘closest collaboration’ between China and the Soviet Union . The Soviet-China relationship is described as ‘the most significant’ in the world .
 Mao called for a national movement to learn from the Soviet Union in 1953 . Mao called on the Chinese government to learn more from Soviet Union . Mao was assassinated in 1968 during a visit to Beijing .
 In 1958, Mao launched the Great Leap Forward movement to industrialize the economy . Mao launched it in 1958 to help the country industrialize .
 By the mid-1960s, questions about Mao’s Great Leap Forward policy and dissenting opinion in the party and government spread to some extent . By the 1960s, dissenters in the Communist Party and government were able to spread .
 Mao responded to the opposition with a new effort to mobilize support from outside the party, including soldiers and students . With Marshal Lin Biao’s support, Mao launched the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution . Mao responded with an effort to mobilize support for the opposition .
 Mao described the Cultural Revolution as a political struggle, a class struggle inside the party . Mao described it as a struggle within the Communist Party . The Cultural Revolution was a political and class struggle, Mao said .
 "Cultural Revolution Leading Group" led to a frenzy of home searches, property destruction, free-for-all fights, and even murders . Instigated by Lin, it degenerated into a wild spree of property destruction and murder .
 Industry, agriculture, and commerce were badly disrupted, causing widespread public resentment . Public resentment was widespread .
 Red Guard organizations developed serious factional differences, and constantly argued and debated heatedly among themselves . At the same time, since understanding and concepts varied among the numerous Red Guards organizations, they developed serious .
 It had indeed reached the ‘ideal’ stage of Mao’s ‘great chaos under the heavens’ so earnestly sought by the revolutionary seer . Mao had reached the ideal stage of “great chaos’ under the skies, Mao said .
 Mao’s wife Jiang Qing, Zhang Chunqiao (1917— 2005), Yao Wenyuan , and Wang Hongwen (1901— 1990) The old guard, including Chen Yun, Xu Xiangqian and Ye Jianying (Nie Rongzhen) surfaced
 After the demise of the Gang of Four, Deng Xiaoping (Deng Hsiao-ping) staged his third comeback in 1977 . The Chinese leader staged his first comeback in China in 1977, when he was still at the peak of his career .
 Mao denied the need for any continuous domestic class struggle, the underlying impulse of Mao’s Cultural Revolution . Then he ended the Cultural Revolution and led China from a period of political turmoil to one of economic development .
 In 1978, he emerged as the new paramount leader, launched new reform policies, and opened China up to the outside world . He emerged as China's paramount leader and launched new reforms .
 Deng’s reform movement brought tremendous changes to China, a ‘second revolution’ comparable to Mao’�s 1949 revolution . Deng's reform movement was a “second revolution,’t a second revolution” comparable to the 1949 revolution, says Deng .
 For the first time in history, the country began to establish a market economy and participate in the international community . The country's economy was established in the 1970s and '80s .
 In 1987, he refused to become the chairman of the CCP, premier of the State Council, or president of the PRC . In 1987 he resigned from the Central Committee along with conservative senior party members .
 Deng remained at the center of China’s reforms in the late 1980s and early 1990s . Though officially retired, Deng remained a key figure in China's reform efforts . Deng was officially retired in the 1990s, when the third generation of leaders came to power .
 Jiang had established an unprecedented institutionalized authority that enabled him to preside over the party, state, and military . By 1997, Jiang's authority had been institutionalized . He had established a vast central bureaucracy encompassing the party and state .
 The Three Represents became the most essential requirements for the officials and officers to fulfill their obligations and duties during Jiang’s era from 1990 to 2004 . Jiang was the most important official to fulfill his duties during his era .
 Hu Jintao became the party chairman and the country’s president in 2003, and the chairman of the CMC in 2004 . After Jiang retired, Hu became the president and party chairman in 2003 .
 He and his generals emerged through a protracted service within the government or military . They emerged through long-term service within government, military or government .
 Hu was the youngest member in the Standing Committee of the Politburo of the Fourteenth CCP Central Committee in 1992 . At 50, when he entered the Standing committee of the . Fourteenth . CCP Central . Committee in Beijing was the . youngest member of the top decision-making body
 He was reelected to the Standing Committee of the Politburo and a member of the Central Committee’s Secretariat .
 Hu became chairman of the CCP at the Sixteenth CCP National Congress in November 2002 . In November 2002, when Jiang retired, Hu took over as chairman . Hu is a former member of the Communist Party Party of China .
 Hu was elected the president of the PRC at the Sixth National People’s Congress in March 2003 . In March 2003, Hu became the first Chinese president to be elected .
 Jiang gave up command of the Chinese military at the Fourth Plenary Session of the Sixteenth CCP National Congress in September 2004 . Jiang was forced to give up command at the end of 2004 .
 In October 1950, China entered the Korean War, which, in essence, became a war between China and the United States . The two countries entered their most mutually hostile period in history . The Korean War was one of the most hostile periods of history .
 China began to pay greater attention to the Korean War situation after the U.N. resolution for using all possible means to aid the ROK on July 7 .
 The Northeast China Border Defense Army includes four infantry armies totaling 260,000 troops . Mao Zedong (Mao Tsetung) suggested the formation of the army at the suggestion of Mao .
 Mao called a Politburo meeting to discuss possible involvement and preparation of Chinese forces for the war . On August 4, when the attack by North Korea was repelled by the UN Forces, Mao called the meeting . Mao was concerned about possible involvement .
 On September 15, United States troops landed successfully in Inchon and the war situation in Korea changed rapidly . The war situation changed rapidly in Korea .
 Kim IIsung, North Korea’s leader, asked the Soviet Union for help and told Stalin to ask China to send troops to Korea . Kim II Sung asked Stalin to send China to Korea, but Stalin refused .
 Chinese leaders faced the emergency of sending their troops to Korea . Chinese leaders then faced the crisis of sending troops to North Korea .
 Central Committee met on October 2 to discuss party's future direction . However, there were divergent views when the Secretariat of the Committee met .
 Mao decided to hold an enlarged meeting of the Politburo, which on October 5 agreed to send troops to aid North Korea . At the time, Mao decided on sending troops to North Korea, Mao's idea was approved .
 On October 19, the first wave of the CPVF including four infantry armies and three artillery divisions, crossed the Yalu River and entered Korea . About 300,000 troops, including four armies, entered Korea on October 19 .
 From October 25 to November 5, the CPVF’s armies had head-on engagements with the ROK and the U.S. First Cavalry Division . The CPF's armies were engaged with the First, Sixth, and Eighth divisions .
 The CPVF used some of the same combat tactics the PLA had perfected during the Chinese Civil War . The Chinese army used the same tactics as the PLA during the civil war .
 During the campaign, Peng concentrated 120,000 to 150,000 men in the area north of the Chongchon River against 50,000 UN troops . Peng concentrated his troops in north of Chongchong River .
 He believed that the first campaign was a victory for the CPVF despite its 10,000 casualties . The first campaign in the first two years of the war was a success, he said .
 On November 24, the CPVF launched the second southward offensive campaign to counterattack General Douglas MacArthur’s ‘home-by-Christmas’ offensive . The CPF launched its second southwards offensive campaign on November 24 . The campaign was launched in response to MacArthur
 They attacked the UNF from the surrounding hills, often establishing roadblocks . Roadblocks often forced the American troops back but also threatened to cut them off . U.S. troops were attacked by the rebels from surrounding hills .
 The bitter fighting combined with the bitter cold had made Chosin one of the worst battles of the Korean War for the U.S.
 By late November 1950, China had sent to Korea 33 divisions and 5 regiments, reaching 450,000 strong . China sent 30 infantry divisions, 3 artillery divisions, 1 antiaircraft artillery regiment, and 4 engineering .
 The CPVF’s superiority in manpower enabled the Chinese to overcome their inferiority in equipment and technology . The Chinese were defeated by the Chinese in their first World War II .
 It seemed rational to the Chinese leaders that a large force would be a decisive factor for their victory, it seemed to be rational to them .
 CPVF launched its third offensive campaign across the 38th Parallel against entrenched UNF on New Year's Eve . Operation very different from earlier practice .
 In a matter of eight days, the CPVF moved into South Korea; recaptured Seoul, South Korea’s capital; and pushed the UNF down to the 37th Parallel . The CPF moved in and out of Seoul .
 CPVF units were exhausted after days of constant movement and fighting . However, they were exhausted by the constant fighting .
 By this time, American and UN forces had overwhelming firepower superiority, both on the ground and in the air .
 They inflicted heavy casualties and serious damage to the CPVF, signaling the need for a more cautious strategy . The need to be cautious, the U.S. says .
 Soviet Union pressured the CPVF to launch the next operation to drive the UNF out of Korea as soon as possible . The Soviet Union and Kim, however, pressured the CVPF to start the operation .
 Mao also cabled Peng at the end of January and asked the CPVF to prepare the fourth offensive campaign to drive the UNF farther south . Mao also asked Peng to prepare an offensive campaign .
 During the CPVF's fourth campaign, the Chinese Intervention in the Korean War | 65 two sides engaged in a series of back-andforth mobile battles . During the Chinese intervention in the Korea War, the two sides fought mobile battles.
 China had to keep sending reinforcements to offset losses and meet the new demands of the rapidly expanding military operations and the unexpected manpower needs . China's rapid military operations have led to the rapid increase in casualties .
 By the middle of April 1951, the Chinese forces in Korea had increased to 950,000 men . By the end of the year, the number of Chinese troops in Korea was 950,500 .
 Their combat troops consisted of 42 infantry divisions, 8 artillery divisions, 4 antiaircraft artillery divisions and 4 tank regiments, totaling 770,000 men . The British Army was one of the largest forces in the world .
 Their supporting troops consisted of 6 supply services headquarters, 4 railroad engineering divisions, 11 engineering regiments, and 1 public security division, totaling 180,000 men . The support of the U.S. troops was also a large part of the British Army .
 The CPVF fifth offensive campaign in April-May 1951 was the largest of the war . It was also the largest offensive campaign of the 1950s .
 The Chinese and North Koreans deployed some 700,000 troops against 340,000 UNF troops . The two sides fought for more than 40 days . The Chinese, North Korean and UNF forces fought for 40 days in the Korean peninsula .
 The campaign failed, and the CPVF suffered the loss of 85,000 men . The 180th Division was completely destroyed, with its 180th division completely destroyed .
 After the setback of its fifth campaign, the CPVF made some important tactical and strategic changes to limit casualties and negate the UNF’s firepower . The UNF has made significant changes in its approach to the battle .
 By the summer of 1951, the CPVF was no longer expected to drive into South Korea . The CPF was not expected to return to South Korea in the spring of 1951 .
 In June 1951, the Korean War reached a stalemate, and on July 10, truce negotiations began at Kaesong . The Korean War ended in June 1951 with a truce truce .
 China sent more troops to Korea to turn the war situation around . In order to achieve a favorable position in the negotiations, China sent extra troops to the Korean Peninsula .
 By October, the number of the CPVF had reached 1,150,000 men, including 880,000 combat troops and 220,000 supporting troops . The number of troops in Afghanistan has risen to 1,200,000,000 .
 The negotiations faced tremendous difficulties . While the negotiations faced difficulties, the fighting continued .
 The CPVF began an active defense and constructed underground tunnels along the front line . The CPF began to be active defense against the enemy .
 It also adopted more cautious and realistic strategies, including maintaining a relatively stable front line by increasing CPVF air force, artillery, and tank units .
 By March 1953, Chinese forces had reached a record high, totaling 1,350,000 men, since intervening in the Korean War . Chinese forces now have 1,300,000 Chinese troops .
 From October 19, 1950, to July 27, 1953, when the Korean Armistice agreement was concluded, China had sent a total of 3 million Chinese troops to Korea .
 Mao’s son, Mao Anying, was a Russian translator at the CPVF headquarters in an air raid . Mao's son was killed by U.S. air and naval superiority .
 In terms of the war materials and supplies, the Chinese government transported into Korea a total of 5. million tons of goods and supplies during its intervention . China transported 5.million tons of war materials into Korea during the intervention .
 In January 1950, Ho secretly visited Moscow and Beijing for additional aid for his war against the French . The French had occupied most cities and strategic points in Vietnam . Ho visited Beijing and Moscow in January 1950 for more aid .
 CCP Central Committee decided to send Chinese military advisors and war materials to Vietnam . CCP Central Party Central Committee decides to send China military advisors to Vietnam.
 On January 17, 1950, a group of eight Chinese advisors left Beijing for Vietnam to lay the groundwork for further aid . Luo Guipo was chief of the General Office at the Revolutionary Military Committee of the central government and later the first Chinese ambassador to Vietnam .
 In April, the CMC instructed the PLA’s Southwest Regional Command to supply arms, ammunition, and equipment to the NVA on a regular basis . The CMC also instructed the Southwest regional Command to provide arms and ammunition .
 Regional command assigned a Chinese truck regiment to aid transportation over the border area . The regional command assigned the Chinese to help transport over border areas .
 Wei Guoqing was appointed head of the Chinese advisory group in 1950 . Liu Shaoqi (Liu Shaoch’i) was vice president of the PRC . He was appointed as head of CMAG .
 On June 27, two days after the Korean War broke out, Mao Zedong , Zhu De (1886— 1976), and Liu met Wei and other high-ranking advisors in Beijing .
 Under the umbrella of CMAG headquarters, political, operational, technical, and medical advisory teams were organized . The CMAG is the world's largest agency in the United States .
 The next day, NVA held a welcome meeting, and General Vo Nguyen Giap made a speech in Chinese . NVA commander in chief of the NVA made the speech . The NVA is now in control of the country .
 Wei, Chen, and top advisors served at NVA headquarters . NVA HQ includes department of general staff and bureaus of political affairs and general logistics .
 The other advisors served at the headquarters of the 304th and 308th Divisions . The advisors were ranked according to their ranking and expertise .
 The Chinese advisors took part in the NVA battle planning, operation execution, and campaign assessments in the Border Campaign in the fall of 1950, the Dien Bien Phu Campaign of 1954, and other major battles . They were involved in offensives on the Red River delta from
 Chinese advisors believed that the NVA should engage in large-scale offensive campaigns and fight mobile decisive battles to drive French troops out of Vietnam . Vietnamese troops had experience with traditional guerrilla warfare and small-scale operations .
 To fight this type of war and eliminate a greater number of enemy troops, the NVA needed more regular units . The NVA needs regular units to eliminate more enemy troops and eliminate them .
 By the end of 1952, the NVA had six infantry divisions and one artillery and engineering division, all equipped with Chinese arms and supplies . The NVA also had one of the largest arsenals in the world .
 From 1951 to 1952, the CMAG also provided many training sessions for NVA middleand high-ranking commanders, logistics officers, and medical personnel .
 The Chinese also trained the Vietnamese inside China by opening an officer academy; communication, technology, and mechanic schools; and driver training centers in China’s southwestern Guangxi and Yunnan .
 In 1951, the Vietnamese 308th Division and the 174th and 209th Regiments traveled to China for combat training . Vietnam's 308th and 174th Regiment and the 209th Regiment were sent to China in 1951 .
 By 1954, the Chinese had provided military and technology training for 15,000 Vietnamese officers and soldiers in China . The Chinese had trained Vietnamese soldiers and officers in China in 1954 .
 In late November 1953, the NVA high command and the CMAG planned a response to the French occupation of Dien Bien Phu . The NVA and CMAG were planning to respond to the occupation of the French .
 From December to early March 1954, the NVA encircled 15,000 French troops at Dien Bien Phu . The NVA captured 15,500 French troops, including many of them in Vietnam .
 PLA sent one rocket battalion and one 75-mm recoilless gun battalion to Dien Bien Phu, which had been equipped and trained in China . In the meantime, one Vietnamese rocket battalion had been sent to China .
 Chinese-manufactured sixrocket launchers played an important role in the final assaults . The newly arrived Chinese-made weapons were key to the final assault .
 Ho and the Viet Minh finally defeated 120,000 French troops in the First Indochinese War . After eight years’ fighting, Ho and his country finally defeated the French .
 China tried to step down its military involvement in North Vietnam in order to reduce international tension . After the Geneva Conference, China stepped down its involvement in the country .
 China continued to provide 68 Chinese Offensive in Korea, First weaponry, equipment, and military training to North Vietnam . In September 1955, the CMAG returned to China, but China continued providing weapons, equipment and training .
 Of these, their second and third offensives were the most destructive and raised many questions about the U.S. role in Korea . The U.N. has been criticized for its actions in the region .
 As a result of these sudden Chinese victories, the UN decided to remain in Korea, build up its forces, and not let the Chinese be victorious . The UN stayed in Korea and built up forces to prevent the Chinese victory .
 From January through May 1951, the Chinese conducted four offensives against the UNC, but still could not drive it from Korea . The UNC was driven from Korea by the Chinese in 1951 .
 The failure of the Chinese People’s Volunteer Force from the People's Republic of China to win decisive victories in these last four offensives convinced the leadership that China could not win the war . China's failure of victories convinced the . leadership that . China could no longer win the
 This led to a military stalemate over the course of the years before an armistice could be arranged between the opposing forces . The end of the conflict led to an end-of-the-war stalemate between the two sides .
 The entrance of the PRC into the war in Korea was sudden and unexpected in Washington . The PRC entered the war with the U.S. in Korea in 1950s .
 United States military intelligence at first thought that the Chinese in Korea would “avoid any overt intervention” against United States forces . U.S. military intelligence thought that China would avoid overt intervention against U.K. forces .
 By November 1, U.S. commanders had come to realize that the CPVF was not in Korea just to handle supplies for the Korean People’s Army . But they were trained combat veterans intent on major military activities .
 From the beginning of the war, both North Korean and Chinese leaders had been confused over the policy and intentions of the U.S. government .
 Both North Korea and China believed that the UNC would stop at the 38th Parallel . Both North and China believe that the North and South Korea will stop at 38th parallel .
 Beijing now decided to intervene militarily, and on October 18, Chinese troops began crossing the Yalu River into North Korea .
 Marshal Peng Dehuai had six CPVF armies, 18 divisions in all, in the high mountains of central North Korea . By the end of October he had six armies in total, including 18 divisions .
 U.S. Eighth Army commander Walton H Walker ordered the First Cavalry Division to block the Chinese force that had overrun ROKA forces and was attacking toward Unsan . First | 69 ordered the division to block Chinese forces .
 First and Second Battalions of the Eighth Cavalry Regiment had hardly taken up defensive positions north and west of Unsan when they were assaulted by two divisions of the Chinese Thirty-Ninth Army . Two divisions of Chinese Thirty Ninth Army attacked Unsan .
 The remainder of the Eighth Cavalry Regiment was soon overrun by the rapid Chinese assault . The Chinese assault took place in a rapid succession of rapid bursts .
 By mid-moming on November 2, little fighting ability remained in the regiments as small units retreated toward the rear .
 In spite of a counterattack by the Fifth Cavalry Regiment, the Chinese assault could not be stopped . The Eighth Cavalry . Regiment was almost destroyed .
 The sudden attack by the CPVF created a period of confusion throughout the Eighth Army’s chain of command . The attack was the first of the sudden attack on the U.S. troops in the area .
 Steps were immediately taken to withdraw I Corps below the Ch’ongch’on River . I Corps was withdrawn from the Ch'ongch'on River, North Korea . The U.S. Army withdrew from the area .
 Elements of the Nineteenth Infantry Regiment of the Twenty-Fourth Division were rushed into positions north of the river to protect bridges and tank fords over the river .
 The boundary between I Corps and withdrawing ROKA units crossed the Ch’ongch’on on a north-south line at Kunu-ri . The boundary was the line of the Ch'ongch'on .
 The Fifth Regimental Combat Team of the United States Twenty-Fourth Division took a defensive position at Kunuri behind withdrawing ROKA II Corps .
 Chinese soldiers soon mixed with the South Koreans, making distinctions between Communist and UN units difficult . Chinese soldiers and South Koreans soon mixed up .
 In the confusion, some South Korean soldiers became casualties from United States fire . South Korea soldiers were killed in the confusion .
 Colonel John R Throckmorton’s Fifth RCT held Kunu-ri and successfully protected the right flank of Eighth Army . Colonel John . RCT was in charge of the Eighth Army in the area .
 North of the river, the Nineteenth Infantry was fighting for its life as the Chinese moved to positions in its rear . The Chinese were fighting for their lives in the area .
 Some units of the regiment were forced to withdraw south of the river and abandon a number of their vehicles .
 Many of the regiment’s positions north of the river were restored, thanks to a counterattack . The Twenty-first Regiment of the Twenty-fourth Division counter-attacked by the regiment .
 On the western side of the bridgehead, on November 4-5, the Chinese struck with equal force against the Twenty-seventh British Brigade at Pakch’on . On November 4, 5, they struck with . equal force .
 Elements of the Argyl and Sutherland Highlanders and the Australians rushed to their rescue . By November 6 the position had been stabilized .
 On November 6, Chinese units surrounding U.S. forces suddenly vanished . Chinese units suddenly vanished from the United States .
 To this day there are no clear answers as to why the CPVF suddenly withdrew . The CPF withdrew from the country's governing body of sport .
 Some have speculated that the first engagements were a warning to Allied forces to withdraw from North Korea . Some believe the first engagement was a warning that Allied forces were to withdraw .
 Others believe the CPVF had run out of food and ammunition and needed to regroup and resupply before beginning any new offensive . Others believe that the CPF had ran out of ammunition and had to wait for supplies .
 Chinese Offensive in Korea, Second (November 25-December 24, 1950) The second Chinese offensive in Korea took place in November through December 1950 .
 The Chinese People’s Volunteer Force had concentrated in the high mountains of central North Korea during the month of November . The People's Liberation Army of the People's Republic of China had concentrated .
 Two Chinese army groups, the Thirteenth in the west against United States Eighth Army and the Ninth in the east against X Corps, entered the conflict . Then in late November two Chinese armies entered the battle .
 CPVF Thirteenth Army Group of 18 divisions attacked U.S.Eighth Army directly . In the west, the CPVVF thirteenth army group attacked the United States Eighth Army in the west . The U.N. Eighth Army was attacked directly by CP
 The weight of the Chinese attack was against the right flank of the U.S. Eighth Army . The attack was aimed at the Eighth Army's right flank .
 The Chinese crushed the ROK II Corps and tried to outflank the U.S. IX Corps . The Chinese tried to get the US IX Corps out of the battle .
 The weight of the CPVF attack fell on the United States Second and Twenty-Fifth Divisions . The U.S. 2 and 20-5 Divisions were responsible for the attack .
 Route of withdrawal of the Second Division was blocked by Chinese road blocks that caused heavy U.S. casualties . The route of withdrawal was blocked in China .
 Other Eighth Army units along the Ch’ongch’on River west of IX Corps near Anju were able to hold back the Chinese assaults long enough for most of Eighth Army to withdraw .
 CPVF movement was slow, allowing Eighth Army to maintain a deliberate withdrawal back into South Korea . Eighth Army was able to maintain an orderly withdrawal into the South Korean border .
 CPVF activities against X Corps in northeast Korea in late October were a mirror image of their activities against United States Eighth Army . CPF activities were mirroring those of the U.S. Eighth Army in October .
 In spite of total destruction of the Seventh ROK Regiment near Sudong and fierce fighting with the Seventh Marine Regiment near Chinhung-ni, Chinese forces suddenly melted away as they had at LInsan .
 Chinese forces concentrated in the high mountains of central North Korea and awaited new actions by X Corps . As in the west, Chinese forces are concentrated in high mountains in North Korea .
 Eighth Army in the west, X Corps received orders Chinese Offensive in Korea, Second | 71 to attack north toward the Yalu River . Eighth Army . Eighth . Army in . west . X Corps . received orders to attack . north . toward the river .
 Under this new plan, the U.S. First Marine Division pushed north up a very steep and difficult road from Hungnam to the Chosin Reservoir . The road is a very difficult 64-mile-long road . Under the new plan it will push north up the road
 The Seventh Division was widely dispersed, while the Thirtysecond Regiment attacked northwest to link up with the Marines . The Marines were also attacked northwest .
 A gap of 80 miles extended between the Seventeenth Infantry and the other two regiments . As a result of the gap, a gap was 80 miles .
 On November 28, the CPVF mounted its first big assault on Seventh Division forces east of the Chosin Reservoir . Seventh Division troops were attacked by the CPF on November 28 . The battle was the first major assault on the Seventh Division .
 The Twentyseventh Chinese army attacked the dispersed U.S. units . The Chinese army invaded the dispersed United States units .
 The Thirty-first RCT fell back to the First Marine Division perimeter at Flagaru-ri, on the southern tip of the Chosin Reservoir . It is located on the south end of the Reservoir, the southern edge of the reservoir .
 Fifth and Seventh Marine Regiments attacked west of the reservoir to Yudam-ni . Meanwhile, the Fifth and . Seventh Marine Regiment attacked west . of the . reservoir . The Fifth and 7th Regiment attacked .
 The First Marine Regiment had the mission of keeping open the main supply route from Hagaru-ri to Hungnam . It was the first Marine Regiment to be stationed in Japan .
 The Chinese kept attacking the extended Marines and attempted to cut them off from their base of supply . All during this period of bitter cold weather the Chinese tried to cut the Marines off .
 The Fifth and Seventh Marines were cut off at Yudam-ni when the Chinese secured the Tokdong Pass in their rear on the route to Hagaru-ri . The Marines were forced to withdraw from the camp .
 Two regiments bypassed the roadblock by moving overland to Hagaru-ri . The two regiments moved overland by moving to Haguru-ri instead .
 The size of the Chinese units caused major changes in X Corps commander Major General Edward M Almond’s plans . Major General Almond's plans were changed by the size of Chinese units .
 His corps was widely dispersed, with isolated units vulnerable to renewed Chinese attacks . isolated units were left vulnerable by the Chinese .
 His mission was to preserve X Corps while conducting an orderly withdrawal . Now he had to preserve the X Corps and conduct a withdrawal .
 The first phase of the withdrawal was completed when marine and army units withdrew from both sides of the Chosin Reservoir into Hagaru-ri . The withdrawal is part of a plan to withdraw troops from the area .
 X Corps' withdrawal is considered one of the most masterly in military history . X Corps’ withdrawal is said to have been masterly by the American military .
 In spite of heavy losses by U.S. forces, the CPVF in northeast Korea in 1950 amounted to a disaster . The CPF suffered heavy losses in November and December 1950 .
 Marine Corps studies estimate that in these divisions both battle and nonbattle casualties amounted to some 72,000 men . The U.S. Marine Corps says the casualties of these divisions are estimated to have been at the hands of the U.N. Marines .
 The Korean War essentially became a conflict between the People’s Republic of China and the United States . The Chinese People's Volunteer Force was sent to North Korea in 1950 .
 The main weight of the attack fell on the U.S. I and IX Corps defending in western Korea directly north of Seoul .
 North Korea's People’s Army forces attacked across the parallel in the center and east of the Korean peninsula . In addition to this attack, the Chinese Sixty-sixth Army and the North Korean S. Korean forces attacked the border .
 The ROK Army III Corps is struggling to hold back the Chinese thrust in central Korea . This last thrust threatened to envelop the ROK army .
 The Chinese attack occurred at night and was preceded by massive artillery and mortar fire . The attack occurred during the night and preceded by heavy artillery and mortars .
 After this artillery barrage came thousands of foot soldiers accompanied by the blowing of bugles . Foot soldiers followed by thousands of feet soldiers . Thousands of people were killed in the attack .
 The United States Twentyfourth and Twenty-fifth Divisions bore the brunt of the attack . The U.S. Twentyfour and Twentyfive Divisions were the worst hit by the attack in Afghanistan .
 The Chinese continued to attack and take heavy casualties . In spite of heavy U.S. counter battery fire, the Chinese continue to attack . The Chinese were killed in the battle .
 By daylight on January 1, 1951, CPVF forces had driven a wedge between the two U.S. divisions, attacking through the weakened ROK First and Sixth Divisions defending the area .
 Another Chinese force penetrated the UNC defense east of Seoul and threatened to envelop the city . The UNC defense is based in Seoul, South Korea, near the border with China .
 General Matthew B Ridgway ordered the United States I and IX Corps to fall back into a bridgehead around Seoul . General Walton H Walker’s death in a jeep accident led to the collapse of the Eighth Army in Korea . General Ridgways had taken command of the
 UNC commander General Douglas MacArthur had given Ridgway instructions not to risk the destruction of the United States Eighth Army . MacArthur had ordered Ridgways not to destroy the Eighth Army.
 Eighth Army established lines upon which withdrawing UNC elements could coordinate their movements . Eighth Army set up lines to coordinate withdrawal movements . UNC elements were able to coordinate movements with Eighth Army .
 Line C passed along the south bank of the Han River, except for the bridgehead around Seoul . Line C is located along the southern bank of Seoul's Han River .
 At Yangp’yong it extended across the Korean peninsula to the east coast . The Korean peninsula was also known as the Yangp'yong peninsula .
 Line D, passed from the west coast at P’yongt’aek northeast to the east coast at Woonp’o-ri . Line D passed from P'yongongt'aek to P‘yong-aek .
 By January 2, both I and IX United States Corps had formed a bridgehead of 10 infantry regiments around Seoul . The U.S. Army has formed 10 regiments in the area .
 ROK units on the central front collapsed during the invasion of Seoul . The defense of Seoul was thwarted by the collapse of the ROK forces on central front .
 The CPVF was able to push around Seoul to the east of the city and outflank the Eighth Army . The Eighth Army outflanked the Eighth and Fifth Army .
 Eighth Army ordered slow withdrawal from Seoul to Line C along the south bank of the Han River . Ridgway ordered a slow withdrawal of the Eighth Army from Seoul .
 U.S. I and IX Corps conducted an orderly withdrawal from Seoul . In spite of Chinese pressure, the withdrawal was orderly . The United States withdrew from South Korea .
 Only incident in Chinese Offensive in Korea, Third | 73 the withdrawal took place as the British Twenty-ninth Brigade was withdrawing . The only incident in the Chinese offensive in Korea .
 Elements of the Chinese Thirty-ninth Army overran two companies of the Royal Ulster Rifles . Two companies were overran by elements of the Thirty-Ninth Army .
 By January 4, the last UNC units in Seoul crossed over the Han River and took up defensive positions along Line C . Indeed, the major problem in the evacuation of the two United States corps was a flood of South Korean refugees .
 U.S. engineers worried about the integrity of the Han River bridges and whether they could support heavy equipment as well as thousands of Korean refugees . The bridges were built in the 1950s .
 A large number of refugees were able to board trains south of the river and travel directly to Pusan . In spite of much confusion, many refugees managed to board a train to the island .
 CPVF continues its drive, shifting its thrust to central South Korea . In the meantime, the CPF continued its drive to central Korea .
 Eighth Army began its move to the new line, accomplishing it in several days without incident . Ridgway ordered the withdrawal of all UNC forces back to Line D to prevent this from occurring .
 Ridgway ordered aggressive patrolling on Line D . The army has been stabilized on line D, Ridgways says .
 The bitter cold winter was having its effect on Chinese forces and drastically slowed their movement . Cold winter had drastically slowed the movement of Chinese forces .
 Gaps as wide as 20 miles appeared between attacking Chinese and Eighth Army defenders on Line C . Ridgway planned a counterattack to regain the territory recently lost by the Eighth Army .
 By February 11, the U.S. I and IX Corps had begun the counterattack and were slowly progressing north to the Han River . The counterattack began February 11 .
 X Corps, evacuated from Hungnam to Pusan at the end of December, was now preparing to move up to Line D to join the Eighth Army . X Corps was evacuated from the Korean peninsula in December .
 Tenth Corps was still composed of the United States Army Third and Seventh Divisions and the First Marine Division . The Tenth Corps still made up of the U.S. Army Third, Seventh, Seventh and Ninth Divisions .
 The United States Army Second Division is recovering from its losses in North Korea . Added to this was the U.S. Second Division, recovering from North Korea losses .
 During January 7-22, X Corps moved up to Line D in central South Korea . X Corps has been stationed in South Korea since 2008 .
 The KPA II and V Corps were pushing into South Korea directly to the east of the Chinese . In this movement they encountered the KPA I and V . Corps, which were pushing directly east of China's borders .
 The Chinese People’s Volunteer Force launched offensive campaigns one after another against the United Nations Forces in the winter of 1950-1951 . Chinese troops sent to the Korean War in October 1950 .
 China was overwhelmed by the victory of the CPVF’s Third Offensive Campaign from December 31, 1950, to January 8, 1951 . The victory was achieved by the success of the Third Offensive campaign .
 In a matter of eight days, the CPVF crossed the 38th Parallel and moved into South Korea . The UNF pushed the CPF down to the 37th Parallel . The CPF captured its capital Seoul and pushed the UNF down .
 After taking over Seoul, the Chinese government organized parades and parties to celebrate with fireworks .
 Russian advisors in Beijing even questioned the CPVF Command why not follow up their victory with hot pursuit of the UNF into South Korea . The CPF Command even questioned whether it should follow up its victory .
 Joseph Stalin and North Korea’s leader Kim Il-sung pressured the CPVF to launch the next offensive operation immediately to drive the UNF out of Korea with all possible speed . Soviet leader Joseph Stalin . North Korean leader Kim Jong-Il-sung continually pressured the .
 Mao Zedong cabled Peng Dehuai in January and urged a preparation of the CPVF’s Fourth Offensive Campaign to drive the UNF farther south . Mao Zedongs urged the preparation of a preparation for the campaign .
 The CPVF Command was under tremendous pressure from the political leaders of all three Communist countries (China, the Soviet Union, and North Korea) for a quick victory . North Korea was one of the three communist countries .
 The gap between political goals and strategic realities grew wider at the end of each campaign . But the gap between this political goal and strategic reality grew wider .
 As the CPVF strikes further south in the Fourth Offensive Campaign, tactics began to lose effectiveness . The tactics that had been successful earlier had started losing effectiveness .
 From January 25, 1951, the CPVF engaged in its Fourth Campaign and suffered a casualty of 53,000 men . During the war, the Japanese Army suffered a total of 53 million casualties .
 China had to keep sending reinforcements in order to offset losses and meet new demands of the rapidly expanding military operations and unexpected manpower needs .
 By midApril, the Chinese forces in Korea had increased to 950,000 troops, including 42 infantry divisions, 8 artillery divisions, 4 antiaircraft artillery divisions and 4 tank regiments .
 The CPVF air force had not yet been formally committed to the war . All of them were ground forces, since the air force was not yet committed .
 Their supporting troops consisted of 6 supply services headquarters, 4 railroad engineering divisions, 11 engineering regiments, and 1 public security division . An additional 180,000 men were added to their forces .
 During the Fourth Campaign, the two sides engaged in a series of back-and-forth mobile battles . The Fourth Campaign was the fourth campaign of World War II .
 The ROKA Eighth Division was annihilated, creating a salient in the UNC front . The Eighth Division is annihilated by the ROKa Eighth Division .
 The United States Second Division and the United States 187th Airborne RCT supporting the ROKA I Corps struggled to block the Communist penetration . The U.S. Second Division of the U.K. Airborne Airborne helped block the communist penetration .
 Lk.S. artillery wreaked havoc on these Chinese forces . Chinese Offensive in Korea, Fifth | 75 as they tried to swarm over the United States positions .
 The Communist assault divisions were shattered in this “Wonju Shoot,” and the attack came to a halt . The Communist forces were shattered by this ‘shoot’
 To the east, CPVF units attacked the Twenty-third Regiment and the French Battalion at Chip’yong-ni . The French Battalion and Twenty-Third Regiment were attacked .
 UNC units formed a defensive perimeter around the town and refused to yield this strategic road junction . These two UNC units . formed a . defensive perimeter . around the city .
 Eighth Army commander Lieutenant General Matthew B Ridgway believed that this was a key junction and ordered the defenders to hold it against an estimated 25,000 Chinese attackers . Ridgways believed that the defenders would be able to hold the key junction against a large number of attackers .
 For two days, the Chinese mounted attack after attack against the UNF positions, but the defenders refused to surrender . The UNF forces were attacked by the Chinese for two days .
 The encircled defenders were saved by the arrival of elements of the United States First Cavalry Division . The U.S. troops arrived at the scene of the battle .
 The CPVF withdrew to regroup at the former KPA defensive position in April just north of the 38th parallel . Unable to break through this Eighth Army line in central Korea while trying to hold back an Eighth Army drive west .
 Chinese leaders did not realize that their goal of driving the UNF out of Korea was unattainable until the CPVF’s Fifth Offensive Campaign . The Chinese leaders didn’t realize that they’d have to wait for their goal to be achieved .
 China, People’s Republic of; Chinese Intervention in the Korean War; Chinese Offensive Campaign in Korea, Third; Chinese People's Volunteer Force . Mao Zedong; Peng Dehuai. China . China .
 Chinese Offensive in Korea was the decisive battle in the Korean War . The People's Republic of China sent the troops to Korea in October 1950 . Fifth China’s decisive battle was the Chinese offensive .
 During the winter of 1950-1951, the Chinese People's Volunteer Force engaged in three offensive campaigns that were successful because of their surprise attacks and superiority in number . The Chinese People’s Volunteer Force was successful because they were superior in number and surprise attacks .
 As the CPVF struck farther south into South Korea, the tactics that had been working began to lose effectiveness . The tactics were losing effectiveness as the U.N. forces continued to strike .
 In the spring of 1951, considerable disagreement arose among CPVF officers regarding the Fifth Offensive Campaign . The Fifth Offensive campaign was launched in the spring 1951 .
 Peng was determined to launch the Fifth Offensive Campaign (or the Chinese Spring Offensive Campaign) and regain the initiative . Despite these arguments, Peng launched the campaign to regain the lead .
 The Chinese and North Koreans deployed some 700,000 troops, including nearly 600,000 CPVF troops of 33 infantry divisions and 4 artillery divisions . More than four weeks of combat took place during the four-week period .
 CPVF launched a major attack against Eighth Army of the United Nations Command across a 40-mile front in the west in 1951 .
 Six Chinese armies struck directly at the Eighth Army’s I Corps above Seoul . Three armies attacked down the center of the peninsula toward X Corps . Six armies attacked directly at I Corps .
 CPVF Sixty-third Army struck the ROKA First Division and the British Twenty-ninth Brigade defending the left end of I Corps . The CPF Sixties-Third Army struck .
 ROKA First Division put up a strong defense, but was forced back several miles . The British Brigade left its left flank exposed, leaving the left flank of the British Brigade exposed .
 It was eventually overrun by the massive Chinese attack, but not before a brilliant defense that produced enormous Chinese casualties . The Chinese defense was brilliant, producing enormous casualties .
 Eighth Army units to the right of the British Twenty-ninth Brigade put up a strong defense directly north of Seoul . Eighth Army troops to the left of the brigade put up strong defense north of the Korean capital .
 To their right, the United States IX Corps was thinly disposed . The U.S. IX Corps is thinly disposed of .
 The CPVF concentrated on the ROKA Sixth Division, which fled and left a gaping ten-mile hole in the Eighth Army’s front . The Eighth Army's front was left in the hands of the enemy .
 Thousands of Chinese overran many artillery units supporting the Eighth Army . Through this poured thousands of Chinese, who overran several artillery units .
 The gap was finally plugged when the British Commonwealth Brigade set up a blocking position at Kapyong . The gap between the two sides was finally bridged by British Commonwealth Brigades .
 At the same time, the United States First Marine Division to the right of the gap shifted its position to slow down the penetration . At the moment, the U.S. First Marine Corps shifted their position to reduce the penetration of the area .
 The Eighth Army withdrew to form a new position around Seoul, known as the No Name Line .
 The first eight-day combat after April 22 marked the largest single battle of the Korean War . The battle was fought in Korea's first eight days after the war began .
 On May 16, 20 Communist divisions— 15 CPVF and 5 KPA divisions— attacked the United States X Corps and ROKA III Corps, the five divisions of which extended to the east coast . In all 175,000 men, 175,00 men were involved in the
 The main weight of the Communist attack fell against the Eighth Army’s weak right flank . The Eighth Army was attacked by the Soviet Union's main attack .
 Eighth Army commander Lieutenant General James A Van Fleet had anticipated that the major attack would be against the heavily defended west flank of the Eighth Army protecting the ROK capital of Seoul . The major attack was expected to be on the west flank .
 The shock of the Chinese attack caused panic in ROKA units, many of which abandoned their defensive positions and fell back . Many of the soldiers were killed in the attack .
 A huge gap opened up on X Corps’ right flank, exposing the rear of the Eighth Army’s defense along No Name Line . X Corps' right flank was exposed by a huge gap .
 Six CPVA divisions of 60,000 men struck the United States Second Division to the west of the salient . The CPVA managed to hold its ground and pushed into the flank of the Chinese Offensive in Korea, Fifth | 77 .
 The United States Third Division was dispatched from the Seoul area to block further CPVA movement into the salient . Simultaneously, the U.S. Third Division of the Korean Army was dispatched to block the CPVA move .
 Eighth Army was severely tested, but I and IX Corps units around Seoul held . Eighth Army's Eighth Army severely tested in Korea .
 ROKA units to the right of the salient and the U.S. Second Division to the left held firm . The United States Second Division held firm in the salient .
 The 187th Airborne RCT was rushed in to block the farthest point of the CPVA penetration and complete the encirclement of the salient . In addition to the United States Third Division of the U.S. Third Division, the 187th .
 UNC artillery, airpower, mines, and barbed wire brought the Communist Sixth Offensive to a halt . After five days, the determined Eighth Army stand brought the offensive to a stand-still halt .
 The Fifth Offensive Campaign failed, and the CPVF suffered the loss of 85,000 men . The 5th Offensive Campaign was unsuccessful .
 180th Division was completely eliminated, and 7,644 men became POWs . 59 officers were captured, including 59 officers at division, regiment, and battalion levels .
 Mao realized the limit of China’s military power after this campaign . Mao realized that China's military power had to be limited .
 Their defeat in this battle forced Mao to reconsider his aims on the battlefield . Mao's defeat in the battle forced him to rethink his aims . The battle was one of Mao's greatest victories .
 Chinese leadership was willing to conclude the war short of total victory in Korea . China realized a huge gap between the capacity of Chinese troops in Korea and its aim of driving the UNF from the peninsular .
 The Fifth Offensive Campaign is a deciding battle that determined the rest of the war and the truce negotiations . It helped create conditions that polarized East Asia through the Cold War and beyond .
 If entering Korea in the name of the government, China might risk a direct state of war with the U.S. and 16 other nations that had joined the UNF in Korea . China is one of the world's most populous countries .
 ‘Volunteer’ troops were the Chinese regular troops of the People’s Liberation Army and commanded by the Chinese generals . In fact, the ‘volunteer troops’ were the . regular troops .
 Mao Zedong (18931976), chairman of the CCP and president of the PRC’s central government, created the CPVF . He appointed Peng Dehuai (P’eng Te-huai) as commander of the PLA Northwest Military Region and vice chairman
 On October 19, the first wave of the CPVF troops crossed the Yalu River and entered North Korea, beginning Chinese participation in the Korean War . The first wave was without wearing China’s army insignias .
 The first wave of the CPVF had six armies, including 18 infantry divisions, 3 artillery divisions, and 7,000 supporting service troops . In all about 300,000 men, the first wave had about six armies and about 18 infantry and 3 artillery .
 Not until November would the PRC publicly acknowledge that the CPVF had entered Korea to assist the North Koreans in their war against American invasion . The PRC would not publicly acknowledge the move until November .
 By late November, China had sent to Korea 33 divisions, totaling 450,000 troops . China sent to South Korea by late November .
 These included numerical superiority; engaging the enemy in mobile operations and avoiding trench warfare; and achieving surprise as much as possible in order to negate superior enemy firepower .
 During the early offensive campaigns from late October to late November 1950, the CPVF employed all these familiar tactics . In the early 1950s, the Chinese army used similar tactics .
 Peng instructed the CPVF to engage the troops of the Republic of Korea first in order to gain some experience before dealing with the more powerful U.S. units . Peng also instructed the Chinese to engage with the troops first .
 Chinese troops quickly gained battlefield experience, helped immensely by a nucleus of career officers and civil war veterans . The Chinese troops were helped by the nucleus of officers and veterans .
 First time since MacArthur’s Inchon Landing in September, CPVF stabilized the situation for the North Koreans . North Korea is pushing the front line south of the Chongchon River .
 On November 24, the CPVF launched the second southward offensive campaign to counterattack MacArthur’s ‘home-by-Christmas’ offensive . The CPF launched its second campaign on November 24 . The offensive is counter-attacked by MacArthur's “home
 American airpower forced the Chinese to take to the hills, and much of what they required was carried on foot . The Chinese were forced to take the hills in order to survive .
 The Chinese People’s Volunteer Force | 79 hills, often established roadblocks, which forced the American troops back . They attacked from the surrounding Chinese People's Volunteer Force, often establishing roadblocks .
 The retreat of the U.S. First Marine Division has become a part of Marine lore, but it was still a retreat, not a victory . The retreat was part of the United States First Marines' retreat .
 In nine days, the CPVF pushed the battle line to the 38th Parallel and recaptured Pyongyang, North Korea’s capital, which had been captured by the UNF on October 19 . Pyongyang had been held by the North Korean government since 2008 .
 China kept sending more reinforcements to Korea to offset losses and meet new demands of rapidly expanded military operations and unexpected manpower replenishment . China has been sending reinforcements to South Korea since 2008 .
 On New Year’s Eve, the CPVF launched the Third Offensive Campaign across the 38th Parallel against entrenched UNF troops, an operation very different from earlier practice .
 In a matter of eight days, the CPVF crossed the 38th Parallel, moved into South Korea, recaptured the capital Seoul, and pushed the UNF down to the 37th Parallel . The CPF crossed 38th and 37th parallel in eight days .
 The CPVF units were exhausted after days of constant movement and fighting . Yet the CPF units are exhausted after fighting .
 The CPVF also faced mounting problems, including shortage of food and ammunition, extreme fatigue, poor rear area security, and delays in getting reinforcements .
 On January 25, 1951, the UNF launched its counterattack to retake Seoul . The UNF was forced to withdraw from South Korea .
 It was not until after the CPVF’s Fifth Campaign in April-May 1951 that Mao came to the conclusion that the goal of driving the UNF out of Korea was unattainable . Mao concluded in 1951 that it was impossible to achieve the goal . The CPV
 Considerable disagreements existed among CPVF officers regarding how to execute the Fifth Campaign . The Fifth Campaign was executed by the CPVVF .
 Most of the top commanders disagreed with Peng’s idea (which in fact was imposed upon him by Mao, Kim II Sung, and Joseph Stalin) of striking south . Mao, Stalin, and Mao II Sung imposed the idea on Peng .
 By mid-April, Chinese forces in Korea had increased to 950,000 men, including 42 infantry divisions, 8 artillery divisions, 4 antiaircraft artillery divisions and 4 tank divisions .
 The Chinese and North Koreans deployed some 700,000 troops against 340,000 UNF troops . The two sides fought for more than 40 days . The Chinese, North Korean and UNF forces fought for 40 days in North Korea .
 After the setback of their fifth campaign, the CPVF made some important strategic and tactical changes in order to limit casualties and negate UNF firepower .
 Chinese command shifts focus from eliminating enemy units in mobile warfare to securing lines in positional warfare . Chinese command shifted focus from elimination of enemy units to secure lines .
 CPVF command began an active defense by constructing underground tunnels in the summer of 1951 . The CPV F command began to construct underground tunnels .
 They placed greater emphasis on gaining and retaining the operational initiative in battles (including preemption), which was still seen as an optimum strategy . The U.S. government was seen as having more emphasis on preemption in battles .
 By December 1952, Chinese forces in Korea had reached a record high of 1.45 million men . The Chinese forces included 5 infantry divisions, 10 artillery divisions, 5 antiaircraft divisions, and 7 tank regiments .
 As a result of the 80 Chinese Revolution of 1911 rotation, more Chinese troops were sent to Korea, including five Chinese Air Force divisions that came under the CPVF command in September 1951 . Five Chinese air force divisions were under the Chinese Air force command .
 These air force divisions kept their bases within the Chinese borders . Pilots flew into Korea when they were carrying out missions .
 CPVF numbers remained stable until the armistice agreement was signed in July 1953 . CPV numbers remained steady until the end of the war .
 The Chinese Communist forces had sent 2. million troops to Korea from 1950 to 1953 . China had been involved in the Korean War between 1950 and 1953 .
 China had also mobilized a large number of civilian laborers for the war, totaling 600,000 men . China also mobilized large numbers of civilian workers for the conflict .
 Chinese volunteers entered Korea as part of the Chinese volunteers . They worked in logistical supply and supporting services such as manpower transportation and railroad and highway construction .
 3. million Chinese volunteers participated in the Korean War . A total of 3.million Chinese volunteers were involved .
 Mao's son was killed while working as a Russian translator at the CPVF headquarters in an air raid . Mao’s son died during the 1950s, when the Chinese volunteer forces were confronted by United States air and naval superiority .
 Chinese soldiers faced a greater chance of being killed or wounded than those who served in WWII or the Chinese Civil War . The Chinese soldiers served in the Korean War faced a higher chance of death or injury than those in WWII .
 7,100 were repatriated back to China in three different groups after the war ended in July 1953 . Among the 21,300 Chinese POWs, 7,000 were returned to China after the conflict .
 The rest of the Chinese prisoners, about 14,200, were claimed by the UNF as refusing to be repatriated . About 14,000 Chinese prisoners are claimed to be refusing to return to China .
 Qing dynasty established a ‘new army’ in 1897, hiring German instructors and purchasing modern firearms from European countries . To survive, the Qing dynasty set up a new army in 1897 .
 By 1906, the New Army consisted of five infantry divisions, totaling 50,000, and established five officer training schools and military academies . The New Army was established in 1906 .
 The Manchu rulers refused to carry out reforms into military institutions and organizations beyond buying Western weapons and hiring European instructors . The New Army did not save the empire because the rulers did not carry out the reforms .
 Foreign concessions in treaty ports and foreign nations all gave shelter to Chinese rebels . Meanwhile, foreign concessions in the treaty ports were given shelter to the rebels .
 As a great breakthrough in the Chinese history, it ended 2,000 years of monarchy and built the first republic in Asian history . The first republic was built in China and is now the first in Asia .
 Sun and other revolutionaries negotiated with Yuan and offered him the presidency of the new republic . Yuan was the first president of the Chinese Republic of China . Sun and others negotiated with him to become president .
 Yuan is the first president of the Republic of China . Yuan was elected by the provisional government on February 14, 2013 . Yuan is a former Chinese president .
 Yuan, however, tried to establish his own dictatorship and monarchy against the revolutionaries until his death in 1916 . Yuan's death was the first of its kind in China .
 The revolution failed to turn China into a truly independent and democratic country for the Chinese people . Although it ended the Qing dynasty, it failed to make China truly independent .
 The Republican revolutionaries did not attempt to enlist the peasants in their struggle . Instead they made efforts to win over secret societies and the New Army .
 Sun’s movement was composed largely of students and intellectuals, secret societies, and Chinese abroad, gave impetus and momentum to the cause .
 Initially, where the peasants reacted to the insurrection at all, they reacted positively . Initially, the peasants react positively to the uprising . The peasants reacted positively, with some of the most positive reactions .
 They saw opportunities to redress some of the wrongs suffered under the Qing regime such as taxation and land concentration . But it soon became clear that the rebellion served the rich landlords rather than the poor peasants .
 The gentry and local elite took over such duties as tax collection through the selfgovernment bureaus . They also gained greater influence over the local magistrates .
 The peasants’ initial positive support came to a quick end. Under such circumstances, the peasants were not able to support the peasants. The peasants were able to get back on their feet .
 After Yuan’s death, from 1916 to 1927, the country entered the Warlord Period, in which military commanders of different armies controlled a province or region . The period was known as the "Warlord Period"
 Warlord armies competed for human resources by drafting young peasants into their own army . Hoping to seize control of the whole country, warlord armies drafted young peasants in their own armies .
 The total increased to 1 million by 1918, and about 1. million by 1924 . The total of about 1 million people in the U.S. was killed in 1918 .
 He led the successful Northern Expedition against the warlords in 1926 . He established the GMD government of the ROC in 1927 . He was the leader of the Northern Expedition .
 China, Republic of China, Guomindang; Jiang Jieshi; Manchus; New Army; Northern Expedition; Qing Dynasty; Qing dynasty; Self-Strengthening Movement; Sino-Japanese War; Sun Yat-sen; Unequal Treaties;
 The People's Republic of China sent a large force to the Korean War against the United Nations Forces in 1950-1953 . The Chinese Summer Offensives in Korea were one of China's most successful military campaigns .
 By December 1952, the Chinese People’s Volunteer Force (CPVF) had reached a record high of 1.45 million men, including 59 infantry divisions, 10 artillery divisions, 7 antiaircraft artillery divisions and 7 tank regiments .
 The CPVF conducted regimental-sized attacks against the UNF in the final week of May 1953 . In the sector held by the Eighth Army’s IX Corps, the Eighth and Capital Divisions were hit .
 The CPVF was unable to overrun these units, but the attacks did signal a two-month-long increase in activity all along the front of an intensity not seen since April 1951 .
 On May 28, 1953, Communist forces struck the United States I Corps . Communist forces hit five outposts of troops of the U.S. Twenty-fifth Division .
 Outposts 1,000 yards forward of the main line were defended by troops from the division's Turkish Brigade .
 Four days of intense fighting ensued often included hand-tohand combat . The four days of fighting were often involved hand-hand combat .
 The Chinese eventually took three of the five outposts, they suffered more than 3,200 casualties . The Chinese took three outposts in the area, taking more than 300 casualties .
 The action ended only when the Turks were ordered to abandon the final two outposts . The action only ended when the Turkish government ordered the Turks to abandon their outposts.
 By the first of June, it appeared to Eighth Army intelligence officers that the Chinese planned a major blow soon . The Chinese appeared to be planning a major strike soon, intelligence officers said .
 The failure to immediately follow up the May attacks against I Corps seemed to indicate that these were diversionary efforts to screen their real intention of pushing the line southward .
 This was prompted by agenda item 2 of the armistice agreement, which called for the demarcation line and demilitarized zone to follow the final battle line . The agreement calls for the line to be followed by the final line .
 The first week of June passed quietly, the continued movement of Communist troops kept UNF troops on alert . UNF soldiers were on alert during the first week .
 The Communist offensive opened on the night of June 10 as the Panmunjom negotiators began to draw the final armistice line . The communist offensive began on June 10 .
 UNC leaders determined that the Communist objective was to achieve a more southerly line or, at the very least, the propaganda value of a symbolic victory at the end of the war . UNC leaders decided to try to get a more southern line .
 The initial probe, which turned into a general offensive, began as two Chinese divisions moved down both sides of the Pukhan River to attack the ROKA II Corps near Kumsong .
 ROKA units continued to withdraw south approximately three miles along an eight-mile front until June 15, when they formed a new line . The hard-pressed ROKa units continued withdrawal south approximately 3 miles along a front .
 The UNF situation was just as critical in the corps center, especially after June 12, when another Chinese division struck the ROKA Eighth Division, forcing it to withdraw . Another Chinese division also struck the UNF corps center .
 The failure of the two ROKA divisions to hold prompted UN commander General Maxwell D Taylor to shift the boundary between the two sides . Two ROKa divisions, the Seventh and Third, were then in reserve, to the battle .
 Two outpost positions in front of the ROKA First Division of the United States I Corps fell at the end of June after prolonged attacks . The outpost positions were attacked by the U.S. I Corps .
 The Chinese employed battalion-strength forces against the U.S. Third and ROKA Ninth Divisions . Farther east in IX Corps sector, the Chinese used battalion strength forces .
 North Korean attacks forced a readjustment of the main line positions on the X Corps’ right wing . The X Corps' right wing was attacked by North Korean forces .
 Communist forces were successful in seizing Hill 351, the northern anchor of the ROKA First Corps line . Hill 351 is located in the northern part of the Korean peninsula .
 By June 18, the attacks had subsided, allowing General Taylor to stabilize the front and begin relieving the ROKA Fifth and Seventh Divisions . General Taylor was relieved of the troops by June 18 .
 Beginning on June 21, he received reinforcements from Japan in the form of the United States 187th Airborne Airborne Regimental Combat Team and the ThirtyFourth Regiment of the Twenty-Fourth Division . The U.S. 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team and Thirty
 The Communist side made no further attacks during June or during the first week of July 1953 . The Communists were defeated by the British side .
 Chinese suffered about 6,600 casualties, and the ROKA II Corps alone reported losses of more than 7,300 men .
 By June 18, the terms of an armistice agreement were all but complete . The terms of the agreement were also all but completed by June 18 .
 On this date, South Korean president Syngman Rhee unilaterally ordered the release of 27,000 prisoners of war prisoners . Rhee made the decision on this date .
 Communist delegates denounced it as a serious breach of faith and delayed the final agreement for another month . To protest, the Communist delegates called it an 'breach of faith' The final agreement was delayed by another month and was delayed further .
 On July 6, there was another Chinese attack against ROKA forces near the Iron Triangle that inflicted heavy casualties on the South Koreans . The attacks on Pork Chop Hill, a scene of heavy fighting in March, resumed in July .
 After an artillery and mortar barrage, a succession of Chinese infantry units assaulted Pork Chop Hill . The Chinese government was forced to withdraw troops after the attack .
 The attackers far outnumbered the defenders of the United States Seventh Division . The situation became chaotic as both sides fed companies, battalions and then regiments into the battle .
 Chinese determination may be judged by the fact that they matched each new U.S. company with a battalion . Each new United States company has a battalion of troops .
 Both sides continued to pound the hill with artillery and mortar barrages . Both sides continue to pound it with artillery .
 By the morning of July 11, five U.S. battalions had been committed to holding a company-sized outpost against a full Chinese division . Five battalions were deployed to hold an outpost .
 Faced with the prospect of sending additional units into the battle at a time when the armistice was near, Taylor decided to withdraw . Taylor decided not to send additional units in the battle .
 U.S. units withdrew from Pork Chop Hill on July 11, 2011 .
 The Chinese launched a three-division attack against the left flank of the ROKA II Corps in the Kumsog area . Elsewhere, on the night of July 13, the Chinese launched an attack on the U.S. IX Corps . The Chinese attacked the right flank of
 Five Chinese divisions broke through the lines, causing the collapse of the ROKA Capital and Third Divisions, as well as weakening three other ROKa divisions . The collapse was caused by great confusion in both corps areas .
 The Communists inflicted 14,000 casualties on the South Koreans in October . The Communists set a monthly record for artillery rounds fired . The South Koreans suffered 14,500 casualties in the month .
 Taylor directed commanders of the United States IX and ROKA II Corps to establish and hold a new main line along the south bank of the Kumsong River . Taylor reacted quickly to the situation .
 Taylor ordered the U.S. Second and Third Divisions to extend their sectors to cover gaps created by retreating units . Chinese Workers and Peasants Red Army | 85 moved the newly arrived 187th Airborne RCT and the Thirty-fourth RCT from Pusan to the
 The additional commitment of two units then in reserve, the United States Fortyfifth Division and ROKA Eleventh Division, greatly strengthened UN forces . U.S. Fortyfifth division and U.K. Eleventh division were in reserve at the time .
 ROKA II Corps counterattacked with three divisions and managed, by July 20, to retake the high ground along the Kumsong River and establish a new line six miles south of the original line . After reorganization of UN forces, on July 17, three divisions counteratt
 U.S. secretary of state John Foster Dulles voiced opposition to allowing the Chinese to finish the war with a victory . No attempt was made to restore the original line of the line .
 With armistice to be signed at any time, both Generals Taylor and Mark Clark (18961984) thought it unnecessary to expend lives for terrain not essential to the security of the Eighth Army’s front .
 Final Communist offensive caused enormous casualties at the end of the war . This final Communist offensive was the last Communist offensive to take place .
 UN forces estimated that the Chinese had lost more than 72,000 men, more than 25,000 of whom were killed . UN forces said that more than 75,000 Chinese men were killed in the conflict .
 Of the five Chinese armies that had been identified in the attacks against the ROKA II and U.S. IX Corps, the Chinese lost the equivalent of seven divisions .
 U.S. refused to respond in kind to Russia's refusal to respond to U.K. strike . Communists moved quickly to complete the truce talks . U.N. President Barack Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House .
 Details were worked out within a week, and the Korean Armistice agreement was signed on July 27, 1953 . Details of the Korean armistice were revealed within the week .
 China, People’s Republic of; Chinese Intervention in the Korean War; Chinese Offensive in Korea, Fifth; Chinese People's Volunteer Force; Korean War . Korean War Armistice Agreement .
 Mao led the peasants’ Autumn Harvest Uprising in central Hunan and Jiangxi Provinces . Mao organized the First Division of the Chinese Revolutionary Army of Workers and Peasants (CRAWP, 19271930)
 Zhu De reorganized his revolting GMD troops from the Nanchang Uprising into the CRAWP on January 13, 1928 . Zhu De joined Mao at Jinggangshan on April 24, 1928, and joined Mao on April 26, 1928. Zhu De was Zhu De
 About 5,000 men organized into six regiments, for which they had but 2,000 rifles . They established the CRAWP’s Fourth Army on May 4, about 5,00 men . The army was organized into 6 regiments .
 Jinggangshan became the ‘cradle’ of the CCP’s military revolution against Jiang Jieshi and GMD government . Soon other Communist troops joined them at the 'cradle'
 Zhu and Mao developed guerrilla tactics as new strategy to win battles . Mao and Zhu developed tactics to win victories in Maoist-era China . Zhu's guerrilla tactics were new strategy . Zhu: "To win battles in China, Zhu's tactics are guerrilla tactics"
 Central Committee accepted Mao’s way after last urban uprising failed in Guangzhou in December 1927 . Mao's "up to the mountains" approach was accepted by the Communist Party Central Committee .
 “The CCP Military Task Guideline” is the first systematic outline for CCP military organization, institution, and operation . It was written by CCP’s “First systematic outline” for military organization .
 The document instructed that the rebelling peasants be recruited into the regular armies . The document also instructed that they should be enlisted into the army .
 Zhu-Mao's Fourth Army of the CRAWP became the Red Army’s Fourth Army in June 1928 . For instance, Zhu-mao’�s . Fourth Army . of the . CrawP became . the Red . Army in 1928 was Zhu-
 Central Committee ordered other armies to follow its example . Praising the Fourth Army’s experience in land reform to win over the peasants and its guerrilla tactics .
 Zhu and Mao had created a military center at Jinggangshan for the Communist revolution at that time . Mao and Zhu and Zhu had created the military center .
 From 1928 to 1930, the Red Army formed 10 armies, about 70,000 men, plus 30,000 local self-defense militias . Red Army engaged in many battles against GMD and warlords’ armies and defended their bases .
 The Red Army experienced a new period of rural-centered development in more than 20 base regions across the country . Red Army has been in rural areas for more than two decades .
 In May 1930, the Central Committee secretly held a national representative meeting of the Red Army, which it renamed the Chinese Workers and Peasants Red Army . The Communist Party Central Committee held a secret meeting in May 1930 .
 The Shanghai meeting became a turning point in the Red Army's development, transforming scattered guerrilla operations into a more organized, central operation . The meeting was the turning point of the development of the Soviet Union .
 The rapid growth of the Communist troops and expansion of the regions they controlled alarmed the GMD government . GMD was alarmed by the growth of Communist troops .
 President Jiang Jieshi and the high command of the Nationalist army centralized their provincial campaigns into a coordinated suppression in order to round up the Red Army . Jiang's high command was able to get his troops to the base base .
 Mao and Zhu began the Long March toward northwest China in October 1934 . After the Red Army failed during Jiang’s fifth campaign, they began the long march .
 The Long March was an attempt to save the Red Army by moving its main strength away from the GMD-controlled central region and to develop a new strategic initiative in a remote region .
 The Red Army suffered heavy casualties during its western movement due to the needed protection of the Central Committee and party administration, which traveled 8,000 miles with the army .
 In October 1935, the First Front Army of the Red Army and the Central Committee arrived at a CCP-controlled area in northwestern Shaanxi Province . The CCP is a Chinese Communist Party .
 In July 1936, Moscow resumed telegraphy communication with the Chinese high command, which had made Yan’an, Shaanxi, its new base area . Moscow resumed talks with China in July 1936 .
 On July 7, 1937, the Japanese army attacked the GMD troops at the Marco Polo Bridge, located to the southwest of Beijing, China . The bridge was attacked by Japanese troops on July 7 .
 GMD government came to an agreement with the CCP on joint resistance . The GMD govt. and the CCP came to a joint agreement with each other . The agreement was reached in advance of the agreement .
 Zhu as commander, Peng Dehuai as deputy commander, and Ye Jianying as chief of staff . Zhu was commander of the Eighth Route Army of the National Army in August 1937 . As part of this agreement, the Red Army, then located in the northwest and numbering 46,000
 All units of the CCP’s Red Army were reorganized into the Nationalist army during the Anti-Japanese War from 1937 to 1945 . The Red Army was reorganized as a Nationalist Army .
 Commission of Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense . A ministry-level administration of the central government of the People’s Republic of China for national defense industry .
 During the past 50 years, it has played a significant supervisory role in China’s military R&D, acquisition of defense technology, nuclear weapons testing, arms import and export control .
 In October 1958, the Central Military Commission established the Commission of Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense . Marshal Nie Rongzhen was the chairman of the commission .
 COSTIND was a highly centralized top military authority in charge of defense industry and weapon development . The COSTind was the most powerful military body in the world .
 China’s NASA, a ministry-level agency, was founded on November 4, 1955, to develop missile and space technology . The Fifth Academy was founded by the Chinese government in 1955 . It is now a ministry level agency .
 The Second Ministry was also founded on November 4, 1955, in charge of atomic and hydrogen bomb development .
 Thereafter, November 4 became the national anniversary of the Chinese nuclear and strategic weapon industry . November 4 is the national day of the anniversary of China's nuclear industry .
 COSTIND imported military technology from the Soviet Union from 1956 to 1960 . From 1956 until 1960, COSTind managed nuclear research and developments . The agency was responsible for the country's nuclear research .
 In the 1960s, the COSTIND shaped innovation and technological development, coordinated the complicated interactions between the state and military, and utilized civilian professionals for its military and civilian programs .
 Under the COSTIND, China’s nuclear programs from the mid-1950s to the 1970s were characterized by centralization and bureaucratic power . Centralization and bureaucracy guaranteed the program’�s success .
 China's first nuclear bomb test took place on October 16, 1964, and the first hydrogen bomb on June 17, 1967 . China’s first hydrogen and nuclear bomb tests took place in 1967, and first nuclear tests in 1964 .
 During the reform movement in the 1980s, Lieutenant General Cao Gangchuan, later the defense minister, served as the chairman of the COSTIND . Four vice chairmen were all lieutenant generals .
 COSTIND created the National Defense Industry Office, National Defense Science and Technology Commission of Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense | 89 Commission . COSTind was created in 1982 to meet new needs in military technology .
 COSTIND was also given responsibility for commercial deals of China’s entire defense industry . Since 1986, it has also been responsible for commercial defense deals of the country's entire defense .
 It was initially formed to improve efficiency and competence of military research and production . Its functions had been broadened over time until the mid-1990s .
 COSTIND’s authority over space and nuclear programs was clearly evidenced by its control of nuclear agencies and laboratories such as the China Atomic Energy Agency (CAEA) and the Chinese Academy of Engineering Physics (which ran nuclear weapons research)
 COSTIND has a close relationship with the PLA Second Artillery Corps, China’s strategic missile force . Its extensive influence on the nuclear and space sectors also gave the COSTind a close .
 COSTIND played a role in the acquisition of foreign military technology . In addition, the COSTind played a . role in . the acquisition . of foreign technology .
 COSTIND was established to expedite the defense technology transfer from the Western world that had begun in the early 1980s . New Era Corporation and Galaxy New Technology Corporation, directly under the COSTind’s control, were both established .
 COSTIND had broad responsibilities over military production and R&D, technology acquisition, arms export and export control . It also provided policy guidance related to China’s defense industry . As a result, it had vast amount of personnel, units, testing and evaluation bases .
 COSTIND underwent the first restructuring since its establishment in the mid-1950s, and its status declined significantly . In March 1998, the COSTind underwent its first restructuring .
 COSTIND turned into a ministry-level agency under the State Council . COSTind became a ministry level agency under State Council.
 The Growth and Decline of the PLA’s Science and Technology Commission for National Defense . The growth and decline in the PLA's science and technology commission for national defense .
 The Role of the Chinese Military in National Security Policymaking is critical to national security policymaking . Swaine, Michael D. Swaine: China's military role in national security is vital to the U.S.
 Mencius was one of the principal interpreters of Confucianism . He was the most famous Confucan after Confucius himself . Mencius is one of China's most famous mencius .
 Humanity is the core of the ConfucianMencian paradigm, whose goal is to achieve social harmony . The goal of this is to create social harmony, according to the Chinese culture .
 Specific duties were set down to each of the participants in these sets of relationships . Specific duties of each of these relationships were also set down .
 Confucianism means juniors owe their seniors respect and worry toward their seniors . Senior seniors also have duties of compassion and worry towards juniors, according to Confucians .
 Filial piety, children showing respect to their parents, including both the living and the dead, is considered among the greatest of virtues . Even remote ancestors .
 Confucianism urges all men to become gentlemen or perfect men and act as moral leaders to the society . Confucanism also urges men to be moral leaders and to act as gentlemen and perfect men .
 A gentleman should cultivate himself morally, show filial piety and loyalty where these are due, and cultivate humanity . A gentleman must cultivate himself moral and show respect for his family and friends .
 The philosophies of Mencius and Confucius were similar, but there were some differences . The philosophies were similar but there was some differences between the two .
 Mencius emphasized the significance of the common citizens in the state, while Confucius generally regarded rulers highly . Mencius emphasizes the importance of common citizens .
 Mencius argued that a king had an apparently higher status over a commoner, but he was actually subordinate to the masses of people . Confucius admired kings of great accomplishment, but Mencius said he was subordinate to people .
 Mencius believed that individual endeavor was required to cultivate oneself . He believed that the object of education was the cultivation of benevolence . Mencius was influenced by Daoism and Confucianism .
 filial piety is still built into law and continues to play a significant role in Confucian philosophy . Filial piety continues to be a significant part of Confucan philosophy . Today, filial piety is still built in law .
 People have the responsibility to provide for their Confucian-Mencian Paradigm | 91 elderly parents according to modern laws in Chinese society . For example, people have to provide . for their elderly parents . for example, . people have the . responsibility to . provide . their Conf
 The paradigm's idea of meritocracy in part inspired the introduction of the imperial examination system into traditional China . The imperial examinations were introduced in traditional China in the 1970s .
 This system was established by the Song dynasty and continued until it was abolished in 1905 . This system had been well established by Song dynasty .
 Under the system, almost anyone who wished to become an official would have an opportunity to be an officer . The position would bring wealth and honor to the whole family, if he passed written government examinations .
 Confucian-Mencian paradigm is a complex system of moral, social, political, philosophical, and quasi-religious thought . It influenced mainland China but also Taiwan, Korea, Japan, and Vietnam, as well as various territories, such as Singapore and Hong Kong .
 The works of Confucius were translated into European languages by Jesuit scholars stationed in China . The works were translated by Jesuits in China and translated into languages .
 Matteo Ricci started to report on the thoughts of Confucius in 1687 . The life and works of the Chinese scholar were translated into Latin . Ricci was the first person to translate the works into Latin in China .
 Western philosophers of the Enlightenment were interested in the integration of the system of morality of Confucius into Western civilization . The Enlightenment was concerned with the integration into the Western world of morality .
 Since the development of the ConfucianMencian paradigm, a number of critiques of it have appeared, especially in modern times . Mencian mencian culture has been criticized in the past by some .
 Some critics claim Confucius has a negative view of women because he stated that women should have no dignity and less rights than men . He said women should be at home, playing the role of a good wife and mother .
 Some scholars argue that Confucianism has heavily shaped the Chinese people in the past 2,000 years . It has limited their rights and freedom, limiting their rights .
 Waves of criticisms along with outright vilification of Confucianism arose during the Taiping Rebellion of 1850-1864, the May Fourth Movement of 1917-1920, and the Cultural Revolution of 1966-1978 in China .
 Scholars debate about the classification of Confucianism as a religion or a philosophy . Scholars still debate about whether it was a religion .
 Some maintain that the practices of Confucianism, such as ancestor worship, ceremony, and sacrifices, meet the standards of a religion . Others maintain that it is a state religion in some East Asian countries because of state promotion of state philosophies . Some say it is state religion because of
 Confucianism is only a collection of moral teachings and is not a religon because it does not have the concept of afterlife . But many others argue that Confucanism is not religious because it doesn't have an afterlife . Many others say it is not religion but a collection
 China, China, People’s Republic of; Cultural Revolution; Han Dynasty; Hong Kong; Qin Dynasty; Qing Dynasty; Song Dynasty . Song Dynasty; Taiping Rebellion; Warring States Period; Zhou Dynasty .
 By 1950, the new regime realized the necessity of stamping out any resistance . The new regime was determined to stamp out resistance .
 The officers of the People’s Liberation Army . took over the cities from the GMD during the Chinese Civil War in 1946-1949 . They were apparently insecure in this new social environment .
 The Municipal Military Administration of Chongqing, a large city in southwestern Sichuan Province, had to enforce “martial law” from January to May 1950 because of riots, serious looting, and organized insurgents in that city .
 During these months, the city’s military administration employed radical policies such as dissolving the GMD and other political organizations, outlawing all religious groups, and confiscating banks, enterprises, and properties of the “bureaucratic capitalists” in Chongqing .
 The suppression worked well, as the military administration gained control of the city in the summer of 1950 . The suppression was successful, and the city was eventually taken over by the military .
 Mao recommended Chongqing’s suppression efforts, though with some leniency . In his report to the Third Plenary of the CCP Seventh Central Committee on June 6, 1950, Mao recommended the suppression efforts . Mao's report was published in 1950 .
 On July 23, the PRC’s State Council and Supreme Court issued a joint instruction to start the Campaign against the Counterrevolutionaries in the cities .
 The mass movement targeted three layers of counterrevolutionaries, who were, by the official definition, enemies to the society, to the government, and to the party . The movement targeted those who were enemies to society, government and to party .
 The government reported that there were 600,000 spies and 2 million armed remnants of the GMD and bandits on the mainland .
 Campaign against the Counterrevolutionaries escalated into a nationwide movement . With the outbreak of the Korean War in June and China’s intervention in Korea in October 1950, the campaign against the counterrevolutionaries became a national movement .
 The Central Committee of the CCP issued a new instruction for the movement on October 10 .
 Cultural Revolution | 93 clarified and were noticeably harsher against former GMD officers and soldiers . Criteria of punishable crimes and sentences were clarified and harsher against ex-GMD officers .
 The PRC government needed to secure the homeland when it fought the armed forces of the U.S. and the United Nations Forces in a foreign land . China's government needs to secure its homeland, the government says .
 The death penalty would be meted out not only to assassins and saboteurs, but also to their accomplices . It would be the first time the death penalty has been meted in this case .
 The CCP eradicated any resistance in an effort to consolidate control of order . The CCP wiped out any resistance from any resistance .
 The party disarmed the local masses of their weapons and ammunition that had been used during the long years of warlord and guerrilla fighting in the Anti-Japanese War and the Chinese Civil War .
 The campaign then became swift and decisive in December, as thousands of suspected enemies of the revolution were rounded up, tried, and arbitrarily sentenced . Mao: Around 1.27 million were incarcerated and 800,000 were executed in 1950-1951 .
 On February 22, 1951, the central government of the PRC issued detailed punishments against the counterrevolutionaries . The PRC government issued a list of punishments for counterrevolutionists .
 Leadership believed that the campaign was necessary and should continue . The leadership believed that it was necessary to continue. The leadership believes that it should continue.
 During the campaign, many of the accused did not have a lawyer, hearing, or even trial before they were sentenced or executed . Many of those accused had not had a lawyer or even a trial before being sentenced .
 Through a massive peasant movement in the rural areas, landlords and rich peasants as a social class were eliminated through the campaign . Most of the rural population were unaware of the wrath of the revolutionary state .
 By the summer of 1953, when the Korean War Armistice was signed on July 23, the Campaign against the Counterrevolutionaries ended . The campaign ended in 1953 .
 The Chinese leaders had constructed a Soviet-style institution that put severe limits on individual freedoms, such as movement, employment, and economic activities . China's leaders had built a Soviet style of state-run institutions, including the state of mind .
 In the summer of 1966, the Cultural Revolution became a nationwide political struggle accompanied by extensive purges . The Cultural Revolution was the result of extensive political purges, including the purges of dissidents .
 Mao publicly attacked Liu Shaoqi, president of the People’s Republic of China, and Deng Xiaoping, secretarygeneral of the CCP Central Committee, whose loyalty Mao questioned . Mao questioned the loyalty of the Chinese leader . Mao publicly attack Liu Shoqi, the president of
 By the mid-1960s, questions about Mao’s Great Leap Forward policy and dissenting opinion in the party and government spread . Questions about Mao's Great Leap forward policy and dissent spread .
 On May 28, the Politburo organized the Central Committee’s Cultural Revolution Leading Group . The group is the leading organ to guide the national movement . It was organized by the Communist Party Central Committee .
 Cultural Revolution Leading Group gradually replaced the Politburo in 1966-1967 as the party’s authority for the Cultural Revolution . In August, when Jiang Qing became its chairman, the group was led by Mao's wife, Jiang Qing .
 In the summer of 1966, Mao began to publicly attack, or “bomb” , the CCP and PRC hierarchy officials, including President Liu and Deng Xiaoping . Mao began the attack on the leaders of the Communist Party in 1966 .
 From June to August 1966, all high schools and colleges dismissed classes and allowed the Cultural Revolution . 95 students participated in the new revolution .
 Some marshals and generals tried to stop the Maoists’ attempt to involve the PLA in the Cultural Revolution in early 1967 . The Maoists wanted the PLA to take part in their Cultural Revolution .
 The "February Countercurrent" against the Cultural Revolution was the group's first attempt . Their efforts failed, and they were branded the “February Counter Currentcurrent” against the cultural revolution .
 In March 1967, Lin mentioned several times the need to identify “a small handful in the army” and burn them to death . Lin said several times in March 1967 that the army needed to identify a small handful of soldiers .
 Lin used the Cultural Revolution mass movements to purge the military leaders who did not agree with his strategy and policy . He used the mass movement to purge military leaders .
 With Mao’s approval, Lin dismissed and jailed many marshals and generals . Lin dismissed many marshal and generals with Mao's approval . Lin was jailed for life in prison terms .
 Lin’s long-time rival, He Long, was labeled the “biggest bandit” and died in prison . Among the marshals was He Long who was labeled “the biggest bandit,” who died in jail .
 In early 1968, the Central Committee dismissed and jailed General Yang Chengwu (Yang Ch’eng-wu) , chief of the General Staff, and General Yu Lijin (Chief of the air force) in China . The Central Committee dismisses and jailed both of them .
 Most marshals and generals lost their positions and were jailed or publicly criticized . Most marshal and general lost their jobs and were publicly criticized for their actions .
 In the course of the cruel questioning sessions, many were tortured or beaten to death . Many were tortured, beaten or killed by police officers .
 Lin’s followers and leftists called for ‘destroying the GPD hell’ ( yan wangdian) and overthrow of General Xiao Hua, director of GPD on July 25, 1967 . General Xiao Hui was the director of the General Political Department .
 Thereafter, 40 top officers in the GPD were purged, and most of them died in prison . Most of the officers were killed in the deaths of many of them .
 Among them, 1,169 officers died of torture, starvation, or by execution . Among them were those who were tortured, starved, or executed .
 Many military institutes were shut down, and research programs were cancelled . Research programs were also shut down .
 At local levels, regional and provincial commands were either paralyzed or divided into two or more factions because they were involved in local factional activities, some siding with one faction, some with another . Some of the commands were paralyzed or split into factions .
 Wuhan Regional Command had an armed clash with the Hubei Provincial Command because of their different opinion over the local, factional mass organizations in July 1967 . For example, it was because of the different opinion of the local mass organizations .
 The “July 20 Incident’s’ armed conflict brought the entire province into a civil war . Their armed conflict, known as the ‘July 20 incident,’ brought the province into an armed conflict .
 During and after 96 Cultural Revolution the incident, more than 180,000 officers, soldiers, and civilians were killed or wounded in the city streets of Wuhan . More than180,000 people were killed in and after the incident .
 Since early 1967, the situation worsened across the country as the Cultural Revolution entered the phase of a ‘total takingover’ of the authorities . The Cultural Revolution began in early 1967 as the country entered a “total taking over’s authorities .
 The Red Guards took over the government offices at all levels, jailed officials, and administered provincial and local affairs . The government offices were taken over by the Red Guards at the end of the war .
 Different factions within the Red Guards had contradictory political orientations and different plans, leading to violent conflicts in many places resembling a civil war . The Red Guards were divided by factions in many of the country's cities .
 Mao employed the PLA to restore social and political order and to prevent a possible civil war in the country . Mao employed them to restore order and prevent a potential civil war .
 On March 19, the CMC ordered all the PLA units to become fully engaged in the “three supports and two militaries” task . The task is to stop the armed conflicts and stabilize the social order across the country .
 Tasking headquarters were established at regional and provincial commands . Thereafter, tasking offices were opened at the army and divisional levels .
 The Chinese military replaced civilian governments at the provincial, district, county, and city levels through its military administration, or the “Military Administrative Committee,” from 1967 to 1972 . The military administration took over from civilian governments in China at the provinces and districts .
 The PLA used its officers as administrators for schools, factories, companies, villages, and farms . The PLA's officers were used as administrators in schools and factories .
 The PLA takeover promoted the military-civilian integration and contributed to another increase in military services . The takeover of the Chinese military has seen an increase in the number of military personnel .
 From 1967 to 1971, the PLA became the dominant political force in the country . The PLA was the dominant power force in China .
 A new political struggle between Chairman Mao and Marshal Lin erupted, a struggle that would rip a great hole in a political arena already gasping for breath from the battering it had endured . Chairman Mao's struggle with Marshal Lin would rip the political arena into a new hole .
 Lin and his family realized that Mao was directing the spearhead of his political struggle against them . Lin's family believed that Mao directed the spearheading of his struggle against the Chinese people .
 Lin’s son, Lin Liguo, planned to assassinate Mao on his way back from Shanghai . Lin Ligiuo planned to kill Mao while he was returning from China .
 Mao realized the danger and returned to Beijing early from Hangzhou on September 12 . Mao realized that he was in danger and decided to return home early . Mao's return to Beijing was the first time he had returned to China .
 On September 13, 1971, at the urging of his wife and his son, Lin fled . Lin fled the scene of his murder in 1971 at the request of his family .
 Lin, his family, the crew, and others on board, eight people were killed in the crash . Lin's family, crew and others were also on board the plane when it crashed .
 Mao’s political criticism was followed by another top-down purge and shake-up in the military . Mao's political criticism has been followed by a shakeup of the military in the past .
 Most of Lin’s generals were purged, and his military programs were terminated in 1972-1973 . During the movement to “Criticize Lin and Confucius” {piliti pikong ), most of his generals were also purged .
 By January 1973, the CMC had completed its thorough replacement and reorganization of all services and departments . The CMC reorganization was completed in January .
 On December 22, the CMC ordered all the chiefs of eight regional commands to exchange their positions . Cultural Revolution | 97 within 10 days . The CMC also ordered all chiefs of 8 regional commands .
 Zhou-Ye and Jiang Qing continued to dominate the media and preach class struggle . A new power struggle began between the two women in China's first major cities .
 The Great Cultural Revolution lasted until Mao’s death in September 1976 . Mao was Mao's first leader in China .
 His Holiness the Dalai Lama was born on July 6, 1935, in Taktser, Tibet . He was the fourth child of a peasant family . The Dalai Lama is the fourth son of a Tibetan family .
 In 1937 he was recognized by Buddhist monks as the reincarnation of the Thirteenth Buddhist Lord of Compassion . On February 22, 1940, he was enthroned as the Fourteenth Dalai Lama in Lhasa, Tibet .
 Dalai Lama’s education began when he was six years old, directed by Buddhist monks . The Dalai Lama was educated by monks at the age of six . He is now the Dalai Lama of Tibet .
 On November 17, 1950, the Dalai Lama was called upon to assume the role of Tibetan head of state in order to give voice to Tibetan demands for political and religious autonomy . The Dalai Lama became the first Tibetan head-of-state in 1950 .
 Until 1959, the Dalai Lama engaged in a careful policy aimed at preserving Tibet’s traditional religious and political structures while attempting to negotiate with CCP leaders . The Dalai Lama has been in Tibet since 1959 .
 Fearing for the Dalai Lama’s life, his advisors counseled him to flee Tibet, which he reluctantly did . The Dalai Lama's life was at risk, and he fled Tibet .
 Tibetan leader took up residence in Dharamsala, India, the official seat of the Tibetan government-in-exile . He was exiled from Tibet in 2009 .
 Since his forced exile, the Dalai Lama has constantly sought to focus the world’s attention on the plight of the Tibetan people . He has appealed to the U.N. for support .
 He has encouraged Tibetans to engage in nonviolent civil disobedience against Chinese Communist rule . Tibetans have also been encouraged to engage civil disobedience in China .
 He displayed considerable diplomatic and political skill in presenting Tibet’s case on the international stage and won widespread respect . Tibet is one of the world's most populous countries .
 In 1989, the Dalai Lama was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his nonviolent opposition to the Tibetan occupation . The Dalai Lama has been in Tibet since 1989 .
 He has met with all of the world’s major religious leaders, including Pope John Paul II five times . He has been widely received in capitals .
 The Dalai Lama's nonconfrontational approach began to bear fruit in 2002 . He has published numerous publications of the Dalai Lama, both political and spiritual, as well as his constant travel .
 Tibetan leader took part in talks with Chinese government for Tibetan autonomy in 2010 . Tibetan autonomy is still ongoing in negotiations with China .
 Originally, it connected to the Chinese side, but water erosion separated it to form an independent island in 1915 . It was originally connected to China, but was separated in 1915 from the Chinese .
 Zhenbao in Chinese means “treasure,” a name given to the island because a huge ginseng root was discovered there in the nineteenth century by a Chinese fisherman . The island was named after a Chinese fishing boat found the root of a huge plant .
 The Chinese claim that it has been under the administration of Hulin County, Heilongjiang Province . The Chinese state that it is now under Hulin .
 This tiny island gained international fame due to the Sino-Soviet border conflict in 1969 . The island was the site of a Chinese-Russian border conflict .
 The People's Republic of China and the former Soviet Union shared a nearly 7,000-kilometer-long border . The People’s Republic of . China and . the former . Soviet Union share a nearly . 7,400-kilometre long border . border .
 During the 1950s, the ‘brotherhood’ between the two Communist states seldom reminded them of their territorial disputes . The “brotherhoods’s” in 1950s and '60s were rarely reminded of their disputes .
 Nikita Khrushchev’s de-Stalinization led to a bilateral ideological rift . After Joseph Stalin's death, Khrushchev led to an ideological rift in the Soviet Union .
 Leonid Brezhnev (19061982) took power in 1964, the ideological schism caused border clashes . Border clashes between Russia and the Soviet Union began in 1964 .
 Brezhnev assumed a hard stance toward the border disputes by denying any treaties signed between the two countries were unequal . With no intention of compromise, he assumed no intention to compromise .
 According to Chinese sources, the Soviets invaded Chinese territory 4,189 times between October 1964 and February 1969 . On the contrary, according to China, the Soviet Union invaded China more than 4,000 times during the period .
 On Damansky Island, as the Chinese claimed, the Soviets violated their territorial integrity 16 times from January 1967 to February 1969 . The Chinese claimed that the Soviet Union violated their territory 16 times during the period .
 No third observer objectively reported it, and conflicting claims were rendered by the two sides . "No third observer objective reported it," says CNN's John Sutter .
 A careful review of their existing sources reveals that the two countries fought three major battles on March 3, March 15, and March 17 respectively respectively .
 Both countries had stationed forces along the border for a long time in preparation for war . These were not accidents, as both countries had positioned forces along their borders .
 On March 2, one group of Chinese soldiers camouflaged itself in snow in a wooded area in preparation for an ambush . Another group marched toward Soviet soldiers .
 Both sides dispatched reinforcements, and the fighting lasted until late afternoon . The fighting continued for hours .
 The Soviets brought in four military vehicles yet were forced to withdraw . The Soviet Union was forced to pull out of the battle .
 Soviet artillery bombarded Chinese territory up to seven kilometers beyond the border . The Soviet artillery bombed Chinese territory seven kilometers from its border .
 The violent fighting lasted for nine hours, resulting in heavy casualties . Heavy casualties were caused by heavy casualties from both sides .
 One foreign source claimed that Chinese casualties on that day were over 800 . Another foreign source said Chinese casualties that day may have been 800 .
 The Soviets dispatched 70 soldiers to stop the Chinese from towing away a newly invented Soviet T-62 tank left by the previous battle on the ice near the Chinese side .
 The tank was dragged out and put on display in Beijing to show off a Chinese victory . The Soviets were not successful, and the tank was soon dragged out . It was then dragged back to Beijing to display the tank .
 The three days of heavy fighting shocked the world and made the tiny island famous . The three-day battle was the first of its kind in the Philippines .
 Both sides claimed victory and decorated their heroes with honors and promotions . Both sides claim victory .
 Russians set their loss at 58 dead and 94 wounded, while Chinese announced their loss of 29 dead, 62 wounded, and 1 missing . Nobody knows the exact figure of casualties, even though the Russians set theirs at 58 .
 After Damansky, skirmishes along the border continued, but none of them matched the scale of Damansky . Damansky was one of the most significant skirmishes in the area .
 Aleksei Kosygin and Zhou Enlai met at Beijing Airport in September 1969 . They agreed to separate forces in disputed areas and to solve border problems by peaceful negotiations . Only after the informal meeting, the military confrontation subside, ended military confrontation .
 Some scholars consider the Damansky clash a modern war since both employed their most advanced weapons in the intensive fighting . Some scholars have called it a modern conflict since both sides employed the most advanced weaponry .
 It ushered Sino-Soviet relations into a two-decade ebb during which both saw each other as the arch enemy . China and the Soviet Union were allies in the Cold War .
 The Chinese claimed that the Damansky battle enabled them to smash the Soviet attempt to launch a major war against China . The Soviets argued that the clash thwarted China’s further territorial demands .
 The Damansky incident cast a shadow upon the two countries as their ideological and territorial disputes continued until the collapse of the Soviet Union . The incident occurred in the early 1980s .
 In a particular way, the Damansky clash changed Chinese relations with the West . The Damansky conflict changed China's relations with West, says CNN.com .
 The small war over the island triggered a significant shift in global balance of power by shaping a new world order . Indeed, the small war . over the . island triggered significant shifts in the global balance . order .
 In 1991, China and the Soviet Union signed an agreement to stipulate its belonging to China . The agreement stipulates that the land belongs to China, but it is now owned by China .
 In 2005, both the Chinese parliament and Russian Duma ratified a bilateral agreement to legalize Damansky as Chinese territory . The agreement was ratified by both chambers of the Russian and Chinese governments .
 China, People’s Republic of; Cold War; Cultural Revolution; Manchuria . Manchus; Mao Zedong; Zhou Enlai; Mao Zongong; People's Liberation Army . Sino-Soviet conflict; Sino conflict; Soviet Union; U.
 He helped usher in reforms that would transform the economy of China from centrally planned to more market oriented . The reforms paved the way for China's ascendancy to the global power that it is today .
 Deng was born in Guang’an County, Sichuan Province, on August 22, 1904 . Deng was also known for his work in China's Guang'an County . Deng is one of the world's most famous women .
 Deng then joined the ‘Chinese Communist Youth League in Europe’ Deng then made his way to Moscow to study Marxist theory in depth . Deng then traveled to China to study Marxism in depth in 1926 . Deng was a member of the “Chinese Communist Party Youth League’s
 He returned to China by 1927 and became a local leader of the CCP as well as the Red Army . He was a member of the Communist Party of China's Communist Party .
 He retreated to the Communist area of Jiangxi Province . These revolts failed and he retreated to a Communist area in Jiangxi .
 Deng served in the Red Army through the Anti-Japanese War . Deng was later appointed secretary of the CCP Central China Bureau . Deng is a former member of the Communist Party Central China Party .
 He aided the victory of Mao Zedong over the GMD armies by capturing many key Nationalist-held cities, even in Sichuan . He was a political commissar of the People's Liberation Army .
 Deng's triumphs in the military field progressed to such an extent that by 1949, Communist forces had destroyed much of the GMD forces . Deng’s triumphs were such an impressive that by 1949 they had destroyed much of GAD forces .
 The prestige of Deng continued to grow with every victory and helped him rise through the ranks of the CCP . Deng was one of the premier members of the party by the time the war was over . Deng became one of China's premier members after the war .
 Deng was appointed chairman of the Financial and Economic Affairs Committee in 1952 . Deng was the first Chinese leader to be appointed by the PRC in October 1949 .
 He became deputy premier and general secretary of the CCP’s Central committee in 1954 . He was appointed to the Politburo in the 1960s . He became general secretary and deputy premier of the party in 1954 and was appointed in 1960 .
 Deng was purged by Mao for being too ‘Bourgeoisie’ and forced to retire all his positions in 1966 . Deng was forced out of all his posts during the Cultural Revolution in China .
 He faced rehabilitation by first being placed under house arrest and then sent to a tractor repair factory in Jiangxi to work as a regular laborer . He was first sent to house arrest before being sent to the factory .
 Deng was deemed fit to return to his leadership duties as deputy premier and member of the Central Committee . Deng died in 1973 at the age of 65 . Deng was declared fit to be a member of China's Communist Party Central Committee in 1973 .
 He became vice chairman of the Central Military Commission and chief of the General Staff of the PLA in 1975 . He was elected vice chairman and member of the Politburo Standing Committee in 1974 .
 Accusations surfaced of Deng disparaging Jiang Qing , Mao’s wife, and he was dismissed again from his positions in 1976 . Deng was dismissed from his position in 1976 after being accused of disparaging Mao's wife . He was also dismissed from positions in charge of Mao's
 Deng was allowed to return to the party fold after the Gang of Four was expunged . Mao died and Mao died later in the year . Deng was not allowed to rejoin the Communist Party fold until Mao died .
 Deng delivered a speech, “Emancipate the Mind,” at the Plenary Session of the party’s Central Committee in 1978 . Deng got rid of the remaining Maoists, getting rid of them . Deng delivered the speech at the party's Plenary
 China must become more open to the outside world, he said . He said to bring modernity and economic prosperity to China, the country must be more open . The speech was made by President Xi Jinping .
 Deng began to shift Chinese policy to become more reform oriented . Deng's new mandate was to shift China's policy to be more reform-oriented . Mao had spearheaded many of the ill-fated policies that Mao had earlier .
 China began to open up to the world after adopting more reform policies . As the country adopted more reforms, the country became more open-hearted .
 Deng pursued an even closer relationship with the United States, paying the first ever PRC state visit to the States . Deng pursued the first state visit of the PRC to the U.S. Deng was the first Chinese leader to visit the States.
 Deng underlined cooperation as he signed the Carter-Deng normalization agreements . Deng signed the agreements with President Jimmy Carter . Deng and Jimmy Carter signed the agreement .
 Deng approached British government in 1982 over issue of Chinese sovereignty over Hong Kong . Deng approached the British government over the issue of Hong Kong sovereignty in 1982 .
 He similarly approached the Portuguese with respect to returning Macau to PRC control . Macau was also returned to Chinese territory under Chinese control .
 Deng developed the “one country, two systems” policy to help relieve Western fears over Communist control . Deng's policy was designed to help ease Western fears of Communist control in China .
 China and Britain finally reached an agreement in 1984 called the Sino-British Joint Declaration on Hong Kong . The agreement was reached in 1984 and was signed by the British government .
 Under the terms of the agreement, Britain would turn over control of Hong Kong by 1997 . China would administer it as a special region, allowing it to retain its social and economic freedoms for 50 years .
 Deng's victory was a major success for Deng, as the issue of foreign domination over Chinese territory had long been a thorn in the nation’s side . This was the first time foreign domination of China had been allowed to be allowed in China .
 Deng's first major challenge to the success of Deng occurred in the spring of 1989 . Deng was assassinated in the fall of that year .
 Some in China wished the government to allow similar freedoms in their country . As prodemocracy groups began to speak out in Eastern Europe, some in China wish to see similar freedoms .
 In April 1989, students gathered in Beijing using the death of Hu Yaobang to voice their desire for democratic reforms and an end to corruption . Students gathered in 1989 to voice the desire to end corruption and democracy .
 Teachers joined their students, and the demonstrations grew ever larger . The demonstrations grew larger .
 By the end of May the crowd of over 100,000 presented a serious dilemma to Deng . Deng was in the middle of a crisis when he faced a decision to make a decision .
 Deng had the Twenty-seventh Army and other units loyal to him move in to disperse the crowd . Deng had to use the military to disperse crowds .
 The military compelled the demoralized students to leave the area . Closing off the area and shutting down the lighting, the military compelled them to leave .
 The teachers and students in the surrounding area were caught by government forces and many were gunned down . Many of the students and teachers were killed in the attack .
 Students took action against the army and began to kill troops as well . Enraged by the wanton killing of their associates, some students took action . Soldiers were also killed by students .
 Many countries imposed economic sanctions, and consideration was given to the expulsion of China from international organizations . China is considered to be one of the world's most powerful countries .
 The government of Deng absorbed the hit, although the leader himself took damage to his reputation . Deng's government absorbed the damage, but he himself took the hit .
 With the collapse of Communism and the Soviet Union by 1991, Deng began a tour of the country in an effort to shore up support for his policies . Deng's tour of China was an attempt to shore-up his policies with the fall of Communism .
 Beginning in 1992, he visited the Special Economic Zones he had set up during the 1980s to highlight the progress made by these areas . He visited these areas to highlight progress .
 Deng died on February 28, 1997 in Beijing . Suffering from Parkinson’s disease, Deng died in 1997 in China .
 Franklin D Roosevelt approved the proposal that American observers be sent to Communist-controlled areas . FDR approved the distinguished diplomat John Paton Davies’s proposal in 1944 .
 The Dixie Mission began when the U.S. Army Observer Group arrived in Yan’an, the Chinese Communist capital, on July 22, 1944 .
 The Army Observer Group was redesignated the Yan’an Liaison Group after April 13, 1946 . It was renamed after the war's first war with China in 1946 .
 The mission was headed by seven army officers until it ceased operation in March 1947 . The mission ended its mission in March 1946 .
 Colonel David D Barrett, the first Group officer, served until the end of 1944 . The best known of these was Colonel David Barrett, who served as the first .
 He was presiding at a critical moment when Americans and the Chinese Communists first came into contact, militarily and politically . Americans and China first came to contact in the 1950s .
 His duties included the gathering of intelligence and weather information, assistance in the rescue of downed American pilots, and assessment of Communist military strength .
 Highlights of the mission included the soon-to-be ambassador Patrick Hurley’s visit in November 1944 . General George Marshall's visit in March 1946 was also highlights .
 Both presidential envoys failed in their efforts to mediate between Jiang and Mao . Mao and Jiang were Mao's first two leaders .
 The United States should follow a policy of “exclusive” support of Jiang by working directly with Mao, says Barrett . Barrett and Davies recommended that the U.S. follow the same policy .
 Hurley accused them of being procommunist by Hurley and later persecuted by McCarthyism in the 1950s . They were soon accused of being anti-communist and persecuted in McCarthyism .
 GMD troops launched a lightning invasion of Dongshan Island on July 16, 1953, on July 17, 1953 . The invasion was the first of its kind in China .
 After the PRC sent the Chinese troops to Korea in October 1950, the Korean War essentially became a conflict between China and the U.S. After the war, the war was essentially a war between the two countries .
 By December 1952, Chinese forces in Korea had reached a record high of 1.45 million troops, including 59 infantry divisions, 10 artillery divisions, and 5 antiaircraft divisions . The Chinese forces were in Korea by December 1952 .
 GMD high command sought to establish a permanent base at Dongshan to support possible GMD advances into the Chinese mainland in the near future . As a strategic objective in the . landing offensive, the GMD . high command wanted to establish . a permanent . base .
 GMD had only one regiment, less than 1,200 troops, as campaign reserve . The GMD was in control of the GMD during the Second World War .
 GMD troops immediately occupied the major part of the island by the end of the landing day . On July 16, 1953, with overwhelming numerical superiority and naval firepower, the GMD forces occupied the island .
 The commanders declared victory immediately . They were so impressed by their own success that they declared victory instantly .
 The island defense proved to be much stronger than what the GMD officers had expected, and even disastrous for them in the end . The GMD had expected the island defense to be stronger than they expected .
 Within the range of the PLA mortar shelling were the landing fields and the largest port on the island, which was critical to the GMD supply lines and reinforcement . The landing fields were the target of the mortar shelling .
 On July 17, at the port, three of the landing ships loaded with heavy equipment turned to sitting ducks as they were being unloaded . Three landing ships were turned into sitting ducks at the time .
 PLA mortars shelled the landing ships, and the damages were deadly in effect . The PLA mortar fired mortars into the ships, killing more than 100 people .
 Three landing ships were sunk, heavy weaponry lost, and the only pier in need of repair . Heavy weaponry was lost, but heavy weaponry was also lost . The only pier needed to be repaired .
 Most GMD troops engaged without needed artillery pieces or even machine guns . More importantly, due to the destruction of landing ships and therefore blockage of the waterway, most GMD forces engaged without artillery pieces .
 Another area still in the hands of the Communists is Bachimen, a key point for PLA’s reinforcement . Bachimen is a key part of the Chinese military's reinforcement effort .
 2,000 GMD paratroopers were dispatched to capture Bachimen . Bachimen is believed to be a key security barrier against possible PLA reinforcement .
 Bachimen was the main strength of the PLA forces and garrison on the island . But anchoring its defensive positions at Bachimen is its main strength . The island is now a base of Chinese military operations .
 The lightly armed paratroops were no match for defenders in strong fortified positions . They were no longer able to defeat the defenders in the battle .
 After one day of fighting, GMD landing troops suffered heavy casualties, and most of their key objectives had not been achieved . Most of the GMD landed troops had not achieved their objectives .
 GMD high command decided to withdraw all remnant troops from the area . GMD has withdrawn all remnants of the area from the region .
 The Dongshan Island Campaign lasted about three days, 2,700 GMD soldiers were killed, and the PLA lost 1,250 soldiers killed . The GMD lost about 1,000 soldiers, 1,500 of them were killed .
 After 1860, the appearance of many unwelcome foreigners aroused Chinese resentment . The appearance of unwelcome foreigners arouses Chinese resentment. After 1860s, many unwelcome foreign visitors were seen as unwelcome .
 Western missionaries were given the right to preach Christianity and to rent or buy land for construction of churches throughout the Qing Empire . The Qing Empire was ruled by the Qing dynasty .
 Antimissionary attitudes among the scholar-gentry often secretly promoted antiforeign activities in the Chinese society . Anti-socialist attitudes often secretly promote anti-communist activities .
 The Chinese gentry distributed books with anti-Christian ideas and created an antiforeign atmosphere . The gentry created an anti-religious atmosphere in China .
 A small but growing number of Chinese nationalists were resentful of the national humiliations that China suffered . China suffered from a series of humiliations .
 At the beginning, the Boxers blamed both foreigners and the Qing government . The Boxers have been fighting for years against the government .
 Qing government first tolerated the Boxers and then supported their actions in an attempt to reduce foreigners’ power and influence in China . Qing government supported Boxers' actions in a bid to reduce foreign influence in the country .
 Boxer movement had become an antiforeign campaign by 1900 . As a result, the Boxer campaign became an anti-establishment campaign .
 Chinese Christians were killed, railway and telegraph lines were destroyed, and foreigners murdered . Chinese Christians and foreigners were killed in the massacre .
 As antiforeign activities increased, Boxer disturbances spread farther to the Beijing area .
 Foreign powers gathered an expeditionary force and built up their naval forces along the northern China coast at the end of April 1900 . To rescue the Westerners in Beijing, the foreign powers gathered a large force .
 After arriving in the capital, these troops joined the legations and protected them from being attacked by the Boxers . These troops were able to protect them from attacks .
 A second international force of 2,000 British Marines was dispatched from Dagu to Beijing on June 10 . The British vice admiral Edward Seymour was dispatched to Beijing in June .
 The Boxers bombarded Tianjin, and Dong Fuxiang's Muslim troops attacked Admiral Seymour’s expeditionary force . Admiral Seymour was killed by the Boxers and the Muslim troops .
 With a breakdown of communications between Tianjin and Beijing, the allied nations were determined to reinforce their military presence significantly . With a difficult military situation in Tianjin, the allies were determined .
 The Eight Foreign Armies quickly and severely defeated the Boxers and the Qing troops . The Boxers were quickly defeated by the Eight Foreign .
 After one day of fighting, the international force occupied Tianjin on July 14 . International force occupied the city of Tianjin, China, after one day .
 The international force occupied Beijing on August 14 . After the rebellion and Qing armies were crushed, the international forces occupied Beijing .
 Li Hongzhang (18231901), a high official and diplomat of the Qing government, traveled to Beijing to reach a settlement with the foreigners . Realizing that armed resistance to the foreign powers was useless, the empress called Li Hong Zhang to Beijing .
 On September 7, 1901, the Qing court was compelled to sign the “Boxer Protocol,” known as the Peace Agreement between the Eight-Nation Alliance and China . The treaty was signed by the Eight Nation Alliance between China and the other nations .
 Foreign Legation district in Beijing was enlarged and placed under the exclusive control of foreign powers . Foreign troops were allowed to be stationed at important points from Beijing to the sea . The Chinese were not allowed to live in the district .
 Protocol ordered capital punishment of 10 highranking officials associated with the outbreak of the Boxer rebellion . The protocol also ordered the capital punishment for the murder of the Westerners in China .
 Beijing, Tianjin, and other cities in northern China were occupied for more than one year by an international expeditionary force under the command of German General Alfred Graf von Waldersee . Beijing, . Tianjin and . other cities were occupied by the international force under . the command
 Imperial edicts were issued to forbid further antiforeign activities and organizations in the future . The edicts forbid further anti-government activities in future .
 The Imperial Civil Service Examinations were suspended for five years in areas of Boxer disturbances as a reprimand of the pro-Boxer scholars . The imperial civil service exams were suspended in the wake of the disturbances .
 After suppressing the Boxer Rebellion, the great powers realized that the best way to govern China was through the Manchu officials, instead of direct dealing with the Chinese people .
 Western powers began to establish their own sphere of influence in China to promote and protect their interests, rather than colonizing China . In the following decades, the Western powers .
 The Chinese imperial structure was for the moment maintained by the great powers . But the Qing dynasty was weakened significantly and the anti-Qing force was rising . This led to the 1911 Chinese Revolution that would overthrow the Manchu dynasty . The revolution was the first attempt to overthrow the Chinese imperial
 Boxer Rebellion; Chinese Revolution of 1911; Li Hongzhang; Manchus; Qing Dynasty; Sino-French War; Unequal Treaties . Chinese Revolution was first Chinese uprising in 1881 .
 The Eight Trigrams Rebellion refers to an uprising against the Qing dynasty (16441911) that occurred from September to October 1813 . The uprising occurred during the Qing era .
 This rebellion involved tens of thousands of Chinese villagers, members of a secret sect known as the Eight Trigrams . Some scholars consider this offshoot of the White Lotus movement .
 Membership in this secret sect required a person to memorize a specific incantation that consisted of eight characters . Membership in the sect required people to memorise the eight characters in the incantantation .
 Loyal followers worshiped the so-called Eternal Unborn Mother, who they believed was mankind’s progenitor . Loyal followers worshipped her as the 'Eternal Unborn mother'
 The sect masters assured their loyal followers, that the faithful among them would be saved . Once this occurred, however, the sect masters told them that they would save them .
 This certain salvation would result due to the Eternal Mother sending them the Maitreya Buddha of the Future . The Eternal Mother would have sent them a certain salvation to the future . This would be due to an Eternal Mother's sending them a Buddha .
 The frustrated villagers roamed the countryside for weeks in September 1813 . Adhering to these teachings, the frustrated villagers were forced to leave .
 They achieved limited successes, which included taking control of several villages in north China . They also took control of some villages in northern China .
 Sectarian leaders firmly believed that if their followers managed to seize the palace in Beijing, this would influence the people to rise up and join their efforts . Sectarians believed if their dedicated followers could manage to . seize the . palace, they said .
 Sect members use knives to discourage any opposition to their movement . Sect members used knives as they steadily made their way toward Beijing .
 It has been estimated that at least 70,000 people lost their lives during this time of social unrest . It is estimated that 70,00 people died during the unrest .
 Crowds gather in shops outside both the palace’s western and eastern gates . Gathering in small groups, they situated themselves within shops located outside .
 At the appointed time, they adorned themselves with strips of white cloth as waistbands and turbans to symbolize their association . At the time, the men wore turbans and waistbands to represent themselves .
 The rebel forces rushed en masse into the palace gateways . Then, drawing previously hidden weaponry, they drew weapons from inside .
 Approximately 70 swarmed onto the palace grounds from the west . Only a few managed to barge into the eastern gate before guards barred further entrance . About 70 people managed to get into the palace from the east .
 Once inside, the invaders surged northward, heading toward the Great Within . The Great Within was the imperial residence area . The invasion was the first of its kind in the world .
 The Manchu prince, Prince Min-ning, personally killed at least two villagers in the fighting . He later became the Daoguang emperor, later becoming the Manchu emperor . He personally killed two villagers .
 Palace guards isolated commoners from their companions by palace guards . The sect members were untrained in formal warfare tactics .
 Government forces quickly suppressed their meager efforts, and all those involved in the attack were either killed or captured .
 Prince Min-ning's attempt to scare the Chinese masses failed . The incident taught him to fear the people of China . The prince is now in China .
 The underlying social currents of discontent also remained, again rising to the surface in Chinese society during the Boxer Rebellion at the end of the nineteenth century . The Boxer rebellion was the result of the popular uprising in China .
 Banner System; Boxer Rebellion; Manchus; Qing Dynasty; Taiping Rebellion; White Lotus Rebellion . Qing Dynasty: Taiping . Taiping. Rebellion: Qing Dynasty . Qing . Dynasty: Qing .
 This event, known as the Marco Polo Bridge Incident, marked the beginning of Japan’s allout aggression against China and the Second Sino-Japanese War . This event marked the start of the Japanese aggression against the Chinese .
 The GMD government came to an agreement with the CCP on joint resistance through a political and military coalition . The agreement is based on a political, military coalition between GMD and the CCP .
 The Red Army, then located in the northwest and numbering 46,000 men, became the Eighth Route Army of the National Army in August 1937 . Zhu De as commander in chief, Peng Dehuai (1898— 1974) as deputy commander, and Ye Jianying as chief of
 The 115th Division was commanded by Lin Biao (19061971) with Nie Rongzhen as deputy commander and Zhou Kun as chief of staff . Two brigades and two regiments, totaling 15,500 men, had two brigades .
 The 120th Division was commanded by He Long with Xiao Ke as deputy commander and Zhou Shidi as chief of staff . He Long had two brigades, one regiment, and two battalions, totaling 14,000 men . Xiao Ke was the deputy commander of the division . Zhou Sh
 The 129th Division had two brigades, one regiment, and two battalions, totaling 13,000 troops . Liu Bocheng commanded the 129th division with Xu Xiangqian as deputy commander and Ni Zhiliang as chief of staff .
 The GMD high command renamed the Eighth Route Army in September the Eighteenth Army Group . The CCP and Chinese people still called it the eighth Route Army . Even though the GMD has renamed the army in September, the CCP still calls it the Eighth .
 Joseph Stalin continued to send financial aid to the CCP . He also began to support Jiang Jieshi’s GMD army as well .
 Mao Zedong (1893— 1976) often complained about how little he received compared to the hundreds of million dollars Chiang had received from Moscow . Chiang received hundreds of millions of dollars from Moscow, including millions from China .
 Mao conducted a guerrilla campaign in the mountains behind the Japanese lines . As Mao did in Jinggangshan, they conducted guerrilla campaign .
 The divisions marched into the enemy-occupied territories, where they carried out guerrilla operations and established military and political bases . The divisions carried out guerillas and established bases .
 In September 1937, the 115th Division ambushed the Japanese troops at Pingxingguan, Shanxi Province, killing 1,000 Japanese and capturing a large amount of supplies and ammunition . The Japanese troops were killed in the ambush .
 In October, the 120th Division ambushed the Japanese supply regiment, destroying more than 50 trucks and tanks . The 120th division cut off Japanese transportation lines in the battle .
 In November, the 129th Division attacked the Yangmingbao Air Base in Dai County, Shanxi, and destroyed 20 Japanese warplanes . The 129th division attacked the air base in November .
 Jiang lost some of his best troops in the war against the Japanese invasion . The Eighth Route Army’s successful guerrillas behind the line recruited a large number of peasants into the army .
 The army increased from 46,000 men in 1937, to 220,000 in 1939, and 500,000 soldiers in 1940 . The army was at the peak of the Second World War, with a total of 5,500 men .
 It established bases in the border regions of the Jin-Cha-Ji, Jin-JILu-Yu (Shanxi-Hebei-Shandong-Henan Provinces), Shanxi-Suiyuan and also in the central section of Sh
 Eighth Route Army spread from north China into central and east China in 1938-1939 . Eighth Route army spread from . north China to central and eastern China .
 In August-December 1940, the army launched the Battle of Hundred Regiments to cut off the south-north transportation and communication of the Japanese forces in central China .
 In 1941-1942, the Japanese command concentrated 64 percent of its troops in China to launch “mopping-up operations” against the Eighth Route Army’s bases behind its line . The Japanese command in China concentrated its troops to launch "mopping up operations"
 "Slowly and gradually, they wanted to stop the guerrillas in their rear area of operations by eliminating their human and economic resources," says President Obama . "They wanted to ... eliminate their human ... resources"
 To overcome the shortage of food and supplies, the army officers and soldiers devoted themselves to increasing production . The army was forced to increase production .
 Many of them participated in the opening up of wilderness for crop cultivation, the raising of hogs, and the making of cloth . Many of the people were involved in opening up wilderness for crops, raising hogs and making cloth .
 Many army units and offices succeeded in attaining total or partial self-sufficiency . After much hard work, many army units, offices have succeeded in achieving self-sufficiency .
 The most difficult problems with logistical concerns for the bases were resolved by 1943, after which these areas continued to expand . Most difficult logistical concerns with logistical issues were resolved .
 In 1944, the “liberated areas” under CCP control launched, partial counteroffensives and won important victories against Japan . In the meantime, in 1944, in . 1944, . the ‘liberated . areas’ under . control launched . partial counteroffs
 By the spring of 1945, the CCP had 19 “liberated areas” with a total population of 95 million with 1.21 million party members across the country . The CCP had an estimated 95 million members in 1945 .
 The Eighth Route Army began to intensify the counteroffensive in the summer of 1945 . The Eighth and Eighth Route armies intensified the counter offensive in 1945 .
 Army increased from 3 divisions in 1937 to more than 40 divisions in August 1945 . Troops increased from 46,000 men in 1937, to 600,000 troops in 1945 .
 On August 8, the Soviet Union declared war on Encirclement Campaigns I 14 Japan, and its Red Army attacked the Japanese in China’s northeastern provinces .
 The Chinese people and the Eighth Route Army, after eight years of bitter struggle, finally won victory in the Anti-Japanese War . After eight years, the Chinese people won victory .
 Jiang’s army defeated the CCP force in the fifth encirclement campaign . Jiang's army defeated CCP forces in the five encirclements campaign .
 The Red Army fled from their base areas in central China to the northwest during the Long March in 1934-1935 . The Long March took place in the northwest of China during the Red Army's march .
 In 192S, Mao Zedong and Zhu De (18861976) joined the force at the Jinggangshan Mountains . In 192 S, the force was based in China's capital, Beijing .
 They reorganized their troops into the Red Army and created a military center, or a base area, for the Communist revolution . The Red Army reorganized its troops into a military base, or an area, to create a base .
 From 1930 to 1934, Jiang’s central government organized five major offensive campaigns against Communist areas and the Red Army bases in the border areas along the Hunan, Jiangxi, Fujian, Hubei, Jiangsu and Jiangsu .
 Through four counterencirclement campaigns, Red Army troops developed some of their operational principles . They focused on “luring the enemy deep” into their territory and using mobile warfare .
 Jiang concentrated 1 million GMD troops in the summer of 1933 . He launched his fifth encirclement campaign against the Red Army in the fall . Jiang concentrated his troops and launched his five encirclements .
 Mao had lost his positions in the government due to the CCP power struggle . Mao was forced out of the government in January 1934 . Mao lost his position in government in a power struggle in 1934 .
 The temporary Central Committee under the leadership of Wang Ming and Li De employed an “allout offensive” and “two fists fighting back” in their fifth antisuppression campaign .
 Jiang’s troops marched into the central region through his ‘blockhouse’ strategy . The Red Army failed, and Jiang‘s troops march into the . central . region .
 The total defense did not work and failed to either slow down or stop the offensives . The total offense failed to stop or slow down the offendsives .
 CCP and the Red Army lost contact with the Soviet Union . Thereafter, the CCP and Red Army had lost contact .
 The Red Army abandoned all of their bases and Soviet areas across the country, except two in northwest China . Red Army in other provinces abandoned all the bases and . Soviet areas . except two of northwest China.
 The survivors of the Red Army began their Long March toward northwest China on October 10, 1934, to continue the CCP’s Agrarian Revolutionary War .
 The term “eunuch"" refers to a specific type of Chinese Imperial servant . Eunuchs is a Chinese term for a type of Imperial servant called an "eunuc"
 Males Eunuchs I 16 who had survived having their scrotums and penises removed performed a variety of palace roles . Eunuchies I 16 performed a range of roles in the palace of the Roman Empire .
 The original purpose of the guards was to protect his harem while avoiding questions regarding paternity . Their original purpose, however, stemmed from the emperor’s need for guards to protect the harem .
 Traditionally valued by rulers for their loyalty and military prowess, eunuchs also often garnered disdain for being uneducated, susceptible to corruption, and serving as Imperial spies .
 Under some dynasties, eunuchs increased in both numbers and power, accumulating excessive influence over the emperors and their courtly affairs . The eunuchies accumulated too much power over emperors .
 Some bequeathed gifts and titles to family members, others faced persecution and death . Emperors who favored their court scholars often faced persecution or death .
 A eunuch's influence at court waxed and waned depending upon each dynasty’s emperors’ temperaments and judgments . Each dynasty's emperors' temperaments, judgments and judgments depend upon the eunuchs’ influence .
 Admiral Zheng He (Cheng Ho) commanded a vast fleet of Imperial treasure ships under Emperor Yongle’s rule in the 1400s during the Ming dynasty . He commanded a fleet of eunuch sailors who were fiercely loyal to their emperor .
 Yongle’s son later ordered such journeys discontinued and eliminated the eunuchs’ positions . His grandson restored his eunuch’ prominence, arranging for their education and appointing them to important military commands .
 Because a eunuch had no direct ties to the royal family system, he lacked social standing and remained dependent upon the emperor’s favor . Often, his close proximity to his master led to participation in both state affairs and court intrigue .
 Eunuchs often proved themselves a young emperor's most reliable supporters in situations relating to an empress’s family . Working as his servants and companions, eunuchs were often the most reliable backers of the young emperor .
 One eunuch chief minister from the Qin dynasty used deception to assure a younger son’s succession, and eunuchs conspired to murder the brother of one Han emperor's consort . Another chief minister of one Qin dynasty from China used deception .
 Under the Tang dynasty (618907), reforms in court practices regarding Imperial control of taxation curbed the influence of eunuchs controlling the treasuries . Reforms in court practice curbed  eunuch's influence of the .
 Under Tang Emperor Wuzong, a powerful eunuch handled Buddhist affairs until those who espoused Confucian thought suppressed Buddhism in China . The eunuchs handled Buddhism under Tang Emperor .
 Through the centuries, eunuchs served as personal secretaries and envoys to tributary states, as tax auditors, and as members of secret police systems . Eunuchs are eunivers who have been involved in secret societies throughout Europe .
 Chinese and Manchu rulers trusted their eunuchs due to their being entirely dependent upon them . Eunuchs often exploited their privileged positions in order to gain power .
 Their ability to manipulate a court’s bureaucracy led to flagrantly corrupt and oppressive eunuch dictatorships, which resulted in reigns of terror . The eunuchs were able to manipulate the bureaucracy in the way of manipulating the courts .
 They exerted considerable influence in the Inner Court, while using a security system to terrorize court scholars and officials . They eventually exerted considerable . influence in . The security system was set up in place of the court scholars .
 During later decades, Manchu emperors distrusted and restricted their eunuchs’ official power by reducing their numbers to only a few thousand . The Manchu eunuchies were restricted to just a handful of thousands .
 Because no Manchu princes married ethnic Chinese women, their eunuchs also only transported specified nude and specially prepared Manchu women wrapped in rugs to the imperial beds .
 Confucian-Mencian Paradigm; Han Dynasty; Manchus; Ming Dynasty; Qin Dynasty; Qing Dynasty; Tang Dynasty; . Ming Dynasty . Qin Dynasty . Qing Dynasty . Tang Dynasty .
 The Ever-Victorious Army was a Chinese-sponsored military force operating in the Shanghai area . It quickly evolved from an ineffective collection of Western mercenaries into a Western-officered, Chinesesoldiered army .
 The EVA played a pivotal role in defending Shanghai from occupation by the Taiping, and later it contributed to the defeat of the rebellion .
 British General Charles Staveley also wanted to replace Burgevine with a proper English officer . Viceroy Li Hongzhang did not trust a foreign-led army in his domain, particularly one more successful than his own Xiang Army .
 Banker Takee withheld monthly wages of the EVA in December 1862, provoking a near-mutiny in the ranks . Takee deliberately withheld the monthly wages in order to gain control of the army .
 Burgevine forcefully appropriated the amount in arrears and in the process gave Takee a bloody nose . In early 1863, Burgevin forcefully appropriated a portion of the amount .
 Li’s proclamation was an open challenge to extraterritoriality . The proclamation created considerable support for Burgevine among Shanghai's foreign community . Li's proclamation was open challenge .
 Li also used the incident to impeach and remove both Wu and Takee for taking too much ‘squeeze’ from the army’s accounts . Li also removed both Takee and Wu from the post .
 Burgevine appealed his dismissal to the authorities in Beijing in 1863 . During the spring of 1863, 1863, he appealed for his dismissal .
 In his absence, the command of the EVA had been awarded to Lieutenant John Y Holland of the Royal Marines, who led the army to its only truly disastrous defeat at Taitsang . Meanwhile in his absence in the absence of his command, Lieutenant John Holland led the Army to its
 Gordon achieved victories at Fushan, Taitsang, and Quinsan, after which he relocated the EVA headquarters to the latter place to assume more personal control of the organization .
 Viceroy Li would not reinstate Burgevine; consequently, the American recruited about 30 EVA officers, and they defected over to the Taiping side .
 Burgevine was among the rebels, but never had the autonomy of command that he craved . Gordon defeated him at the famous Patachiao Bridge just south of the Suzhou city wall . When he was defeated, he undertook negotiations for the surrender of his men .
 Burgevine was exiled to Japan, from which he maintained a surprisingly cordial correspondence with Gordon in China . Gordon was also exiled to China .
 When Burgevine secretly returned to China in the summer of 1865, he was captured by Zuo Zongtang’s men and, in all probability, executed on Viceroy Li’S orders .
 The EVA kept the Taiping occupied often relying upon his steamers Hyson and Firefly until he was ready to make the final assault upon Suzhou . Under Gordon the EVA often relied on the steamers to keep his forces occupied .
 Gordon promised rebel generals amnesty if they surrendered, but Viceroy Li beheaded them instead . Gordon promised amnesty if he surrendered, then he was beheaded .
 Gordon immediately resigned from his EVA commission, but was reinstated in the spring of 1864 . Gordon was reinstated to complete the destruction of the rebellion .
 Gordon’s EVA had a series of victories in the regions north and west of Suzhou, however, Gordon also suffered one humiliating defeat . Gordon's EVA also suffered a humiliating defeat at the hands of the Chinese authorities .
 At Waisoo, on March 13, he lost 25 percent of his regiment when they broke formation . He was killed by a bomb blast in March 2013 .
 Gordon often granted amnesty to defeated Taiping soldiers and incorporated them into the EVA, even making reformed rebels into his personal bodyguard . Gordon often made reformed Taiping rebels into bodyguards .
 By late summer of 1864, the rebellion had been effectively suppressed; so the EVA was disbanded . Its best men and artillery were amalgamated with Viceroy Li’s own army . The EVA had its best artillery and men and best men .
 The emperor’s edict granted General Charles ‘Chinese’ Gordon the vaunted Yellow Jacket of the first-rank military Mandarin . Gordon returned back to England as a Victorian hero after the war .
 Hong Xiuquan; Li Hongzhang; Qing Dynasty; Taiping Rebellion; Zuo Zongtang; . Qing Dynasty . Taiping . Rebellion; Qing . Dynasty .
 The Battle of Fei River was a military engagement considered one of the significant battles in Chinese history . The battle was fought in the early 1900s in China .
 Qin lost the battle, the dynasty plunged into civil war while Eastern Jin survived . Eastern Jin and other southern countries survived . The Qin dynasty lost its control of the Qin empire .
 Fu Jian of the Qin dynasty organized a large army of 800,000 men in August to march from Chang’an to stop the Jin’s threat .
 He ordered General Huan Chong to defend the Yangzi River . He also ordered Xie An and Xie Xuan with 80,000 soldiers to defend Huai River . Xie Xuan and Xie An were ordered to protect the Huai river .
 Qin army was made up of conscripted militaries from conquered territories . Led by Fu Jian and his brother Fu Rong, the Qin army consisted of conscripted militaries from the conquered territories.
 Front cavalry corps was from Xianbei, and nomadic cavalry corps came from Xiongnu . Front cavalry was from the front cavalry corps, and front cavalry came from front cavalry . For example, front cavalry was Xian bei .
 Qin army numbered over 800,000, but many did not feel a sense of loyalty to the Qin dynasty . Many were either forced or bribed into joining the Qin army .
 Qin army encamped at the western bank of the Fei River, while the Jin army at the eastern bank . The Qin army and Jin army were both encamped on the eastern banks of the river .
 Xie Xuan sent a message to the Qin suggesting that the Qin army back off slightly to allow a small Jin force to cross the river . Xie Xuan then sent a request for the Qin to allow the Jin army to cross a river to cross .
 Fu Jian thought that the Jin were engaged in a suicidal operation and would give the Qin army a quick victory on the western bank of the Fei River . The Qin army was defeated by the Jin army . Fu Jian believed the Jin had committed a suicide attack .
 Fu Jian ordered a pull-back of his men from the western bank and allowed the Jin force to cross the Fei River . Despite the protests of his generals, Fu Jian refused to allow the Jin forces to cross .
 Qin soldiers were confused and wondered why they had to retreat before a fight . The Qin soldiers had been attacked by Qin soldiers . Qin soldiers thought they were going to die in a battle .
 Jin army took the opportunity and made a quick crossing of the river . The Jin army crossed the river to escape the enemy's wrath .
 Jin troops launched a sudden attack on the withdrawing Qin forces . The Jin troops then launched a surprise attack on Qin forces. Qin forces retreated into a retreat . Qin forces were attacked by Jin troops .
 Fu Jian and his generals were unable to control their troops, who thought they had already lost the battle . Fu Jian's generals thought they were already losing the battle. Fu Jian thought he was losing his troops .
 Taking advantage of this favorable situation, the Jin army pursued the enemy . The Jin army was able to defeat the enemy in the first place .
 Qin troops fled the battle group and threw away much of their own equipment . The Qin troops threw away some of their equipment, including some of the equipment .
 Fu Rong was killed in the battle, and Fu Jian was hit by an arrow but escaped . Fu Jian escaped but was hit with an arrow .
 The brilliant Jin victory ensured the survival of the dynasty and the southern countries . The Jin victory was a crucial victory for the Jin dynasty .
 The Battle of Fei River plunged the Qin dynasty into chaos and civil war . The Qin dynasty was overthrown into chaos after the battle .
 Southern and Northern Dynasties; Qin Dynasty; Sui Dynasty; Three Kingdoms; Xiongnu . Qin and Sui Dynastia: Qin, Sui, Three Kingdoms and Three Kingdoms . Qin Dynasty: Sui . Sui. Dynasty: Three Kingdoms, Three Dynast
 Two major wars occurred during the Republic of China’s Warlord Period (1916- 1927) between two warlords over the control of the central government . Fengtian-Zhili War was the first of two major wars in China's history between warlords .
 During the Warlord Period, some military commanders of the army controlled a region or several provinces . The central government lost control of the country .
 Warlord armies divided the country among themselves and waged wars against each other . Seven or eight major warlord armies fought in the country .
 They exercised autonomous political power by virtue of their personal control of their military force . They exercised . personal control . of their own control of the military force, they say .
 Among the major warlords were the Fengtian clique and the Zhili clique . Among the most powerful warlords are the Fengs and Zhili clans .
 The two groups had been engaged in some conflicts over the areas along the Great Wall in the early 1920s . The two sides had been involved in some clashes over some areas along Great Wall .
 The first major war between the Fengtian and Zhili took place between April 28 and May 5, 1922 . First major war was fought between the two sides in 1922 .
 At that time, the Zhili clique had the support of the British and Americans, while the Japanese backed the Fengtian clique . At that point, the Chinese and British backed the Chinese .
 Fengtian clique replaced Premier Jin Yupeng with Liang Shiyi, who was prone to support the Fengtians . Liang was the prime minister of China's first government .
 Zhang Zuolin and Duan Qirui formed a military coalition under the Fengtian to attack the Zhili force . With the support of the central government, the coalition attacked Zhili forces .
 Zhang's troops, totaling 120,000, entered the Great Wall through Shanhaiguan in April . In April, Zhang's forces entered the wall, which is one of the world's most famous walls .
 Zhang arrived at Junliangchen, Hebei, on April 28, and ordered an all-out attack against Zhili troops . Zhang ordered an attack on the Zhili forces . Zhang: "I am not satisfied with the results of the attack"
 Wu Peifu, commander of the Zhili force, concentrated 100,000 troops to defend their territories against Fengtian’s attacks at Machang and Changxindian . The Zhili forces concentrated their troops to protect their territories .
 Wu's strategy was to attack the enemy from the rear to cut off their supply lines and transportation from the north . Wu’s strategy was . to attack from the . rear to . cut off . their supply . lines . Wu was attacked by the . enemy from . the rear
 Zhang had to withdraw his troops out of the Great Wall through Shanhaiguan . Zhang was forced to withdraw troops from the wall . Zhang's troops had to be withdrawn from the Wall . Zhang is believed to be the first Chinese emperor to leave the wall in China .
 The Fengtian clique agreed to return back to Manchuria . The Zhili clique controlled the central government in Beijing .
 Cao Kun became the president of the central government in October 1923 . Cao Kun was the first Chinese leader to become president of China in 1923 .
 The Zhili clique intended to unite China by force with the support of the central government . After the first Zhili-Fengtian War, the Zhili group wanted to unify China . They intended to do so with the help of the government .
 Some Western countries did not want to see the reunification of China . In addition, they gained the support of some Western countries .
 Zhang Zuolin commanded 250,000 troops and entered the Great Wall in two places, Chifeng and Chengde . Zhang entered China's Great Wall at two places . Zhang was one of the first Chinese to enter the wall .
 In respond to Zhang’s invasion, Wu Peifu led 200,000 troops in defense . Zhang invaded China in the early 1900s . Zhang's invasion was the first invasion of China .
 There was an internal power struggle between Marshal Wu Peifu and General Feng Yuxiang (18821948) inside the Zhili command . However, there was also a power struggle inside the Zili command in China .
 Feng and his troops left the Zhili group and formed the new Guomin Army against Zhili . Later, Feng joined the Guomin army and formed a new army .
 Feng's Guomin Army defeated Wu’s troops . Wu reorganized his forces and marched toward Beijing, but Feng’‘Guomin Army’ defeated Wu .
 Zhang Zuolin, along with Feng Yuxiang, created a new provisional government in Beijing . Zhang created the provisional government of China's first provisional government .
 Anhui’s clique Duan Qirui was selected as a figurehead to balance the interests of Zhang and Feng . Duan is the figurehead of the clique chosen to balance Zhang's interests with Feng's .
 They also invited Sun Yat-sen to Beijing from Guangzhou to discuss the reunification of China . They invited Sun to Beijing to discuss reunification with China .
 China, Republic of China of; Great Wall; Guomindang; Jiang Jieshi; Manchuria; Northern Expedition . Sun Yat-sen; Warlord Period; Yuan Shikai. Great Wall of China, China's Great Wall .
 CCP combined the Eighth Route Army with provincial military forces to assemble conventional forces into four standing field armies that were supported by militia and guerrilla elements . The CCP high command combined their forces with provinces and militia elements .
 On November 10, 1946, the Central Military Commission of the CCP established the Northwest Field Army, including the former Jin-Sui Field Army and Jin-Bei field Army .
 The reorganization indicated a shift toward generic geographic identifiers rather than provinces as a naming convention to meet the CCP's needs in winning the Chinese Civil War, which broke out in 1946 .
 Field army defeated GMD offensive and annihilated more than 14,000 GMD troops . The field army defeated the GMD offensive and annihilated 14,000 troops .
 These campaigns laid a solid foundation for a strategic counterattack and strengthened the revolutionary bases in the ShanGan-Ning region . The campaigns laid the foundation for an effective counterattack .
 Peng Dehuai was the commander and political commissar of the Northwest Field Army . He was appointed in July 1947 as the commander of the North American Army .
 In January 1949, the CMC established four field armies, including the First Field Army in the northwest, the Second in central China, the Third in eastern China, and the Fourth in the northeast . The CMC was established in 1949 .
 On February 1, 1949 the Northwest Field Army changed its name to the First Field Army of the PLA with Peng as its commander and political commissar . Peng was Peng's first commander of the North American Field Army .
 To continue the CCP victory in northwest China, the CMC reinforced more armies into the First Field Army in spring of 1949 .
 By this time, the total number of the First Field Army had reached 344,000 troops . By this point, it had reached a total of 344,500 troops .
 First Field Army launched its offensive campaign against GMD troops in the northwest region in July 1949 . GMD soldiers were attacked by the First Field army in the region .
 The CMC issued the order to disband the PLA field army structure in April 1950 . After the founding of the People’s Republic of China in October 1949, the order was issued .
 It reorganized the PLA armies into military regions, thus bringing the PLA full circle in terms of its order of battle and command structure . The PLA armies were reorganized in a military region .
 The First Field Army was reorganized into the Northwest Military Region under the command of Peng Peng Peng .
 During the early years of the Cultural Revolution, the People's Liberation Army moved to the center of domestic politics in 1967-1969 . The People’s Liberation Army became a major factor in domestic politics .
 Marshal Lin became the second most powerful leader in the country, next to Mao, in 1969 . Mao also made Lin his successor in 1969, and Lin became his successor .
 Lin and Mao differed in strategy, foreign policy, and domestic politics . Lin: Mao differed from Mao to Mao's Mao era . Mao's legacy will be remembered for his role in China .
 Mao proposed that the PRC Constitution be amended to eliminate the post of the head of state, Lin made a counterproposal that Mao should assume the presidency . Lin made the counter proposal when Mao proposed to assume the post .
 On the surface this was only a question of whether or not to retain the post of Head of State . However, this is not the only question of who will retain the title .
 Tensions between Mao and Lin mounted at the Second Plenary Session of the Ninth Central Committee of the CCP from August 23 to September 6, 1970 . Mao was Mao's chief of the Communist Party of China's Communist Party Party .
 Lin proposed a new seat of “state chairman” that would effectively limit and weaken Mao’s authority and power in office . Lin and his established group of supporters proposed the new seat . Lin: "State chairman" would be effectively weakened by Mao's authority .
 Mao summoned an enlarged meeting of the Politburo and sternly criticized Lin and the military, sealing Lin’s fate . Mao summoned the enlarged meeting to discuss Lin's role in the military .
 Mao’s concluding speech struck the party leaders like a thunderclap . The plenum ended on September 6 with Mao's concluding speech . Mao's closing speech was Mao's parting speech .
 Some of Lin’s lieutenants were criticized, compelled to make self-criticisms, or removed from office . After the stormy meeting at Lushan, some of Lin's lieutenagers were criticized .
 Mao continued his efforts to reduce Lin's influence in early 1971 by reorganizing the Beijing Military Region and replacing the troops of the former Fourth Field Army (Lin’s army) with Chen Yi's (1901 — 1972) Third Field Army in the capital to weaken and undermine Lin
 Lin sent his son Lin Liguo to Shanghai in February 1971, where the latter called together some close staff members and commanders of the air force and local garrison, including Zhou Yuchi, Yu Xinye, and Li Weixin . Lin's son Lin sent him to Shanghai
 The plan criticized Mao’s policy in the Cultural Revolution and his personality cult . The plan was criticized by Mao's policy in China .
 In March 1971, Lin Liguo established a combat detachment, nicknamed the “joint fleet,” headed by Mi Jianong in Guangzhou . The detachment was established in March 1971 and is now a combat unit .
 On March 31, 1971, Lin Liguo called his joint fleet, consisting of Chen Liyun, Jiang Tengjiao, Wang Weiguo, and Zhou Jianping, to Shanghai for another secret meeting .
 The meeting placed Chen Liyun in command of Hangzhou, Wang Weiguo in command Shanghai, and Zhou Jianping in command Nanjing . The meeting also placed Wang Jiang in command .
 Jiang Tengjiao was appointed liaison between the three locations for efficient coordination . Jiang is a liaison between China and the U.S. mainland China .
 In April, Lin Liguo instructed Wang Weiguo to install a training site in Shanghai for establishing armed forces for the counterrevolutionary coup d’etat . The site will be used to establish forces for a coup d'etat, according to the Chinese government .
 Those trained were taught special sets of skills including arresting people, hand-tohand combat, light weapon skills and driving skills .
 In the Mao-Lin struggle, most of the military leaders chose Mao and denounced Lin . Mao and Lin were involved in the struggle for China's communist revolution .
 Zhou Yuchi and Yu Xinye phoned Gu Tongzhou to correspond about Mao Zedong’s discussions with leading personnel and their plans . On September 5, Zhou Yuchu and Yu Yinye were able to correspond with Gu Tong Zhou .
 The Lin family realized that Mao was personally directing the political struggle against them . Mao personally directed the struggle against the Lin family . The family believed Mao was directing their political struggle .
 Lin Biao would be the next victim of Mao’s brutal political movement . Just like Peng Dehuai (P’eng Te-huai) , Liu Shaoqi (Liu Shao-ch’i) and Deng Xiaoping (Deng Xia
 Plans were worked out to assassinate Mao by attacking his train on its way back from Shanghai to Beijing . Flamethrowers, 40-mm bazookas, dynamite and bombs from the air were among the targets .
 There were also plans to blow up the oil depot in Shanghai where Mao would be murdered in the commotion, or let Wang Weiguo carry out the plot during Mao's reception .
 Lin Liguo and Zhou Yuchi were informed that Mao Zedong had realized the danger and left Shanghai earlier than his schedule . Mao's death was the first time he had left Shanghai since the fall of September 11 .
 The assassination plot had fallen through, and the joint fleet members planned to flee south into Guangzhou, Guangzhou . The joint fleet was planning to flee to Guangzhou in China .
 On September 13, at the urging of his wife and son, Lin and his family fled . Lin's family was forced to flee after he was found guilty of murder in September .
 Lin Liguo commandeered a trident jet at the Shanhaiguan Airport northeast of Beijing . The jet was the first of its kind to fly from China's capital Beijing .
 Lin Biao, his family, crew members, and others on board, eight people, were killed in the crash . The crash killed eight people in total, including the crew of the plane .
 The same day, Zhou Yuchi, Yu Xinye, and Li Weixing hijacked a helicopter at Beijing’s Shahe Airport to flee with state secrets and a large sum of U.S. dollars . The group of three hijackers hijacked the helicopter and fled with
 The helicopter pilot saw through their scheme and tried to take them back to Beijing, but was killed when they landed . The pilot was killed by the helicopter pilot when he saw through the scheme .
 The Lin incident was the most disruptive political event since the inception of the Cultural Revolution . Lin incident is most disruptive event in China's history since the start of Cultural Revolution.
 Mao approved of Lin’s treasonous flight days after his plane crash . Mao approved the move with the approval of Mao's approval of the Central Committee .
 Mao informed military officers and commanders at divisional and senior levels . Ten days later, Mao informed them of his plans . Mao told them of the plot . Mao's secret plan was revealed to the Soviets in October .
 On September 24, the Central Committee dismissed all the key members of Lin’s group from their positions . The Central Committee dismisses all the members of the group .
 The chairman said Lin had controlled the armed forces for more than 10 years . Lin said many problems existed in the military, and that the PLA must be unified and prepared for war .
 First suggested by Zhou Enlai in 1964 and 1975, this plan required sweeping governmental policy changes . The plan was first proposed in 1964, 1975, and required sweeping government changes .
 Deng wanted to move China past the devastating Cultural Revolution . While Hua tried to continue his predecessor’s directives, Deng wanted China to move past the Cultural Revolution.
 Deng still disagreed with Mao’s theories regarding a classless society . Deng was politically rehabilitated in May 1973 after being accused of taking the capitalist road in 1967 .
 Because his proposal included elements of capitalism, this left him open to criticism from radicals . However, as a pragmatist, he pushed forward .
 In 1978, after the four modernizations won approval by the Central Committee, ideology took a secondary position to material incentives . Ideology took a second place to ideology in 1978, according to the Communist Party .
 Under Deng’s leadership in the 1980s, China experienced a decade of unprecedented national and international change, with “openings” occurring in many areas . China experienced unprecedented national, international change under Deng's leadership .
 Reforms to agriculture, industry, the military, and science and technology helped create a new, modernized China . Reforms were made in the 1980s and 1990s to create a modernized nation of China .
 Government officials soon noted the growth of the middle class and increases in luxury goods and Western influences .
 Under decollectivization, farmers across the country began working on family farms rather than at state-run communes . The country has seen a dramatic decline in agricultural production since the 1980s .
 Utilizing mechanized farm equipment and chemical fertilizers, they achieved greater gains in agricultural production and improved living standards . Utilization of mechanized farming equipment and fertilizers led to greater productivity .
 Under similar conditions in the business and industrial fields, the private sector expanded at a breathtaking pace . The private sector grew at a rapid rate in the 1990s .
 Citizens took advantage of opportunities not only to produce goods, but also to sell them for personal profit . Citizens took opportunities to produce and sell their goods . Citizens were encouraged to take advantage of the opportunities .
 Changes to infrastructure led to the creation of new transportation lines and oil pipelines . New industries also appeared in rural areas, providing goods for local markets .
 Government officials allowed business incentives and created special economic zones along the southeast coast of China . This attracted foreign investors and consultants who explained their advanced technology .
 Students once again returned to their university classes or took the opportunity to continue their studies abroad . Students were able to return to university or continue to study abroad .
 Specialists in the science and technology fields received respect rather than being shrouded in suspicion or persecuted . Specialists who had already received their training abroad now received respect .
 As Deng Xiaoping had hoped, the standard of living within his country improved as citizens became more economically prosperous . The standard of life in China has improved since Deng's first term .
 After he visited the U.S. in 1979, this diplomatic opening also led to dramatic increases in international relations . This diplomatic opening led to increased international relations, he says .
 Tourism increased, and exchanges of experts in the various fields encouraged the sharing of information to assist the country’s leaders in developing the four modernizations .
 The army was formerly known as the Northeastern People’s Autonomic Army . The Northeast Field Army was formerly the Northeast Democratic United Army and the Northeast People's Liberation Army .
 On October 31, 1945, the Communist Party established the Northeastern Autonomic Army . Lin Biao was the commander of the army . He was the first commander .
 In March 1946, the army engaged its main force with GMD troops in the Battle of Siping . GMD forces engaged in the battle with the army in March 1946 .
 Both sides employed more than 400,000 troops in the battle . The battle lasted from April 8 to May 18 . Both sides were involved in the fight .
 In order to stop the GMD’s continuing northward march into Manchuria, the army adopted a strategy of “offense in the south and defense in the north” in the region . The GMD has been in the midst of a war with the Russian
 The CCP Central Committee reinforced the army, which had a total of 460,000 men in April 1947 . The CCP was reinforced by the army . The army was reinforced with the help of the party's Central Committee .
 The army shifted its strategy from defense to counteroffense against the GMD force in May 1947 . With continuing reinforcement, the army shifted to counteroffensive .
 In August and September, the army concentrated 12 infantry divisions to attack GMD-held cities and strategic points . The GMD has been at the top of the world for more than a decade .
 By the end of 1947, the army controlled 15 cities in Manchuria . The army had the full advantage of the battlefields in northeastern China .
 On January 1, 1948, the Northeast Democratic United Army changed its name to the Northeast Field Army . Lin Biao was the commander and political commissar of the army . He was the first commander of the Army .
 Main strength of Northeast Field Army moved southward on September 12, launched the Liaoning-Shenyang (LiaoShenhen) Campaign . Northeast field Army launched the campaign against China in China's capital .
 Official PLA records cite 472,000 GMD casualties, which included 109,000 defections and 306,200 prisoners of war . Official records cite 109,00 defections, 306,000 prisoners of the war .
 This was an unprecedented victory for the Communists and would be the beginning of the end for the Nationalist regime in mainland China . This was a victory for China's Communist Party Party Party .
 In January 1949, the CMC established four field armies, including the First Field Army in the northwest, the Second in central China, the Third in east China, and the Fourth in the northeast . The CMC was established in 1949 .
 From November 29, 1948, to January 31, 1949, the army received the order to move south into the Great Wall and launched the Beiping-Tianjin Campaign . The campaign was launched by the Chinese army in 1949 .
 In March, advanced command of the army moved to central and southern China . The advanced command has been in charge of China's army since March .
 Fourth Field Army cooperates with the Second and Third Field Armies to launch an offensive campaign to cross the Yangzi River . The Fourth and Third Army cooperated with the . Second and . Third Field . Armies .
 Fourth Field Army started to move further south after they crossed the Yangzi River . Then the main force of the . Fourth Field . Army began to move south after crossing the river .
 In the summer, the Fourth Field Army traced the remnants of the GMD troops into southern Guangdong and southwestern Guangxi Provinces . The GMD forces are still in China .
 From March 5 to May 1, 1950, two armies under the command of the Fifteenth Army Group of the Fourth Field Army crossed the strait and took over GMD-held Hainan Island .
 Fourth Field Army changed its name to Guangzhou (Canton Military Command) in April 1955 . Guangzhou is now known as Canton Military Command in China .
 Fu joined the warlord army under the command of Marshal Yan Xishan in his hometown . Fu was born on June 2, 1895, in Linyi County, Shanxi Province .
 Fu Zuoyi participated in the Northern Expedition and became the commander of the Fifth Army and the Tianjin Garrison Command in 1927 . In 1927 he was the commander in the Fifth and Tianjin Army .
 He served under the command of Yan Xishan, who had declared his support to the GMD, but later participated in the failed coup against Jiang Jieshi (18871975), president of the Republic of China . He was later involved in a failed coup .
 Fu became governor of Suiyuan Province in Manchuria in the early 1930s . Fu developed a close relationship with Marshal Zhang Xueliang .
 During the Anti-Japanese War , he held numerous commanding positions in northern China . He was a major commander in China's anti-Japanese war .
 As commander of the Seventh Army Group, he fought in Operation Chahar, the Battle of Taiyuan, and the 1939-1940 Winter Offensive Campaign . He fought in China's Second War .
 By the end of World War II, he was the commander of the Twelfth War Regional Command, which included provinces of Jehol, Chahar, and Suiyuan in northern China .
 Fu Zuoyi commanded the GMD’s force of 500,000 men during the Chinese Civil War (19461949) He controlled the critically important Suiyuan-Peiping (Beijing, or Peking) Corridor that separated Manchuria from China proper
 The CCP representatives pressured him to negotiate a peaceful solution in the face of the inevitable Communist takeover . The party's representatives said they wanted a peaceful resolution .
 Jiang suddenly left Fu and flew to Shanghai to help one of his relatives who had trouble with the law . During a critical strategic defense planning meeting of northern China, Jiang suddenly flew away .
 Jiang placed the welfare of his family above the country . Fu Zuoyi and many other GMD commanders felt that Jiang placed his family's welfare above his country . Jiang died in 2011 at the age of 65 .
 Fu Zuoyi began secret negotiations with Lin Biao, commander of the PLA Fourth Field Army . When Communist agents, including Fu’s own daughter as well as his most trusted personal secretary, approached him . Fu began secret talks with the commander of China's fourth field army
 Talks arranged surrender of Fu’s Beiping garrison, totaling 250,000 GMD troops, on January 31, 1949 .
 Fu Zuoyi's contributions to the CCP’s success were rewarded with high posts such as the Minister of Water Resources in 1949-1958 and those in the Chinese People’�s Political Consultative Conference .
 Fu was unable to protect his own family members during the Cultural Revolution . His own daughter, Fu Dongju, was strangled by the Red Guards . Fu's own daughter was killed by Red Guards during the Revolution .
 A peasant-soldier service system acting as the Chinese military reserve during the medieval age . Fubing was a peasant-service system .
 The Chinese Empire in the ancient time maintained a large army for domestic security and social order by creating a central authority and domestic control . The army was created by the ancient Chinese Empire to maintain domestic security .
 The emperors of the Han dynasty (206 BC220 AD) had a regular army of over 1 million men . The Han dynasty had an army of more than 1million men .
 Peasants paid taxes in the form of grain, manual labor, and military service . Peasant farmers paid grain and manual labor in return for food .
 The central government used the taxation system as a recruitment agency to conscribe peasants to meet its needs for national defense and foreign expeditions . The peasants were conscripted to meet the needs of national defense .
 Wei emperors abolished the centralized taxationbased conscription system . Instead, they established a frontier military-farming system as a cost-effective reserve .
 At certain strategic points along the state border, the Wei offered free land on the frontier to poor peasants . Poor peasants signed a land-service lease with the government as farmers in peacetime and soldiers in wartime .
 These peasant-soldiers were armed by the government and trained on a regular basis . The peasant soldiers were armed and trained in a regular way .
 This peasant-soldier reserve later became the fubing as the national military system . The peasant soldier reserve became the mainstay of the army .
 The commanding officers in many cases also served as local administrators . The commanding officer in many of the cases was also a local administrator .
 The generals controlled the civil governments at both the county and provincial levels through the Tang dynasty . From then on, local power continued to increase as the generals controlled local governments .
 Han Dynasty; Han Wudi, Emperor; Song Dynasty; Sui Dynasty; Tang Dynasty; Three Kingdoms . Song Dynasty and Song-Mongol War . Sui and Tang Dynasty: Three Kingdoms.
 Maoists supported the persecution of anyone who did not follow Mao’s directives . Maoists wanted to punish anyone who didn't follow Mao's directives . They supported the persecutions of anyone following Mao's orders .
 Their actions led them to become increasingly unpopular and greatly feared by the Chinese people . Their actions were led to the death of many of them, including their families .
 Zhou Enlai became ill and hospitalized due to bladder cancer . Deng Xiaoping unofficially assumed his duties . Zhou was Zhou's trusted assistant when he was ill .
 Deng had ties to the People’s Liberation Army and had been an important target during the Cultural Revolution . Deng had also recently been politically rehabilitated . This outraged the fanatical Gang of Four, as Deng had recently been .
 Mao’s own health failing, speculation arose concerning who would succeed him as chairman . Mao's own health failed, and speculation arose about his successor . Mao died in 1966 at the age of 60 .
 The Gang of Four thought that designation should fall to one of their group members . Gang of four thought it should be one of the Gangs of Four .
 Mao appointed a favored CCP leader named Hua Guofeng as premier of the State Council . Deng gave the eulogy, but instead of officially naming him premier of China's State Council, Mao appointed him . Hua was the first secretary of the party in Hunan Province .
 Many had come to honor Zhou Enlai’s memory at the traditional day of mourning known as the Qing Ming Festival .
 Jiang and her allies responded by summoning police to disperse the boisterous demonstrators, and fierce rioting erupted . Rioting erupted when the crowd’s animosity became readily apparent, Jiang said . Police were forced to disperse rioting after the demonstration .
 Group blamed Deng Xiaoping for the Qing Ming Tiananmen Square incident . To then rid themselves of their most viable rival, the group blamed him for the incident .
 Mao did not trust the Gang of Four to carry on his legacy . Mao had appeared to be in the strongest political position regarding his succession . Gang of four appeared to have been in the best political position in China .
 In July, after an earthquake that struck the city of Tangshan, Hebei Province, killed hundreds of thousands, a superstitious Chinese populace responded negatively to the Gang of Four's reminder to remain compliant with Mao’s directives . Deng Xiaoping's revolutionary influence has been
 Gang of Four were brought to trial in 1980 accused of ‘persecuting to death’ 34,800 people during the Cultural Revolution . They were accused of having ‘framed and persecuted’ 729,511 other people during their years in power .
 Jiang Qing stood beside Hua as he read the eulogy at the memorial service held in Tiananmen Square on September 18, 2011 .
 Hua ordered the arrests of the radical group and their associates during the early hours of October 6, thereby crushing their planned coup d’etat . Despite this public appearance together, Hua—with the support of important military leaders like Marshal Ye Jianying .
 Many in China, who thought the Gang of Four’s views too fanatical, welcomed the news . Many in the country welcomed the release of the four .
 A national media campaign commenced in which the group faced severe criticism for their excesses carried out during Mao’s Cultural Revolution . The group was accused of excesses during the Cultural Revolution in China .
 The accused spent four years in prison before their show trial began in 1980 . The trial was held in front of TV cameras in the 1980s .
 Jiang and her colleagues stood accused of many crimes, including persecution or killing of thousands of innocent people . Jiang's colleagues were accused of killing or persecution of many of the people .
 The true extent of their criminal activities remains unclear . Because adequate records had not been maintained, the true extent is unclear .
 Many judges estimated that 800,000 persons had been persecuted under the Cultural Revolution . Many deaths either went unreported or were covered up by the police or Red Guard members .
 Jiang Qing, the former actress and the group’s accused ringleader, reacted dramatically to the charges in court . Jiang Qing is accused of being the ringleader of the group . The former actress reacted dramatically in court as she was accused .
 At age 67, and having endured years of solitary confinement, she meant to be heard . She meant to make her voice heard at age 67 .
 She was still shrieking her personal views to the judges as she was dragged away from the proceedings . Vehemently argued that she had been acting under Mao’s great influence . She was dragged from the court by the judges .
 Jiang and Zhang declared their innocence, but each received death sentences . Authorities later commuted these sentences to terms of life imprisonment .
 Yao and Wang, who confessed and repented of their activities at the trial, earned a life and 20-year prison sentence . Both Yao, Wang were sentenced to life and life in prison respectively . The two men were found guilty and sentenced to 20 years respectively .
 Unlike many of their Cultural Revolution victims, none of the condemned suffered rulings of execution . Unlike many other victims of the Cultural Revolution, none were sentenced to death .
 Several conspirators garnered guilty verdicts and lengthy prison terms for their collaborative efforts . The jury convicted several of the conspirators of the crime .
 Gao Gang was a Chinese Communist leader and general . He was born in Hengshan County, Shaanxi Province, around 1902 . He became a Communist Party leader in 1902 .
 Gao Gang was a key leader of Communist forces in Shaanxi during the early 1930s . He was a leader of the Communist Party of Shaanxia . Gang was one of the most prominent leaders of the Chinese Communist Party in China .
 Gao served as the political commissar of the Shaanxi and Gansu Provinces guerrilla forces in 1931 . Gao was a member of the Communist Party of China . He was the leader of the Chinese Communist Party in China .
 Between 1933 and 1934, he was political commissar of the Shaanxi-Gansu Military Committee . He was political commissar between 1933 and 1935 . He died in 1934 .
 Gao helped develop the Soviet area in Yan’an that would provide sanctuary to the survivors of the Long March and to Mao Zedong (1893— 1976), who arrived there on October 19, 1935 . Gao worked in Yan'an to develop the area that provided sanctuary
 Gao was sent on a secret mission of top Chinese leaders to Moscow in May 1949 . In May 1949, he was sent to Moscow on secret mission to Moscow . Gao became a prominent figure in China's political circles .
 Gao headed the Chinese committee to handle Soviet loans and material assistance . Along with Liu Shaoqi (18981969), Gao was one of two Chinese leaders in the Soviet-era .
 Gao was especially powerful in the region because he held all major posts of the military . Gao held the most powerful posts of all military posts .
 He maintained close ties to senior government and military leaders in the USSR, as well as railway and resource interests in Manchuria .
 On August 4, 1950, a Politburo meeting convened in Beijing to discuss accelerating preparations to assist the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in the Korean War .
 Mao Zedong ordered Gao to mobilize the Northeast Border Defense Force to prepare for intervention in Korea by late August 1950 . Gao was ordered to prepare the force for intervention by August 5, 1950 .
 Gao sent a telegram to Mao suggesting that mobilization be postponed . With preparations ineffective, Gao suggested postponing mobilization . Gao: "It's time to get ready for mobilization"
 Mao responded by informing Gao that preparations must be completed no later than September 30 . Mao responded to Gao's request that preparations be completed by September 30. Mao told Gao to prepare no later this month .
 Beijing increased pressure on Gao to complete mobilization for the possible intervention . During late August, Gao was under pressure from the Chinese government to prepare for intervention .
 Reports claim Gao supported Mao’s decision to intervene in Korea . Other reports contradict this, claiming that Gao backed Mao's decision to invade Korea . Gao is believed to have been assassinated in 1945 .
 Mao’s decision to intervene prevailed prevailed on October 5, 1950 . In any case, it was a good thing for Mao to intervene in the Chinese revolution .
 In the formal order of October 8, the NBDF was renamed Chinese People’s Volunteer Force . Gao is in charge of supplies, transportation, and other rear services .
 Mao sent PLA Chief of Staff Xu Xiangqian (Hsu Hsiang-ch’ian) to Moscow to secure munitions and military technology . Mao sent him to Moscow in the early summer of 1951 to secure weapons and technology from Moscow .
 Gao later was sent to assist, but the Soviets hesitated, fearing war with the U.S. and being distrustful of China . Gao was sent by the Soviets to assist in the battle .
 He was responsible for training, recruiting, organizing, organizing and arming all forces . He was also responsible for recruiting and organizing all forces in Afghanistan .
 He also commanded the militia and served as the custodian of its arms and ammunition . He was also custodian and custodian .
 Gao supervised support to specialized units such as air defense, railway, airborne, and amphibious units within northeast China . Gao also supervised support for specialized units, such a . air defense and railway units .
 Gao operated the local military schools and training centers, and he handled all inductions and separations . Gao was responsible for many of the country's military deaths .
 Both Gao and Rao Shushi, political commissar of Shanghai, were accused of building ‘independent kingdoms’ and following erroneous economic policies . Gao was accused of following erroneous policies .
 Gao established one-man management within factories rather than relying on revolutionary revolutionary factory management committees . Mao Zedong hated Gao's innovation, which he hated . Gao, for example, had established one man management in factories, not revolutionary committees .
 Rao and Gao were accused of trying to seize power from Zhou Enlai and Liu Shaoqi . Rao was accused of wanting to assume the senior positions next to Mao . Mao was Mao's first Chinese leader to take over .
 Gao's close links to the Soviet Union may also have been a factor in his downfall . Gao’s close ties to the country's former Soviet Union also a factor .
 For his alleged crimes, Gao was deprived of all his posts and expelled from the party . Gao has been accused of defrauding all posts and being a member of the Communist Party .
 Deng Xiaoping later announced that Gao Gang had been guilty of the ultimate treason by committing suicide in 1954 . Gao's suicide was declared a suicide by the Chinese state of the Great Depression .
 General Departments of the People's Liberation Army are the most important part of the PLA’s chain of command . The general departments, or general headquarters, are most important parts of the command chain of the army .
 These departments make strategic decisions, provide military intelligence, plan and execute operations, recruit and train troops, research and develop new military technology, and secure China’s borders .
 They command the Chinese armed forces, including army, air force, navy, and strategic missile force . They are responsible for most of the country's armed forces .
 During the Anti-Japanese War (19371945), the party maintained its control of the armed forces after the CCP-GMD coalition established in early 1937 . The party maintained control of armed forces during the war . During the war, the party was in charge of the military .
 In August 1937, the CCP Central Committee established a new Central Military Commission . In order to command its own troops, the new commission was established .
 It includes the general staff, general political tasks, logistics, and logistics departments . It included the general . political tasks and logistics, logistics and medic departments .
 The CMC continued to serve as the high command of the CCP forces during the Chinese Civil War . The CCP defeated the GMD forces and took over the country .
 After the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the central government established its own Central Military Commission, separate from the CCP’s . The central government set up its own central military commission after the revolution .
 In September 1954, the First National People’s Congress promulgated a new constitution . The constitution created a new National Defense Commission under the central government and a new Ministry of Defense .
 Marshal Peng Dehuai became the first defense minister in this new configuration . Marshal Peng dehuai is the first Chinese defense minister to become a minister in the new configuration.
 On October 11, 1954, the PLA established eight general departments, which paralleled those in the armed forces of the Soviet Union . The departments include the existing General Staff Department, General Political Department , General Logistics Department and General Officer Corps .
 As with the Soviet Red Army, the GSD carried out staff and operational functions of the PLA and implemented modernization plans . GSD also implemented plans for modernization of the Soviet-era military .
 Headed by the chief of the General Staff, the department served as the headquarters for the ground forces . The department also contained directorates for the other armed services .
 The GPD was responsible for ideological indoctrination, political loyalty, morale, morale and personnel records, personnel records and cultural activities, discipline, and military justice .
 One of the political commissar’s primary tasks was the supervision of the party organization through party committees at the battalion level and above or through party branches at the company level . The political commissar's responsibility was to supervise the party .
 In the 1960s, the GPD exerted a considerable amount of political influence throughout the defense establishment . The GPD was a major influence in the defense industry .
 GLD was the least politically influential of the three general departments . The GLD is the least political influential of all three departments in the United States .
 GLD supervised production, supply, transportation, housing, pay, and medical services . GLD was headed by a chief, headed by the chief of the GLD .
 Before the Korean War, most of this support came from the civilian populace . Most of the support was organized most frequently by commissars . The Korean War was the first Korean War of its kind .
 After the fall of Marshal Peng in 1959, Marshal Lin Biao terminated many of Peng’s military reforming programs . After Peng's fall in 1959 the new defense minister terminated many military reforms programs .
 This commanding system of the PLA continued for almost 30 years until 1998 . The PLA continued to be in charge of the Chinese military .
 During Mao’s Cultural Revolution, the three general departments became paralyzed . The three departments were paralyzed during the Cultural Revolution . Mao's Cultural Revolution was the result of the revolution .
 On August 23, 1966, Lin Biao called for “three-month turmoil” in the PLA at the CMC Standing Committee meeting . Lin Bao called for three months of turmoil in the military .
 On October 5, the CMC and General Political Department issued an urgent instruction that all the military academies and institutes should dismiss their classes and allow their cadets to become fully involved in the Great Cultural Revolution . The CMC issued an order to dismiss classes, allowing their students to
 In these general departments, commanders and officers were expelled from their positions . In some cases, they were also expelled from the positions .
 In the course of the cruel questioning sessions, many were tormented or beaten to death . Many of the victims were tortured or killed in the brutal sessions .
 Lin’s followers and leftists called for ‘destroying the GPD hell’ and overthrowing General Xiao Hua, director of GPD . General Xiao Hao was ousted from the General Political Department on July 25 .
 Many defense works were destroyed, and regular training actually stopped . Regular training was stopped .
 From 1966 to 1976, the PLA general departments experienced tremendous ups and downs that corresponded with international as well as domestic politics . The PLA general department was one of China's most powerful military branches .
 After Mao’s death in 1976, Deng Xiaoping, the second generation of the CCP leadership, launched a reforming movement in China, including military reform . Then, after Mao's death in . 1976, he launched a reform movement, including the military reform, in China .
 In the mid-1980s, Deng downsized the PLA forces by 1 million troops within two years . Deng also downsized China's military in the 1980s, downinging the PLA force .
 Jiang Zemin became the chairman of both the CCP and CMC as the third generation of Chinese leadership in 1989 . He is now chairman of the CMC and the CCP, as well as the Chinese Communist Party .
 The three general departments play a more important role in the high command than the other three . The three departments are more important than the three generals .
 In 1998, the CMC created a unified General Armaments Department alongside the three departments in a major overhaul of its command and control, logistics, and armament mechanisms . The CMC has been in charge of the U.S. since 1998 .
 Genghis Khan (Chinggis Khan or Chengiz Khan) was able to unite various Mongolian clans into an army that defeated everyone in its path . He created an empire that eventually stretched from Beijing to the Caspian Sea .
 The expansion of the Mongols’ power affected not only inner Asia, China, and Korea but Russia and Hungary as well . In each place the legacy of their terror was long remembered .
 Genghis was a skilled tactician and ruler, one who successfully organized a multiethnic state . He once said that there was nothing better in life than killing one's enemies, stealing their horses and cattle, and taking their women .
 Temujin, the man who would later become Genghis Khan, was born ca.62 AD to a powerful Mongolian family . He was the son of Genghi Khan, who would become a Mongolian ruler .
 Most of what is known of his early life is found in the Secret History of the Mongols, a history compiled about two generations after his death .
 Genghis found great help in his father’s friend, Toghril Khan, the leader of the allied Kereit tribe . The next few years were difficult ones, but in that time, he was able to find help from Toghil Khan .
 Toghril helped to rescue Genghis’s wife, Borte, who was abducted by the Merkit . Among other acts of assistance, Toghil helped to save Genghi’S wife, who is still alive .
 Toghril provided Genghis with a military force and convinced Jamuka to assist them . Jamuka, Genghi’s childhood friend, was Genghs’ childhood friend . Toghil provided Toghri with military force, Jamuka joined them .
 Genghis then went after other tribes, including the Jurkin, which, like the Merkit, was destroyed . The Jurkin and Merkit tribes were destroyed in the same way .
 Genghis killed all of the Jurkin’s nobility and took its commoners as soldiers and servants . The Jurkin was the last tribe to live under Genghi, who killed all its nobility .
 The absorption of conquered peoples into the Mongol Empire would become a common practice . The absorption would be common practice in the Mongol empire .
 Genghis and Toghril joined the attack on the Tatars in China's Jin dynasty . Genghi and his brother Toghil were the two men who fought against the Tatar in China .
 When Genghis had amassed enough power, he went after the Tatars again and destroyed them . When he had enough power he went on to destroy them again, he attacked them .
 Genghis is said to have killed any Tatar who was taller than a cart axle . He then absorbed the Tatar children into the Mongol Empire . The Mongol Empire was founded in the 17th Century .
 Genghis’s power base was dealt a blow when he and Jamuka had a falling-out . Jamuka and Genghi had a fall-out in the 17th century . The two tribesmen had a dispute over the territory .
 The Mongols split between the two men, with Toghril, Genghis’s old ally, aligning himself with Jamuka . Jamuka was Jamuka, the daughter of Toghil, the son of Genghi, who died in the process .
 Genghis ultimately prevailed over both Toghril's Kereit tribe and Jamuka’s forces . Jamuka's forces were defeated in the Battle of Genghi .
 Genghis created not only an experienced, highly mobile army, but also a very large one . In fighting other Mongol tribes and their neighbors, Genghi created a very strong army .
 Each of the commanders was personally loyal to him, which meant that Genghis could replace them and that older, usually stronger ties of family were less of a threat . Each of these commanders were personally loyal .
 Genghis created another unit, his own special guard of 10,000 men, many of whom were the sons of his generals . Many of the soldiers were sons of Genghi's generals .
 As the Mongol military moved away from the clan system, so did Mongol society . Both the military and society became more feudalistic . The Mongol military and Mongol society both became feudal .
 Mongol expansion began in earnest once Genghis had neutralized the threat of neighboring states . Mongol expansion in China began in 17th Century China . Mongol invasion began in 18th Century Europe .
 Genghis’s rapid expansion of power was first felt with the Mongol conquest of China . The rapid expansion was felt in the early years of the Mongol Empire .
 Around 1206, Genghis campaigned against the Tangut kingdom of Xi Xia in what is today part of Tibet and sections of northern China . Genghi campaigned in what now is part of the Tibetan region of Tibet .
 The war against the Jin lasted until 1234, though other matters often commanded the great khan's attention during that time .
 Khwarezm Empire executed several Mongol envoys . Khwarem Empire ruler executed several envoys during the Khwarzm-era .
 Genghis turned toward Khwarezm. He left Muqali, one of his generals, in charge of continuing the fight against the Chinese .
 While Genghis was away, the Xi Xia and the Jin united against the Mongols . The Xi Xia, the Jin and the Xia Xia were able to defeat the Mongolian invaders .
 Having avenged himself against the Khwarezm, Genghis headed back to Xi Xia in 1225 .
 When he arrived with his 180,000 troops, Genghis found a force of 300,000 Xi Xia . Genghi arrived with 180,00 troops, with 300,00 Xi Xia. Xi Xia was the largest force in the world .
 Genghis left some of his forces to lay siege to the Xi Xia capital, while his son Ogadai took another portion west . The rest of his troops moved to China’s southern border .
 In addition to his wars in Central Asia and China, he also threatened Korea, which out of fear became subject to him . He also threatened North Korea .
 Under Genghis, many other peoples were absorbed into the Mongol confederation . The confederation made his empire a multiethnic state . The Mongol empire was a multi-niverse state .
 There is little doubt that Genghis was a brutal leader, particularly toward cities, but he nonetheless did some good in his time . While there was little doubt he was a ruthless leader, he was also a good leader . He was the first Mongol ruler to conquer cities .
 Genghis mandated the creation and use of written Mongolian . He was illiterate himself himself . Genghi also mandated the use of Mongolian in his own country .
 His enthusiasm often meant forcibly moving artisans from their homelands . He generally encouraged the arts, but often forced them from their homes .
 He united the Mongols, who until his time had lived a difficult, pastoral life in the Central Asian steppes . He also united the Mongolian people .
 On August 18, 1227, Genghis died from wounds probably sustained either in battle or while hunting . Genghi died of wounds likely sustained either battle or hunting .
 Genghis’s descendants went on to threaten Austria, Japan, Persia, and Poland . Genghi's descendants also threatened Austria and Japan .
 Kublai Khan capitalized on Genghis’s ideas to create one of the greatest empires in Asian history . Genghi Khan's grandson, Genghai Khan, created one of Asia's most successful empires .
 Mongols, Cavalry of; Song Dynasty, Song Dynasty; Song-Mongol War; Yuan Dynasty. Jin Dynasty; Kublai Khan; Korea . Korea; Korea; Mongols; Mongolols; Mongol Cavalry . Mongols were also known as the Mongols
 The Grand Canal of China, 1,114 miles long with 24 locks and some 60 bridges, is the oldest and longest canal in the world . Grand Canal is the world's longest canal .
 The Grand Canal runs from Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, to Beijing in north China . It is the longest canal system in the world .
 The Grand Canal was a major transportation hub in the past 1,500 years . It joined the Yangzi River, Yellow River and Huai River, Huai river, Hai River, and other rivers .
 The Grand Canal is renowned as one of the most impressive examples of traditional Chinese architecture .
 A canal was constructed in the late Spring and Autumn Period of the Zhou dynasty . The canal was built for trading purposes, as well as to ship supplies north .
 The canal connected the Yangzi River to the Huai River by means of existing waterways, lakes, and marshes . The canal, completed in three years, was completed in 2012 .
 It took more than six years to complete this great project, known as the Grand Canal . The Grand Canal was completed more than 6 years ago .
 Approximately half of the 3 million peasants who worked on the project died of hunger and exhaustion . The project contributed to the collapse of the Sui dynasty in China .
 During the Yuan dynasty (12711368), the Mongols moved the capital of China to Beijing and renovated the canal . The canal was moved to Beijing in order to move the capital to Beijing .
 A summit section was dug to link Hangzhou and Beijing with a direct north-south waterway . For the first time, a summit section has been dug in Hangzhou, Beijing .
 Between 1411 and 1415, a total of 165,000 peasants were forced to clean the canal bed and build new channels, embankments, and canal locks . The canal bed was cleaned by peasants between 1411 to 1415 . The new channels and locks were built between 14
 During the Qing dynasty, many of the canal sections were not functional, and some parts returned to flat fields . Some parts were not fully functional during the Qing Dynasty .
 After the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, the need for economic growth led the Beijing government to order extensive restoration work .
 The Grand Canal is used primarily to transport vast amounts of bulk goods such as bricks, gravel, sand, diesel, and coal .
 The pound lock was invented in 984 in response to the requirements of greater safety for the travel of barge ships along rough waters of the Grand Canal . A doublegate system, known as the pound lock, was invented by 984 .
 This system allowed ships to wait within a gated space while the water could be drained to appropriate levels . This system was designed to allow ships to stay in the water while it was drained .
 From Sui to Qing dynasties, the Grand Canal was the main artery between northern and southern China . The canal was essential for the transportation of grain to the imperial capital .
 At its height, more than 8,000 boats transported 240,000-360,000 metric tons of grain during the Tang dynasty every year . At the height of the dynasty, 8,300 boats transported more than 240,00 metric tons .
 The Grand Canal helped the imperial army to become self-sufficient farmers while stationed at the northern frontier, shipping food supplies easily from south to north . The canal also helped the army become selfsufficient farmers .
 The canal promoted political integration between northern and southern China, as it had long been a government-run messenger route for the past 1,000 years .
 During the Ming dynasty, official courier stations were placed at intervals of approximately 20 miles, and each courier station was given a different name . Each courier station is given a separate name .
 The expediency of transport along the Grand Canal also helped make possible the travel of emperors to southern China for inspections .
 The canal greatly improved the imperial administration and military defenses of China . Thereafter, the canal was used to improve imperial administration, military defenses .
 Grand Canal also contributed to the Sino-Western cultural exchange . The Grand Canal was also a major source of cultural exchange in China .
 Marco Polo recounted the Grand Canal’s arched bridges in addition to the stores and booming trade of its cities in the thirteenth century . Marco Polo , for example, recounted the grand canal's arched bridge's arches .
 The famous Roman Catholic missionary Matteo Ricci traveled from Nanjing (Nanking) to Beijing on the canal at the end of the sixteenth century . Also, the famous Catholic missionary . Ricci . traveled from . Nanking to Beijing .
 Grand Canal contributed greatly to China’s economy in the past 2,000 years . The Grand Canal is the largest canal in China's history . The canal was built in the early 1900s .
 The canal was mainly used for shipping grain but also transported other commodities . The corridor along the canal developed into an important economic ring, promoting trade and strengthening economic relations .
 China, People’s Republic of; Great Wall, Great Wall; Kangxi, Emperor; Ming Dynasty; Mongols; Qianlong, Emperor . Song Dynasty; Song-Mongol War; Sui Dynasty; Tang Dynasty; Yuan Dynasty; Zhou Dynasty . Sui,
 The Great Wall extends from Shanghai Pass (Shanhaiguan) to Jiayu Pass . It is a total of about 4,500 miles long .
 The Great Wall is one of China's most important symbols of its strength and endurance . It has suffered considerable damage due to warfare and weather over its long life . It remains a symbol of China’s strength and strength .
 Communist leader Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung) reportedly told the Chinese people, “If you have not climbed the Great Wall, you cannot call yourself a great man,” visits to the wall have increased throughout the modern period .
 Traditionally, most Chinese have regarded the wall as a cultural barrier as well as a military one . It is a demarcation point separating their ‘civilized” land from the ‘barbarian” lands to the north .
 Most foreign tourists visit it when traveling in China . At the same time, the nonChinese world has also become captivated by the wall .
 The United Nations recognized the importance of the Great Wall to all of human history in 1987 . The structure was declared a United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization World Heritage site .
 When construction of the Great Wall began, ancient China had emerged as a variety of independent states . Ancient China was at war with one another and with raiding tribal groups from Mongolia and Central Asia .
 Chinese history is known as the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period of the Zhou dynasty . Names that allude to the political climate of the time .
 In the seventh century BC, the Chu began construction on what would eventually become the Great Wall of China . The Chu was one of the most powerful Chinese states in the 7th century BC .
 Chu’s architects sought to build fortifications around the northern borders of the province in an effort to protect both the population and its resources from Mongolian raids . Calling their defense the ‘square wall,’ architects sought .
 The success of the Chu wall inspired many other Chinese states to do the same . Over the next three centuries, a variety of walls were erected in many parts of what is now China .
 The wall itself was made largely of earth, with tall watchtowers for sentries to observe any advancing hordes on the horizon .
 The notion of the wall remained central to Chinese military and political thought . Han dynasty of the second and first centuries BC rebuilt and expanded it, with important ecological and economic results .
 Han wall was famous because it protected larger areas of land suitable for agricultural exploitation . Food production increased significantly, as did the population .
 Han wall created a safe zone and natural passage for the Silk Road, the famed trade route that brought goods from the Mediterranean world east to China and back again . The wall was expanded further by later emperors in the first century BC and first century AD .
 The Great Wall as it is known today was largely a creation of the Ming dynasty . The Ming dynasty ruled China from 1368 to 1644 .
 Ming emperors suffered greatly at the hands of Mongol chief Esen Taiji when his forces attacked China between 1449 and 1454 . The Mongols attacked China in 1449-1454 .
 Mongols led by Altan Khan, who besieged the Chinese capital, Beijing, in 1550 . A century later, the Mongols threatened China again, this time led byAltan Khan . Altan was the first Mongol to invade Beijing in the 1500s .
 Ming leaders determined to create a new Great Wall to serve as an impenetrable fortification that would protect China from further invasion . As a result of the Great Wall, Ming leaders decided to create the new wall to protect China .
 The Ming commanded their architects and engineers to create a stronger wall made of local stone limestone or granite . Watchtowers, storehouses, and barracks were built directly into the wall itself .
 Ming leaders channeled extraordinary amounts of money and manpower into this ambitious project . Between 1560 and 1640, the Ming leaders spent enormous sums of money on the project .
 The new wall was taller, thicker, and larger than any of the previous walls . It extended over roughly 4,000 miles of northern China, from Bohai Sea in the east to the Uighur region in the west .
 This structure, upon completion, became the longest and most expansive fortification of all time . Upon completion, the structure was the longest in the world .
 In western China, the wall itself ended at the Jiayu Pass, an important Silk Road oasis on the edge of the Gobi Desert .
 The Chinese monitored conditions and possible invasions along the Silk Road with a series of watchtowers that communicated using smoke signals . The watch towers were monitored by a network of watch towers .
 In that way, the defense of the wall was expanded far beyond its physical presence . The wall was built in the 1980s and '90s, but was never fully operational .
 The Great Wall continued to protect China through the centuries, with varying degrees of effectiveness, until 1933 . The wall was built in China in order to protect the country .
 The Defense of the Great Wall was fought between China and Japan after the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931 . In that year, the battle known as the defense of the great wall was fought in China .
 Chinese believed that the Great Wall would prevent the Japanese from crossing through the Shanhai Pass into fortified China . The Japanese used massive firepower to breach the wall and invade China .
 The majority of China’s army was equipped only with pistols, swords, and grenades . After that defeat, the Chinese realized that they were incapable of defending other parts of the wall .
 After several battles along the wall, the Chinese were forced to admit defeat and sign an armistice that created a demilitarized zone along the length of the wall . The wall was created after several battles .
 From that moment on during the Anti-Japanese War, it was clear that the Great Wall of China could no longer protect the nation from foreign invasion . The Great Wall no longer protected China from invasion .
 Other parts of the wall have been breached by roadways or stripped of materials for modern construction projects .
 Chinese government has also funneled money into restoring and rebuilding large parts of the wall . Badaling area near Beijing is the most visited section of the Chinese wall today .
 Chinese municipalities have used the wall as a centerpiece for tourism, including Tianjin, which began an annual Great Wall Marathon in 2000 . The city of Tianjin has also used the Great Wall to promote tourism .
 Anti-Japanese War; China, People’s Republic of; Han Dynasty; Manchuria; Mao Zedong; Ming Dynasty; Qin Dynasty . Ming Dynasty: Qin Dynasty; Silk Road: Warring States Period .
 Cao Cao and Yuan Shao fought over territory in northern China . It was a battle between two warlords over the territory in north China . Cao Cao was a warlord, Cao Cao fought against Shao and Cao Shao .
 Cao Cao won the battle and made it an excellent military example of defeating enemy troops with a force inferior in number . Cao Cao made the battle an excellent example of defeat of enemy troops .
 In the late Han dynasty, army generals developed personally accountable mercenary military troops, and large landowners established private armies to protect their holdings .
 Several powerful military leaders established their domains separately and developed into territorial magnates . Several of these military leaders became territorial lordships .
 Cao Cao gained control of central China south of the Yellow River . Liu Bei claimed the provinces in the southwest . Yuan Shao occupied northern China north of the yellow River . Sun Quan controlled the central and southeastern parts of the country along the Yangzi River .
 Yuan Shan led 100,000 infantry and 10,000 cavalry troops to attack Xuchang, capital city of Cao Cao’s domain . Yuan Shan is the son of the late king Cao Cao, who led the attack .
 Cao Cao built a forward defense line at Guandu, about 75 miles northeast of Xuchang . Cao Cao decided to defend the city by building a forward defensive line . After evaluating his military resources, Cao Cao .
 Cao Cao utilized surprise attacks and killed Yuan Shao’s two commanders, Yan Liang and Wen Chou, forcing Yuan to delay his general attack . At the earlier stage of this battle in January 200, Cao Cao used surprise attacks to kill Yan Liang .
 Yuan Shao failed to break through Cao Cao’s defense line at Guandu . After several offensives in the spring, Yuan tried to take advantage of Cao Cao's position .
 Yuan Shao's aide-de-camp Xu You betrayed his lord and went over to Cao Cao’s side . Xu You went to Cao's side and joined forces with Cao Cao . Cao Cao was killed in the Battle of Shangriripe .
 Xu suggests Cao Cao attack Yuan Shao’s rear base of army provisions at Wuchao . Xu suggested Cao Cao attacked the rear base . Cao Cao suggested attacking the base of provisions at the rear of army . Xu: Cao Cao should attack the rear .
 Cao Cao led 5,000 troops himself to attack Wuchao, burning all Yuan Shao’s supply in October . Cao Cao accepted his advice and led his troops to attack the city in October.
 Yuan Shao heard that the Wuchao supply depot was under attack, he decided to launch the final attack at Guandu . The final attack was the final attempt to take control of Guandou .
 When Yuan Shao’s offensive slowed down, Cao Cao ordered a counteroffensive at Guandu . Cao Cao then destroyed Yuan's main strength with a counter-offensive . The counteroffensive was a success for Cao Cao .
 Yuan Shao was never able to launch another significant offensive campaign against Cao Cao . Cao Cao established his control in central China by 200 years . Yuan's control of central China was never fully achieved .
 Cao Cao; Chibi, Battle of; Han Dynasty; Han, Cavalry of . Han Wudi, Emperor; Liu Bei; Three Kingdoms. Liu Bei . Liu Bei, Liu Cao, Liu Wei, Liu Wudi; Liu Wei .
 The leadership of the CCP learned that the Communist movement in China needed its own armed forces when the first CCP-GMD coalition ended in April 1927 . The first coalition between the CCP and the MD ended in 1927 .
 The CCP Central Committee began its effort to create a new revolutionary army of the workers and peasants . CCP Central Party Central Committee is creating a revolutionary army . The party has been in China since 2008 .
 In midJuly 1927, the Central Committee terminated the leadership of Chen Duxiu and set up a five-member temporary standing committee in order to save the party . The Central Committee held an emergency meeting that terminated the . leadership of the . party .
 To save the CCP-controlled troops in the Nationalist army, the committee planned uprisings in Nanchang, Guangzhou, and other cities . The committee planned to save Nationalist troops in China .
 On December 11, 1927, CCP rebels attacked the city of Guangzhou, one of the most strategic positions in southern China . The rebels were directed by Communist leaders Zhang Tailei .
 Almost all GMD troops of Guangzhou's garrison were killed by the CCP armed rebels . Except for those in the headquarters and armory of the GMD’s Fourth Army Group, almost all of GMD's troops were killed . The GMD was attacked by CCP rebels in
 On December 12, the Guomindang government sent four divisions, with the naval support of England, the U.S., Japan, and France . The Chinese government sent the troops to China .
 GMD and warlord troops counterattacked Guangzhou from east, west, and south . GMD: Warlord forces counterattack from east to west, south, and east .
 CCP rebels lost 1,000 men and retreated from Guangzhou . After one day and one night of tough defense, the CCP rebels retreated . CCP rebels are now in control of Guangzhou, China .
 The attempted takeover failed by the early morning of December 13, 1927 . It was the first attempt to take control of the country's largest city .
 When the Guomindang recovered Guangzhou, they killed more than 5,000 citizens who had supported the CCP uprising . The Guomindaang recovered the city, killing more than five,000 people who had backed the uprising .
 GMD troops continued their suppression and purge of the CCP rebels . After taking-over the city, the GMD forces continued to suppress and purge the rebels .
 More than 5,000 Communists were killed in the following week . It lasted only for a short period of time when it was only temporary .
 The Central Committee of the CCP blamed Ye Ting, military commander of the Guangzhou Uprising, for the disaster . The Central Party of China's Communist Party Party blames Ye for the tragedy .
 In fact, the main cause of the CCP failure in Guangzhou was the obvious disadvantageous conditions for the uprising and weakness of the Communist force . The Communist Party was weakened by the conditions of the uprising .
 Ye and other military commanders had pointed out these problems, and even opposed the uprising . Ye said he had been critical of the uprising, even though he was opposed to it .
 Ye Ting left China for exile in Europe and did not return until nearly a decade later . He was angered by the party’s unfair treatment and returned to China in exile in 2004 .
 Despite its military failure, the Guangzhou Uprising promoted the Communist movement and encouraged further uprisings across the country . The Guangzhou uprising was a failed military coup de facto .
 The Chinese Communist leaders decided to transfer their focus of national revolution from city to countryside, which provided a better foundation for the CCP’s efforts . The move of the revolution from the city to the countryside was a good start .
 A weak army strategy fights a stronger opponent force to survive or to win a victory through guerrilla tactics such as operations behind the enemy lines, hit-and-run, surprise attacks, and night combat . Guerrilla Warfare is a form of guerrilla warfare .
 Mao made guerrilla warfare part of the Chinese military tradition and became the father of Communist guerrilla warfare . Mao made some victories in these wars, but also made it part of China's tradition .
 After the CCP Nanchang Uprising on August 1, 1927, the rebelling Communist troops failed to defend the city and establish an urban base . The city was the birthplace of the first Chinese capital of the modern Chinese city .
 To save their army, commanders Zhu De and He Long moved the rebel army southward from central Jiangxi Province in late August . They attempted to return to Guangdong, a former revolutionary base in the south . Zhu De: "To save our army, we need to move our
 Zhu and He lost half of their troops by October . Many of the rebels surrendered, deserted, or returned to the GMD forces . Zhu lost half his troops .
 Only 2,000 survivors, out of 23,000 men and officers, survived the Nanchang Uprising . They moved into Hunan under the command of Zhu as the Twenty-Eighth Regiment . Later they joined Mao’s forces in April 1928 .
 In August 1927, Mao led the peasants’ Autumn Harvest Uprising in central Hunan and Jiangxi Provinces . Mao was Mao's first leader in China's Communist Party of the 1930s .
 The provincial committee agreed with Mao and moved armed workers, CCP-controlled troops, and security units from the cities to the countryside to support the peasants’ rebellion . Mao’s Mao agreed with the provincial committee and moved the armed workers .
 Mao seemed more concerned about the peasants’ mobilization and benefits for his region, South Hunan, than the revolutionary movement in the provincial capital and other cities . Mao seemed to be more concerned with the peasants' mobilization .
 In early October, Mao led a regiment southward and reached the Jinggangshan, a mountain range in the Luoxiao Mountains . Mao led the troops southward to reach the area in early October .
 Some CCP leaders did not believe Mao could survive since there were no resources to support the troops and no people interested in the revolution in the mountains . At that point, some CCP leaders believed Mao would survive .
 Some considered Mao’s move “up to the mountain” as betraying the CCP and becoming one of the bandits . Mao's move was considered a betrayal of the CCP by some .
 Mao survived and successfully established a military base area for the CCP revolution in 1928 . Mao, however, survived and succeeded in setting up the base area . Mao was assassinated by the Communist Party of China in July 1928 .
 Under his command, the regiment established the Jinggangshan base along the Jiangxi-Hunan border . The base is located in the eastern part of China .
 They established the Fourth Army on May 4, about 5,000 men organized into six regiments, for which they had but 2,000 riiles . The Fourth Army was established in 1903 .
 Communist troops joined them at Jinggangshan (Chingkang Mountains), which became the ‘cradle’ of the CCP’s military revolution . Other Communist troops also joined them .
 Most of the commanders followed examples from Russia's October Revolution and GMD’s Northern Expedition; some of them suffered heavy casualties in urban areas in 1927 . Prior to the Jinggangshan period, most of the commander followed examples .
 China realized the Russian experience, or city-centered operations, did not work for the Chinese Communist military revolution . They realized that they had to look for a new strategy . The Chinese government is looking to find a new way of dealing with the revolution .
 The Fourth Army operated in remote, mountainous areas and away from the GMD military, which occupied the major cities . The guerrilla warfare strategy worked. The GMD used guerrilla warfare .
 Following the Jinggangshan model, other CCP surviving units established their military bases one after another in the rural and border regions of Hunan, Fujian , Jiangsu , and Anhui Provinces .
 Mao's last urban uprising failed in Guangzhou in December 1927 . Central Committee accepted Mao’s way, or his “up to the mountains” approach, after its last urban unrest failed . Mao's approach was accepted by the Central Committee .
 Zhu and Mao had created a definitive military center at Jinggangshan for the Communist revolution at that time . Mao and Zhu and Zhu had created the military center .
 Zhu was commander of the Eighth Route Army of the Nationalist army in August 1937 . Zhu as commander, Peng Dehuai as deputy commander, and Ye Jianying as chief of staff . Zhu was one of the main force of the Red Army, then numbering 46,000 .
 Three divisions commanded three divisions, the 115th, 120th, and 129th . They crossed the Yellow River eastward until it reached north China . The 115th and 120th commanded the three divisions .
 Mao’s successful guerrillas recruited a large number of peasants into his forces . The GMD lost some of their best troops in the war against the Japanese invasion . Mao's successful guerillas recruited some of the best troops .
 Eighth Route Army marched to enemy-occupied territories, where they carried out guerrilla operations and established military and political bases . The units of the Eighth Route army marched to the enemy-held territories, .
 Eighth Route Army increased from 46,000 men in 1937, to 220,000 in 1939, and to 500,000 soldiers in 1940 . The Eighth Route army was the largest in the history of the war .
 It established bases in the border regions of the eastern, northeastern, and northwestern regions . The U.S. government established bases .
 In south China, the New Fourth Army moved along the Yangzi River and established bases in southern Jiangsu and also north of the river .
 In May 1938, Mao wrote a treatise entitled On Protracted War . Mao emphasized the paramount importance of a ‘people’s war’ in the CCP guerrilla warfare . Mao's treatise was published in 1938 .
 Mao instructed the high command to organize extensive peasant militias through the CCP network and transform illiterate peasants into capable soldiers . Mao instructs the high-command to organize the militias .
 By the fall of 1945, the CCP’s regular army had grown to 1,270,000 men, supported by militias numbering another 2.68 million . The CCP had a regular army of 1.3 million men and militias of 2.4 million .
 Eighth Route Army increased from three divisions in 1937 to more than 40 divisions in August 1945 . New Fourth Army also increased from 4 divisions in . 1937 to 7 divisions in 1945 .
 Mao’s successful guerrilla war experience prepared the CCP forces, or the People's Liberation Army, for the final victory in the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949 .
 Gunpowder, also called black powder, is a mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and potassium nitrate . Gunpowder is also known as "black powder"
 When burning rapidly, gunpowder produces a volume of hot gas made up of carbon dioxide, water, nitrogen, and nitrogen . The gas is a solid residue of potassium sulfide . Gunpowder is made of gunpowder, a mixture of water and carbon dioxide .
 Gunpowder has been extensively used as a propellant in firearms and as a pyrotechnic composition in fireworks . Because of its burning properties and the amount of heat and gas volume that it creates, gunpowder is extensively used in firearms .
 Gunpowder is classified as a low explosive because of its relatively slow decomposition rate and consequently low brisance . Gunpowder has been classified as an explosive because it has a relatively low rate of decomposition .
 Alchemists experimented with sulphur and saltpeter, heating the substances in order to transform them . The alchemists used the substances to transform sulphur into sulphur .
 The first reference to gunpowder appeared in a Daoist text written in 1044, alluding to a variety of mixtures that included petrochemicals as well as garlic and honey . Gunpowder was first discovered in China in 16th century .
 When gunpowder’s advantage as a weapon was made clear, the Chinese began to apply gunpowder to warfare . The Chinese began using gunpowder in warfare when it was first developed .
 Gunpowder tubes could launch themselves just by the power produced from the escaping gas . Later, they discovered that these gunpowder tubes can launch themselves . The tubes were launched using the power of the escaping gases .
 The Chinese produced a variety of gunpowder weapons, including flamethrowers, rockets, bombs, and land mines . The Chinese invented guns as a projectile weapon, inventing them as a weapon .
 In China, explosive grenades, bombs, and rockets had been used extensively by the year 1000 . Explosive grenades and bombs were used extensively in China .
 When powder packed behind a bullet was ignited, it generates enough pressure to force the bullet from the muzzle at high speed, but not enough to rupture the gun barrel . The true gun was invented by the Chinese in 1903 .
 The earliest depiction of a gun is a sculpture from a cave in Sichuan dating to the twelfth century of a figure carrying a vase-shaped bombard with flames and a cannonball coming out of it .
 The oldest surviving gun, made of bronze, was manufactured in 1288 in northeastern China . It was made in bronze and is made in China's northeastern region .
 By the thirteenth century, Chinese military forces adopted gunpowder-based weapons technologies such as rockets, guns, and cannons . They were used against the Mongols when they attempted to invade and breach the Great Wall on the northern borders of China .
 After the Mongols conquered China and founded the Yuan dynasty (12791368), they used the Chinese gunpowder-based weapons technology in their invasion of Japan, Korea, and other countries .
 Gunpowder is a mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and saltpeter . It has to be mechanically and carefully assorted to make gunpowder gunpowder .
 Highly sensitive to sparks, it is a very delicate mixture that often resulted in detonations and death owing to sloppy use of the ingredients .
 The formula for making gunpowder was not common information, and only a few special weapon makers knew how to make it . As a result, at the beginning, the formula for gunpowder wasn't common .
 This hazardous and highly explosive weapon, however, spread to Europe through the Silk Road, the world’s oldest and most mysterious trade route . The explosive weapon was used in the creation of the explosive weapon .
 In the tenth century, Arab scientists began to study and carry out experiments with gunpowder and its applications in warfare . The discovery of gunpowder in the 10th century led to the discovery of the weapon .
 Arabs used their newfound weapon against the Christian troops during the crusade movement from the eleventh to the thirteenth centuries . Europeans invaded Arabian countries during the crusaders' invasion .
 The technology would later be adapted by Europeans for use in their military . The technology was later adapted to be used by Europeans .
 Gunpowder changed the course of human history, especially military history . Gunpowder has been used in many of the world's most famous weapons .
 Before the thirteenth century, warfare was primarily hand-to-hand in nature . Warfare was primarily in nature of hand to hand in nature.
 When heavy cannons were introduced into warfare, the effectiveness of castle walls declined . Castle walls declined and armor became a burden rather than protection . The effectiveness of the castle walls has declined in recent years .
 Great Wall; Han Dynasty; Han . Dynasty; Ming Dynasty; Mongols; Silk . Road; Silk Road; Song Dynasty; Song, Fortified Cities; SongMongol War; Tang Dynasty; Yuan Dynasty .
 Alchemy, Bombards, and Pyrotechnics: The History of the Explosive That Changed the World . The history of the explosive that changed the world .
 Sun was elected the first president of the newly created Republic of China on January 1, 1912 . His Tongmenghui group and rebellious New Army officers joined together after the Revolution of 1911 .
 Marshal Yuan Shikai abandoned his Manchu leaders and sided with the rebellion . The New Army commander of the New Army, Marshal Yuan, abandoned the Manchu .
 Yuan defected as a result of Sun’s defection, Sun stepped down as president . After careful negotiation with the rebels, the provisional government elected Yuan to the presidency on February 14, 1912 .
 Sun transformed his Tongmenghui movement into a political party, the Guomindang, to oppose Yuan . Sun transformed the movement into an opposition political party .
 Yuan died in 1916 and the ROC government collapsed, resulting in China splintering into dozens of factions controlled by local warlords . The stalemate between Yuan and the GMD was broken when Yuan died and the government collapsed .
 The Warlord Period at its height included over 1. million men in combat . GMD began its rise to dominance during this fractured civil war . The GMD was dominant during this period .
 Jiang Jieshi was sent to Moscow in 1924 to train with the Soviet Red Army . Sun sent an energetic young nationalist to Moscow to join the Red Army in 1924 .
 Jiang returned to play a critical role in the formation of a new GMD army . Jiang studied in the Soviet Union as a result of his education in the country .
 The first major project for the GMD armed forces was the creation of a military academy .
 The Whampoa Military Academy was founded on June 16, 1924 . Jiang was appointed its first commandant . He was appointed commandant of the academy .
 Jiang set up the GMD National Revolutionary Army along Soviet lines . Jiang was not a Communist, but he set up an army based on Soviet-style army .
 Jiang began his rise in the GMD independent of Sun’s patronage . Sun died on March 12, 1925 of cancer, and Jiang died in 1925 .
 On July 1, 1926, Jiang took the NRA into battle in what is known as the Northern Expedition . Jiang was the first member of the NRA to take part in the battle against the Chinese Army .
 The Northern Expedition’s goal was to attack northern warlords, at first in Hunan and Hubei Provinces and later as far north as Jiangsu . GMD wanted to bring the region under GMD control .
 Jiang reestablished the ROC under GMD control in nearby Nanjing with himself as president . In April 1927, Jiang reestablished ROC in Nanjing . Jiang was president of ROC .
 In Shanghai, GMD sympathizers purged the city of Communist leaders and supporters . In Shanghai they purged city's Communist leaders, supporters of GMD .
 Throughout the GMDcontrolled areas, the CCP was outlawed, and Communist leaders were removed from positions of authority and killed . Communists were taken out of power in GMD controlled areas .
 The GMD only controlled a handful of provinces, facing an encroaching Japanese Empire, and persistent CCP/PLA military confrontation .
 GMD instituted economic reforms and set up new bureaucratic control of cities, towns and rural areas . The GMD set up a new bureaucracy in order to control cities and towns .
 As the Communist and Nationalist civil war continued through the 1930s, Japan increased its territorial expansion onto China .
 Jiang decided early on to focus on defeating the Communist forces, in his mind the larger threat, rather than engaging the remaining warlords or confronting Japan . Jiang had decided to focus his efforts on defeating Communist forces .
 Jiang was placed under arrest by GMD commanders at Xi’an and forced to agree, after refusing to do so in the past, in 1936 . On December 4, 1936, Jiang was forced to sign a second coalition with the CCP to repel Japanese .
 After the Marco Polo Bridge Incident, both Nationalist and Communist forces united to fight a war with Japan that lasted until Japan’s defeat in 1945 by the United States .
 Jiang suffered heavy losses during these years as the Japanese increased their territory in China . Jiang suffered losses during this period .
 GMD was forced to move their government several times and lost most of coastal China to the invading armies . The GMD had to move several times during their reign .
 As the American war in the Pacific chipped away at Japanese hegemony in Asia, both the GMD and CCP forces started to see successes against a faltering Japanese war machine .
 After a failed peace conference in August 1945 at Chongqing between GMD leader Jiang and CCP leader Mao Zedong , the CCP-GMD civil war resumed . The CCP and GMD civil war ended in 1945 after failed peace talks between Jiang and Mao .
 Jiang’s grip on control of China slipped away . Over the next four years, the Communist and Nationalist armies clashed . The Communist State of China was overthrown by the Nationalist army .
 Corruption, GMD infighting, and inability to recruit the rural peasant to the Nationalist cause weakened Jiang’s government and army . Corruption, infighting and a lack of rural peasant support weakened Jiang's government .
 Mao successfully recruited support and army volunteers from the rural poor after the CCP announced a land redistribution plan in September 1947 . Mao recruited both support . and army . volunteers from rural poor .
 Jiang and the GMD were the most damaging events for Jiang . The PLA success at luring Nationalist armies into traps and destroying them was a major blow .
 Jiang moved from offensive operations to defensive retreat by the fall of 1948 . Jiang moved to a defensive retreat in fall of that year . Jiang was one of China's most successful statesmen .
 Jiang maintained control of the Guomindang in Taiwan until his death on April 5, 1975 . Jiang died in 1975 at the age of 75 .
 The GMD was able to survive and economically grow into a modern manufacturing country . As a result of the MDT, the GMD has been able to thrive and grow .
 Taiwan lost its seat in the UN in 1972, and the U.S. ended official recognition of the GMD government in 1979 . Taiwan was officially recognized by the United States in 1979.
 Jiang Jieshi’s son, Jiang Jingguo (Chiang Ching-kuo) became president on March 27, 1978 . In 1987, he began democratic reforms in the GMD-controlled ROC on Taiwan .
 Jiang Jingguo ended martial law, which had existed since his father moved his GMD government to Taiwan in 1949, and legalized opposition parties . Jiang's father moved the GMD to Taiwan from China in 1949 . His government was overthrown by his father's government .
 By the mid-1990s, the ROC was a functioning multiparty democracy . The presidency and vice presidency were opened to popular national vote . The ROC is now a multiparty democratic state .
 The Guomindang still plays a major role in the politics of the ROC today, but it is no longer the first and last word in Taiwan . The ROC no longer has the first word in the political world .
 Successful military expeditions and territorial expansion convinced the Han emperors and the people that they were superior in civilization and institution . The Han people believed the Han was superior in society and institutions .
 The Han emperors began to conquer the territory outside the Great Wall . They conquered territory outside Great Wall in order to conquer territory .
 The Chinese soldiers began to wear armor made of lamellar in which overlapping leather or metal plates were sown onto a cloth . The armor is made of overlapping leather and metal plates .
 The armor provided better protection during the frequent offensive campaigns . Light and flexible, it was light and flexible . The armor was lighter and more flexible than traditional armor .
 The Han Empire was under threat from the Xiongnu, a tribal state in the north of China . The Han dynasty was under attack from the tribal state of the north-west China .
 The Xiongnu was a nomadic people skilled in cavalry warfare . The charioteers of the Han were unable to subdue the Xiongnans .
 Wudi reorganized the economy of the Han dynasty by raising taxes, selling imperial offices, and confiscating noble lands . After a long period of peace and stability, Wudi raised taxes, sold imperial offices and confiscated noble lands in order to raise money .
 With his treasury expanded, Wudi launched his campaign on the nomadic peoples of the north .
 Chinese governments struggled for centuries to protect themselves from agile horseback raiders . China has struggled to protect itself from deadly horseback raids .
 Wudi’s campaign was only temporarily successful in forcing the Xiongnu to accept Han suzerainty . Wudi's campaign only temporarily succeeded in forcing Xiongn to accept the Han sime . The campaign only lasted for a few years .
 The nomadic nature of the Xiongnu ensured long-term conflict with future Han rulers . The Xionguans were nomadic and had long-lasting conflict with the Han .
 It justified Han Wudi’s military invasions that incorporated the ‘barbararian’ people into the Chinese civilizations through a continuous process of acculturation . It justified the invasions of Han .
 Han’s success forced many later rulers to look back and compare themselves with the glorious age of antiquity in terms of territory and geopolitics . Later rulers looked back and compared themselves to the glorious era of antiquity .
 Chinese historian Chang Chun-shu argued that the cavalry Wudi created was one of the main elements in the Han dynasty’s success in subduing the north of China and fueling the great expansionist period .
 The Han cavalry was large by the standards of the period and played a crucial role in the history of China . Modern scholars warn students to be wary of the authenticity of these numbers .
 The Han dynasty has been revered by the Chinese in succeeding periods . Because of its enormous wealth and large population, the Han dynasty is revered by many .
 During the Southern and Northern dynasties, Chinese living in China proper were called “Han’s” Han . Han is an ethnicity that constitutes almost 92 percent of Chinese people today .
 Most people in China thought unification by Qin Shi Huangdi would end their plight . After centuries of wars among states, most people thought unification would end them .
 People encountered heavy rains in the middle of this engagement, and it was certain that they would not be able to reach Yuyang on time . Heavy rains prevented the people from reaching the destination .
 Their small army quickly expanded, with more people joining in en route . More people joined the small army en route en route to the UK .
 They took several big counties and boasted tens of thousands of followers . They were joined by tens of millions of followers of the movement .
 While Chen Sheng and Wu Guang were fighting the Qin, other rebels such as Xiang Yu and Liu Bang also rose up .
 Xiang Yu and Liu Bang survived and continued to grow . But the forces led by Xiang Yu, Liu Bang, continued to fight for the throne .
 Both Liu and Xiang installed Chuhuaiwang, a young progeny of the former king of Chu, as the leader of all rebels . Liu, Xiang and Xiang were led to the death of the Chu king .
 Qin Shi Huangdi restored all former states whose territories had been conquered by Qin Shi Huqdi . Qin ShiHuqdi's territory was restored to Qin Shi .
 No rebel force from the other states dared to help Zhao . Zhang Han’s threat to attack anyone who provided assistance to Zhao . The Qin army was the strongest of the Qin army .
 Xiang Yu killed his superior Song Yi for cowardice and led the army of Chu to Julu . Xiang Yu led the Chu army to the city of Julu and killed Song Yi .
 Xiang Yu ordered his soldiers to destroy their own ships and cooking pans to show their determination to fight the Qin to the death . After Xiang Yu crossed the Zhangshui River, he ordered his troops to destroy the ships and pots .
 Liu Bang was king of the state of Han, and Xiang Yu, the Grand King of Chu . Liu Bang is king of Han . Xiang Yu was the Grand king of Chu and Liu Bang of Han.
 Liu Bang created many vassal states and appointed his sons and brothers to be kings . Learning the lesson that Qin fell because of no help from the vassals states, he created many states . Liu Bang learned from Qin's failure to rely on the help he received from vass
 Liu Bang’s idea ended up being a nightmare for his successors . Yet this seemingly far-seeing idea was a disaster for Liu Bang's successors .
 Not only vassal states became disobedient, but their kings also posed serious threats to the empire . Not only did many vassals become more disobedient but also threatened the empire itself .
 He accepted political advisor Chao Cuo’s suggestion and began limiting the power of the states by taking territories from them .
 The intimidated Jingdi ordered Chao Cuo be killed, believing that his death would quell an uprising . Chao Cuos was killed by Jingdi, who feared the death would help quell the uprising .
 General Zhou Yafu stationed his army inside the fortresses and avoided direct confrontation with the rebels . Jingdi then appointed general Zhou Yfu, who stationed his troops inside fortresses, to avoid confrontation .
 Zhou’s purpose was to exhaust the supplies of the rebels before any military action, Zhou says . Zhou's purpose is to exhaust supplies of rebels before military action . Zhou: “I’m not going to go to war. I’ll go to battle.
 The king of Wu had to retreat after depleting his supplies . That strategy worked well as the king had to abandon his supplies.
 The king of Wu was subsequently killed, and the coalition of rebels collapsed . The coalition collapsed and the king was killed by the rebels .
 After suppressing the rebellion, Jingdi prohibited the kings from governing their states, and all state officials had to be appointed by the emperor . The emperor made state officials appointed by him .
 The power of vassal states had further been eclipsed by Han Wudi . The central power was strengthened, and during the reign of Han .
 By the end of the Han dynasty, the weak vassal states could no longer assist the central power as Liu Bang had foreseen in the fall of Qin . Wang Mang, the regent and a relative of the empress dowager, founded a new empire . The weak v
 His biggest feat was undoubtedly his military campaigns against the northern Huns . He fought against the Huns in the early years of his reign . He died in 12th century .
 Huns had been a dire threat to the Han dynasty since the start of the dynasty . The Huns were the first to attack the Han in the early Han era .
 Even Han founder Liu Bang had been besieged for seven days by the Huns and barely survived . Liu Bang barely survived after being besieged by Huns . Even Liu Bang was besieged by seven days .
 Emperors before Han Wudi generally followed a policy of ‘marriage alliance’ ( heqin\ intermarriage between imperial families of the Han and the Huns) in order to appease Huns . Heqin is intermarriage among imperial families between the imperial families .
 The policy had not always been successful, and the threats from the Huns remained . But the policy was not always successful, with the threat of Huns .
 When Han Wudi was enthroned, Han dynasty had accumulated resources and military might . Han dynasty was known for its military might and accumulated resources . Han was enthralled by Wudi when he died .
 Wudi launched a total of 15 military campaigns, resulting in the split of the much-weakened Huns . The Huns split from the Huns after the death of Wudi .
 Four years later, generals Wei Qing, Gong Sunhe, and Li Guang launched a three-pronged attack on the Huns . Four years after the attack, the Chinese army launched an attack on its enemies . The Huns were eventually defeated by the Chinese forces .
 General Wei Qing again won several battles and reoccupied lost territories in the Hetao region . Wei Qing was able to reoccupy lost lost territories with the help of the Chinese army .
 Huo Qubing, the nephew of Wei Qing, led an army of 10,000 men and defeated the Hun cavalry in Gaolan . He was one of the most famous generals of the Han who swiftly emerged .
 In the summer, Huo marched 1,000 kilometers to the heart of the Huns and decimated them . Huo died in the summer of the summer .
 Wei Qing and Huo Qubing led a large army of 100,000 soldiers attacking the Hun ruler 1,000 kilometers in the north . Wei Qing was the first Chinese women to lead an attack on Hun ruler .
 Hun ruler dared not fight the Han and fled with only a few hundred cavalry . The Hun ruler died in the early years of his rule in China .
 After this battle, the Huns moved further north and no longer posed a major threat to the Han . The Huns were no longer considered a threat for the Han after the battle .
 Han Wudi ordered the migration of hundreds of thousands of Chinese to the areas taken from the Huns . Han Wudan was the leader of the Hanth dynasty .
 With his resoluteness and smart strategy, Mr. Obama's resolutess and . abundant resources inherited from . predecessors and extraordinarily able generals, he said . He said: "With his . resoluteess, smart strategy and . abundance of resources, coupled with .
 Han Wudi was able to eliminate northern threats that had haunted Chinese rulers from the late Warring States Period to the early Han period . The Han dynasty ruled the Han dynasty from the early to early Han Han .
 In 8 AD, Wang Mang toppled the Han dynasty and founded the Xin dynasty . Wang Mang was a regent and general in chief of the 8th century .
 Wang Mang’s subsequent reform policies failed to solve the existing social problems, says Wang Mang . Wang Mang's reforms have failed to address the existing problems, he says. Wang Mang says .
 Commoners’ living standards sharply deteriorated, which triggered mass rebellions across the country . Instead of living standards, commoners' living standards deteriorated, triggering mass revolts . Mass rebellions were triggered by the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 Liu Xiu and his brother Liu Yan were both landlords and descendants of a distant branch of the Han imperial clan . They joined the Lulin rebels . Liu Yan was a member of a Han imperial family of the Xiu dynasty .
 Liu Xiu’s military talent was fully reflected in the Battle of Kunyang, China's first major victory in the history of the Chinese Revolution .
 In 23 AD, Wang Mang sent a huge army of 420,000 soldiers trying to regain Kunyang, a city that had been taken over by the Lulin rebels . Wang Mang tried to recapture Kunyang but the rebels had taken it over .
 With less than 10,000 soldiers inside the city, most rebels demanded retreat . Most rebels have demanded retreat from the city .
 Liu Xiu persuaded other rebels to stay and led 13 cavalry sneaking out of Kunyang for reinforcement . Liu led the cavalry to leave Kunyang, China, to join forces with the rebels .
 When Liu Xiu came back with 10,000 more rebels, he began attacking Wang Mang’s army . Wang Mang's army was attacked by Liu Yiu and Wang Xiu's army. Wang Mang was killed in the battle .
 Despite their small numbers, the rebels fought bravely and defeated their much bigger opponent . The rebels were able to defeat the government forces in the first place .
 The Battle of Kunyang paved the way for Liu Xiu’s leadership among the rebels . It helped turn the tide of the war against Wang Mang's dynasty in China . Wang Mang dynasty fell shortly afterwards .
 Liu Xiu in 25 AD restored the Han dynasty and became the first emperor of the Latter Han or Eastern Han dynasty . Two years after the death of Wang Mang, Liu was the first Chinese emperor to restore the dynasty .
 General Deng Yu was sent to attack the Chimei rebels in 26 AD, but was defeated . Deng Yu died in the fall of 26 AD . He was killed in the battle against the rebels .
 Feng fought a battle with Chimei at Xiaodi and destroyed their main force . Feng fought against Chimei and destroyed them main force in Xiaodi .
 Liu Xiu led the army against the remaining Chimei rebels in Yiyang and forced Liu Gong, their leader, to surrender . Liu Gong was the leader of the rebels, but Liu Gong refused to give up and died in the process . Liu Xu led the troops against the
 Liu Xiu sent troops to suppress other smaller insurrections and in 36 AD finally reunified China . After crushing his biggest enemy, he sent troops out to suppress smaller, smaller insurstances .
 Self-named ‘The General of Heaven’ , Zhang Jiao and his two brothers Zhang Bao and Zhang Liang conquered one county after another . Self-called ‘General of Heaven,’ he conquered many counties .
 The growing threat of the Yellow Turban pressed the government to respond speedily . The government responded quickly to the growing threat .
 Han Lingdi sent Generals Lu Zhi, Huangpu Song, Zhu Jun. and Dong Zhuo to quell the rebels . Generals Zhu Jun, Zhu Zhi and Dong Zhui were among those who fought the rebels in China .
 As the war went on, the Yellow Turbans exposed their own problems such as the lack of coordination among different rebels . As the conflict progressed, the rebels were able to get around the world .
 The government forces quickly found the weakness of the rebels and defeated them individually . The rebels were defeated individually by the government forces .
 General Huangpu Song first assaulted and put down the Yellow Turbans in Yinchuan, resulting in tens of thousands of deaths . General Huang Pu put down and killed thousands of people during the massacre .
 Although the Yellow Turban seized the city three times, they ultimately lost it . Although the city was seized three times by the Turban, it was ultimately lost .
 The Latter Han succeeded and clamped down on the Yellow Turbans . Many powerful regional military leaders such as Liu Bei and Cao Cao emerged during the suppression . Cao Cao and Liu Bei would soon bring down the dynasty .
 Cao Cao; Great Wall; Guandu, Battle of; Han Wudi, Emperor; Julu, battle of Mongols . Qin Shi Huangdi, Emperor, was Emperor of Qin Dynasty . Cao Cao was Emperor Cao Cao .
 Under Wudi’s rule, China expanded its borders, repelling threats from the north and introducing the Silk Road . The Silk Road became an international highway of commerce and cultural transmission .
 During his reign, the boundaries and influence of the Chinese Empire were greatly extended through a series of military campaigns . During this reign, he was able to extend the boundaries of the Empire .
 Little is known of his childhood or early upbringing except that his relatives groomed him to be his father’s successor . Wudi had several older brothers .
 China had been unified when the Han emperor was crowned, but various regions were threatening to break off from China . China was unified when Han was crowned .
 Han Empire rivaled its contemporary, the Roman Empire, for size and glory . The Han Empire was the largest and most successful of all its kind .
 Many of Wudi’s policies were aimed at creating unity among the various cultures and nationalities that made up the Chinese Empire . Wudi's policies were intended to create unity among all cultures .
 To make alliances firmer, he married his children and allies to the leaders of other nations . He also married his wife's children to make alliances stronger .
 He also increased China’s territory, conquering some small kingdoms in the south and annexing Hainan Island and the islands of the South China Sea . He also conquered portions of northern Vietnam and northern Korea .
 The Xiongnu, an ancient nomadic tribe in northern China, threatened the northern border regions . Wudi appointed two generals to lead expeditions against them . The tribes were ancient Chinese nomadic tribes, and Wudi was one of them .
 The Hexi Corridor is a crucial passageway on the northern border of China that became an important part of the Silk Road . The Xiongnu fought against the Xiongn several times and finally forced them north of the Gobi Desert . They fought against them several times .
 Wudi had the Great Wall of China renovated to increase northern China’s security from nomadic invaders from Mongolia . The Great Wall was built in order to protect northern China from Mongolian invaders .
 Wudi’s wars against the northern nomads indirectly resulted in opening up trade between China and the West . Wudi's wars against nomads directly opened up trade with the West.
 In 138, he sent a group of representatives led by Zhang Qian to central Asia in an attempt to secure allies in his fight against the Xiongnu . Zhang Qian was the leader of a group that sent him to Central Asia to fight against Xiongn .
 They returned to the Han court with tales of foreign cultures and goods . They did not make any alliances, but they did return to Han court in China .
 Wudi was very interested in those foreign lands and eventually opened the Silk Road . The Silk Road became a highway of commercial and cultural exchange between the East and West . Wudi opened the silk road, which became a major trade route .
 Wudi’s military enterprises were expensive; to fund his campaigns, he raised taxes and confiscated property owned by nobles . Wudi raised taxes to raise funds to fund campaigns, and confiscated nobles' property .
 Han dynasty, in general, was a time of national strength and cultural advances . The Han dynasty was known for its cultural and cultural achievements .
 Wudi believed that the Qin dynasty had fallen because of its repressive cultural policies, particularly its emphasis on Legalism . Wudi thought that Qin's cultural policies were behind its fall .
 He ordered a revival of Confucianism, proclaiming it the official state philosophy . He also declared it an official state of philosophy .
 Qin emperor Shi Huangdi had ordered the destruction of many Confucian books . Wudi ordered the surviving books to be collected and sent to the national capital in Changan . The academy was set up to educate government officials thoroughly in Confucanism .
 The institution was formed on the foundation of the five Confucian classics, since the Han emperor believed that Confucians should help with the national government . The Han emperor was the first emperor to believe that scholars should help government .
 Confucianism remained the prevailing philosophy through many succeeding dynasties . That training system for the civil service lasted for centuries after his death, and Confucanism remained a dominant philosophy .
 The Han emperor believed that encouraging culture would also encourage civilized behavior among the people . The Han Emperor believed that culture would help people become civilized .
 He created a national music bureau and ordered his government officials to enlighten the people with musical education . He created his national music .
 He also revived many ancient religious rituals and encouraged his government officials to perform them . He also encouraged officials to carry out them .
 He was succeeded by a child, Zhaodi , although the empire was run by a regent until the boy came of age . The empire was ruled by the boy until he was 18 years old .
 Confucian-Mencian Paradigm; Great Wall; Han Dynasty; Martial Arts; Mongols; Qin Dynasty; Qin Shi Huangdi, Emperor; Silk Road; Xiongnu . Great Wall, Great Wall and Great War: Great Wall .
 He Long was born in Sangzhi County, Hunan Province, on March 22, 1896 . He Long began his military career in 1914 by raising a voluntary revolutionary army in his native province .
 In 1920, He’s personal army became a part of the National Revolutionary Army and participated in the Northern Expedition . His personal army joined the army in 1920 .
 They planned the unsuccessful Nanchang Uprising in Jiangxi, marking the beginning of an independent Chinese Communist military tradition . The failed uprising marked the start of the Communist Party of China's military tradition.
 When the Eighth Route Army was formed in 1937, He commanded its 120th Division . He was the leader of the Eighth Army's 120th division .
 During the Anti-Japanese War of 1937— 1945, his command responsibilities grew steadily . During the anti-Japanese war of 1937- 1945, he was in command of the Japanese Army .
 In 1943, he was given overall responsibility for the defense of the Shaanxi-Gansu -Ningxia and the Shanxi -Suiyuan border areas . In 1943 he was named commander of the United Defense Headquarters at Yan’an . He was also given overall
 He was concurrently commander of the 120th Division and the Yan’an garrison army . He also commanded the Yan'an army's 120th division and the Yans' 120th .
 He was able to expand Communist control of territory by taking advantage of the confusion brought about by the Japanese Ichi-go offensive of 1944 .
 More often, however, expansion is achieved by alliance with local guerrillas . More frequently, though, it's achieved by alliances with local rebels .
 He was labeled the “biggest bandit” and later died in prison on June 9, 1969 . He was named the "biggest man in the world"
 Hong Kong British colonial port city functioned as a key strategic Cold War outpost as well as an ideological battleground between Westernstyle capitalism and communism . Hong Kong was a key diplomatic outpost during the Cold War .
 Hong Kong is roughly six times the size of Washington, D.C., and was acquired by the British after the First Opium War in 1841 . Bordering southeastern China and the South China Sea, Hong Kong was acquired after the war in China .
 The British long considered Hong Kong a logical stepping-stone in developing Chinese trade ties . Hong Kong is a step-stone to developing China's trade ties and as an entree to Southeast Asia markets .
 After World War II, Britain recovered control of Hong Kong from the Japanese . Britain was determined to retain it for commercial as well as strategic reasons .
 The establishment of the People’s Republic of China in October 1949 hardened British intentions to retain the colony . The establishment extended Cold War rivalries in Asia .
 First, it was the starting point in an effort to contain communism and protect British interests . It ran from Hong Kong through Indochina, Thailand, Burma, Malaya, Singapore, India, and Sri Lanka .
 Second, the British hoped that retaining Hong Kong would facilitate Anglo-Chinese trade . The British hoped to retain Hong Kong in order to keep it in Hong Kong .
 Britain entertained the idea that a prosperous and stable Hong Kong might dissuade the PRC from leaning toward the Soviet Union or promoting an Asian-style Titoism .
 Despite their one-nation cause, the Chinese Communists had no plans to retake Hong Kong . The Chinese Communist Party had no intention of taking Hong Kong back .
 Hong Kong's colonial status could be utilized to maximize national interests, the Chinese government said . Their policy was summarized as “long-term planning, full exploitation,” meaning there was no urgency to retake Hong Kong .
 By 1997, Hong Kong had been transformed into an ultramodern city, an international financial center, and a vital seaport . Hong Kong was returned to the PRC in 1997 .
 Hong Kong served as one of the few trading channels for the PRC to buy Western materials and earn coveted Western currencies . Economically, Hong Kong was one of only few channels to buy coveted Western materials .
 U.S. and UN imposed sanctions on China during the Korean War and when the Soviet Union stopped assisting the PRC in the late 1950s . This thinking was soon justified when both the United States and the U.N. imposed sanctions .
 Diplomatically, Hong Kong helped the PRC gain diplomatic recognition from Britain, the first Western country to do so . Hong Kong was the first country to have diplomatic recognition of the Chinese government .
 From a strategic vantage point, by tolerating British control of Hong Kong, the PRC hoped to drive a wedge in the AngloAmerican alliance . Britain demonstrated reservations and sometimes opposition to U.S. efforts to place embargoes on Hong Kong and PRC during the Taiwan Strait crises
 As the only port along the Chinese coast remaining in foreign hands, Hong Kong also became a vital window and observation post for the PRC . The PRC used Hong Kong to contact overseas Chinese and promote the cause of the Republic of China .
 Hong Kong served as the Americans’ primary contact point with mainland China . Given the absence of a diplomatic relationship with the PRC, the U.S. could gather intelligence gathering with relative ease .
 Hong Kong’s port facilities provided the United States Navy with a convenient fueling station during military expeditions, especially during the Vietnam War . The U.S. Navy used the port facilities to fuel its military operations .
 America supported Britain’s retention of Hong Kong and encouraged the British to improve its economic and social conditions in hopes of making Hong Kong a free-world outpost that would stand in sharp contrast to conditions on the mainland .
 Hong Kong’s strategic importance began to recede in the early 1970s when the PRC and the United States normalized diplomatic relations . Hong Kong's strategic importance receded in the 1970s .
 Hong Kong’s diminished value was confirmed in 19S4 when the PRC and Britain agreed on the return of the colony to Chinese control in 1997 . Hong Kong was returned to China by Britain in 1997 after the war .
 Hong Kong’s Cold War value was briefly revived after Tiananmen Square crackdown on June 4,1989 . Future sovereignty became contingent upon the PRC's international conduct and human rights record .
 In the end, it is hard to overstate Hong Kong’s importance in the waging of the Cold War . Hong Kong was a key ally of the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 Anti-Japanese War; China, People’s Republic of China, China, Republic of; Chinese Civil War; Cold War; Korean War; Korea War; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Soviet Union; Taiwan Strait Crisis of 1958; Tiananmen Square Events .
 Hong Xiuquan (Hung Hsiuch’uan) founded a millenarian religious group called the Taiping Tianguo (Taiping Heavenly Kingdom) which rebelled against the Manchu Qing dynasty in midninnineteenth-century China .
 Hong created an elaborate bureaucracy, reformed the calendar, placed women on more equal footing with men, and outlawed the use of opium . In the process, Hong created a elaborate bureaucracy and created a calendar .
 His Heavenly Kingdom established stable control over sufficient territory to create a functional utopian society, at least for a time, inspiring and anticipating many revolutionary ideals of twentieth-century China .
 Hong Huoxiu was born in 1814 in Fuyuanshui village, Hua County, 30 miles from Guangzhou . Hong was the third son of a poor Hakka family . He was born on January 11, 1814 .
 Hakka are a Chinese minority group with a distinctive diet and language . They gradually moved south through China over the course of centuries and now live in large numbers in south China . The Hakka have a distinctive language and diet .
 Hong showed signs of scholarly aptitude, his family made sacrifices to see that he could attend school . They hoped he might pass the hallowed civil service examinations and become an official in the Qing government .
 Hong succeeded in the preliminary examinations, he met with frustration in the provincial examination . Hong succeeded but was frustrated by the provincial exam results .
 Less than 1 percent of those who sat for the examination passed . The tests were held in Guangdong Province, China .
 Hong received nine Christian tracts while in Guangzhou for the provincial examination in the spring of 1836 . Hong received the tracts from a Christian missionary named Edwin Stevens and his Chinese assistant, Liang Afa .
 Hong may have glanced at the tracts, but he paid them little heed at the time . Hong paid little heed to the tracts during his life .
 A year later, Hong again made the trip to Guangzhou to retake the exam, and upon his repeat failure, he collapsed . Hong again collapsed after failing to pass the exam again .
 In a delirium, he had a series of dreams involving a heavenly meeting with an old, paternal figure and an elder brother, who informed him that humans had taken to worshipping demons and that his task was to rid the world of those demons .
 Hong changed his name to Hong Xiuquan after his father presented him with a sword . Hong's father gave Hong a sword and gave him a new name . Hong was given a sword by his father and changed his surname to Hong .
 Six years after that series of vivid and terrifying dreams, Hong returned to the Christian tracts he had never discarded and began to read them . Six years later, Hong began reading them again .
 The old man was God, the elder brother was Jesus Christ, and he himself was a son of God . He was sent to rid China of demons, and was sent there to rid them of demons . Jesus Christ was the son of China, sent to China to rid demons .
 Hong and his cousin Hong Rengan, who was also moved by the Christian tracts, baptized one another and went about destroying idols and preaching the doctrine Hong had derived from his dreams and tracts .
 Hong returned to his native place in late November while Feng settled near Zijin Shan, or Thistle Mountain, in Guangxi . After preaching in obscure border areas of Guangdong and Guangxi Provinces, Hong returned .
 Feng gained thousands of converts to Hong’s doctrine . Within a few years, Feng had gained thousands more converts .
 Hong tracked Feng to Zijin Shan in August 1847, after years of preaching in Hua County, China . Feng was found by Hong in 1847 . Feng died in his native village of Zijang Shan .
 Hong had been studying the Bible and developing his theology with aid from an American Baptist missionary named Issachar Roberts . Hong's theology is based on the Bible .
 He found himself in an area receptive to his millenarian message because of the local history of secret societies and the need of Hakkas to unite to defend themselves against other groups .
 Hong assembled the members of the society he had organized to initiate the Taiping Rebellion . Hong assembled his group after a number of clashes between his group and the local self-defense corps .
 The military elements of Hong’s organization had become far more disciplined, subject to careful drill and a strict chain of command . Hong said he had become more disciplined with the military .
 The number of Hong’s forces may have reached as many as 30,000 men and women . 10,000 of them were involved in military preparations .
 The local government reacted in December by sending troops against the assemblage . But those troops were unable to disperse the worshippers .
 The dwindling resources of the area compelled Hong to move his base, and the Taipings marched to Jiangkou, which they took in January 1851 . Hong was forced to leave his base .
 Taiping captured a large number of rich cities along the Yangzi River in 1852 and 1853 . That victory began a somewhat chaotic period of early Taiping military aggression, which climaxed with a series of remarkable military victories .
 In March 1853, they took Nanjing and named it “Tianjin,” the Heavenly Capital . Nanjing is now known as Tianjin, China's first capital .
 The Taiping Heavenly Kingdom was a theocracy ruled by a number of men who entered trances, during which they claimed to channel the words of God, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit .
 Hong (the Heavenly King) and Yang Xiuqing (known as the East King) were mouthpieces for Jesus and God, respectively . Hong was known as the "Heavenly King" and the "East King" Yang was a mouthpiece for God .
 The Catholic Church was founded in 1877 . The church's proximity to the divine commanded the obedience of the faithful . That allowed them to carve out tremendous power for themselves .
 Hong promised followers a heaven on earth, largely shaped by a communitarian plan to divide all land and wealth fairly . Hong also demanded great sacrifices, including the sacrifice of his followers . Hong's plan was largely shaped up by a plan that divided all land .
 There would be no toleration of opium or tobacco smoking, prostitution, slavery, dancing, dancing and imbibing of alcohol, gambling, polygamy, polygamy and polygamy .
 The Taipings refused to shave the front part of their foreheads and braid their hair into the Manchuordained queue . Their long hair fell loosely around their shoulders and fell loosely .
 From about 1856 on, however, the success of the Taipings began to decline due to the increasing hubris of Yang Xiuqing, who had been the commander of the . Taiping armies since 1850 . The success of Taiping in China was in large part due
 Since the establishment of the Heavenly Capital, he had increasingly appropriated power formerly held by Hong Kong . Hong Kong is now the capital of China .
 Yang had taken advantage of the temporary absence of Hong’s strongest supporter, Wei Changhui, to initiate his coup . Wei recalled Wei, who not only murdered Yang but promptly slaughtered roughly 20,000 of his followers .
 Wei soon became as overbearing and threatening as Yang had been, and at the command of Hong, he too was killed . Wei was killed by Hong at the end of the war .
 Taiping generals were alienated from each other by events in China . Those events brought about the alienation of the greatest of the Taiping leaders .
 1856 marked the beginning of the end of the Taiping, which finally came in July 1864 . Though there were Taiping victories in the years to come, there were many more victories there .
 Beginning in the period of great internecine slaughter, Hong spent more time in a world of women . Hong spent most of his life in the Middle Ages .
 In addition to his 86 consorts, his realm was run by a bureaucracy of women . Serving maids and family members brought the number of female inhabitants of Hong’s palace to 2,000 .
 Hong spent his time rewriting the Bible, deleting passages he felt tainted with the holy text, and correcting wording to reflect his personal communications from God . Hong spent the time rewriting his Bible .
 The Taiping Heavenly Kingdom saw a brief period of hope when Hong’s cousin, Hong Rengan, came to Nanjing after several years of religious study in Hong Kong, that hope was extinguished .
 Hong Rengan worked to modernize the Taiping world after the Western model he had come to admire in Hong Kong . Rengan was inspired by Hong Kong's model of modernizing Taiping .
 Hong Rengan witnessed five years of decline in China . From his arrival in 1859 to the defeat of the Taipings at Nanjing, he witnessed a decline in his reign .
 Provincial forces loyal to the Qing under Zeng Guofan (Tseng Kuo-fan) and his brother Zeng . Guoquan, and Li Hongzhang (Li Hungchang) had, slowly but surely. retaken the areas conquered by Taiping troops in
 On July 19, 1864, the Chinese forces burst into Nanjing, and a most extraordinary massacre of Taipings ensued . The massacre took place in the most famous massacre in the Taiping Massacre Massacre of 1864 .
 The exact date of Hong’s death is uncertain, since different accounts give differing dates . Hong's exact death is unknown, but accounts give various dates .
 Hong's son, Hong Tiangui, was enthroned as the new Heavenly King . The news was suppressed for 10 days, after which Hong’s son was enthrroned . Hong was the first person to be enthralled as a Heavenly King in China
 He did not reign for long, however, because the Qing wiped out all the Taiping troops in the summer of 1864 .
 Whether Hong was, as Issachar Roberts declared, “a crazy man, entirely unfit to rule,” or one of the greatest political and social visionaries of Chinese history will never be satisfactorily resolved .
 His social reforms and communitarian ideals both echoed ancient Chinese utopian ideals and presaged the Chinese Communist revolution of the twentieth century . His social reform and social reforms were his social reforms .
 Hong Xuezhi was deputy commander of the Chinese People’s Volunteer Force during the Korean War of 1950-1953 . He was chief of the CPVF Logistics Department during the war .
 Hong served as the deputy commander and chief of staff of the Third Division of the New Fourth Army in the Anti-Japanese War . Hong served in the anti-Japanese war .
 Hong became deputy commander and chief of staff of the Fifteenth Army Group . Hong was deputy commander of the 15th and Thirteenth Army Groups . He was the head of the People's Republic of China's first army .
 When the CCP Central Military Commission established the Northeast Border Defense Army in July 1950, Marshal Lin Biao, commander of the PLA’s Fourth Field Army, transferred Hong to the NBDA .
 In October, the NBDA was reorganized into the CPVF with Hong as its deputy commander . Hong is in charge of operation, logistics, and security of the headquarters . Hong was the deputy commander of the CPF .
 Hong became the head of the CPVF Logistics Department when it was established on May 19, 1951 . Hong was born in Hong Kong .
 He set up a configuration system that fit the needs of the CPVF’s new positional/trench warfare doctrine . From the spring of 1951 to the end of the war, the configuration system was set up .
 New system aimed at directly supplying front locations rather than army units . This new system aims to directly supply front locations .
 Since October 1950, the PLA logistics system had first delivered food and munitions from Manchurian headquarters in China to each CPVF army in Korea .
 The army next distributed the supplies to its divisions, each division delivered them to its regiments, and so on. The army then distributed them to each other's regiments .
 The Chinese soldiers in the company had to carry their food and munitions on their shoulders, usually enough for a week . The soldiers carried their food, munitions and ammunition on the shoulders .
 Supplies always lagged behind CPVF operations, and the old system was inadequate . Supplies therefore always lags behind CPVsF operations . The old system is inadequate, and supplies have always been delayed .
 After a week’s operation, the men had to stop and wait for their supply . The operation was the first time they had to wait for a week .
 Front-line troops received 30 to 40 percent of their minimum needs during the third offensive in December 1950 . Front line troops were only about 30 percent of the minimum needs .
 Hong’s new system established area supply depots along the front lines to supply all the CPVF units stationed within the area . It didn’t matter if it was a regiment or a battalion, the depots supplied all the units stationed .
 CPVF troops moved in and out of the area, but the area supply depot remained . It could also be used by both Chinese and North Korean troops . The area was also a supply depot for the North Korean military .
 The new supply system improved CPVF logistics capacity at the battalion and company levels . It increased front-line troops’ mobility and combat effectiveness . The system also increased front line troops' mobility .
 The CPVF logistics performance reflected a learning curve . As in other cases, it reflected a growing learning curve.
 By October 1951, the CPVF Logistics Department had 180,000 troops . The Logistics department had 6 local headquarters, 28 supply depots, 7 security regiments, 13 truck regiments and 29 transport regiments .
 Hong also commanded the 149th Infantry Division, Eighteenth Security Division, and Sixtyfourth Anti-aircraft Artillery Division . Hong commanded more than 40,000 troops during his time in charge .
 Logistics Department employed a large number of civilian laborers for the war . In addition to regular troops, the Logistics department also employed large numbers of civilian workers .
 They entered Korea and worked in the rear supply, road repair, manpower transportation, warehouse keeping, and railroad and highway construction . They worked in Korea .
 Hong was deputy chief, chief, and political commissar of the PLA General Logistics Department from 1954 to 1957 . Hong became the deputy chief of chief and chief of the military's general logistics department . Hong was also the chief of PLA's general Logistics department from 1953 to
 In 1959, Hong was dismissed from all his military posts because of his defense of Peng Dehuai, who was purged by Mao . Hong was fired from all military posts in 1959 because he defended the ex-Maoi's defense .
 Hong was demoted and reassigned as director of the Petro-Chemical Bureau in Jilin Province during the Cultural Revolution . Hong worked there until 1977, when he was reassigned by the Communist Party Party .
 He became director of the National Defense Industry of the PRC in 1977, and again chief and political commissar of the General Logistics Department from 1980 to 1990 . He was also chief of the general logistics department from 1980 until 1990 .
 He lost his post in 1989 because he opposed using the army to crush the Tiananmen Square student pro-democracy movement . He lost that post reportedly because of his opposition to the use of the army .
 Hua Guofeng was bom on February 16, 1921, in Jiaocheng, Shanxi Province . He was born in China in 1921 .
 He joined the CCP in 1936 and aided Communist guerrilla forces in 1938 as they struggled against Japan during the Anti-Japanese War of 1937-1945 .
 Hua was the secretary of the Xiang-tan Special District, which included Shaoshan, Mao’s hometown . After the founding of the PRC in 1949, Hua relocated to Hunan and became the secretary .
 Mao named Hua as China’s acting premier on February 8, 1976 . Zhou Enlai died in 1976, Mao named him as the acting premier of China . Hua was named as China's acting premier in 1976 .
 Chairman Mao’s own health had been worsening, and he suffered from various ailments toward the end of his life . Chairman Mao's own health was worsening in his final years .
 Chairman Mao officially appointed Hua as premier of the State Council in April . Chairman Mao formally appointed Hua in April that year .
 On April 5, approximately 2 million gathered in Tiananmen Square for the Qing Ming Festival, a traditional day of mourning . Crowds gathered in the square for the festival .
 When those who had originally come to honor Zhou Enlai’s memory also began protesting the radical policies of the Gang of Four, police responded and a riot ensued . Police responded and riot ensued.
 Deng Xiaoping had been Zhou Enlai’s trusted assistant, giving his eulogy and becoming first vice premier so he could continue his predecessor's work . The radical group's denunciations led to his temporarily losing his official posts . Deng Xiaop had given his e
 Mao replaced him with Hua, who became first vice chairman of the Central Committee . Mao was replaced by Hua as first vice-chairman of the Communist Party Party .
 Mao Zedong’s decision infuriated the Gang of Four, leading Jiang Qing to criticize Hua openly . Jiang Qing criticized Hua Hua for his comments .
 Mao's chubby-faced appearance led to his detractors to often refer to him as “pumpkin head’s head” yet his personal loyalty impressed Mao . Mao was a politician of minor importance by political standards, and his appearance was often ridiculed by critics .
 His decision stemmed not only from his belief in Hua’s dogged devotion, but also because he believed his Cultural Revolution policies would be honored, he said .
 Mao’s memorial service held in Tiananmen Square on September 18 . Jiang Qing gave the official eulogy with Jiang Qing standing at his side, but the political atmosphere remained tense .
 The arrest of the Gang of Four effectively blocked Jiang and her revolutionary clique from seizing control of the government . With the support of top military officials, influential Politburo members, and Deng Xiaoping loyalists, he then ordered the predawn arrest . The arrest was a move that
 Mao's official policy stated that the Chinese people should continue to obey Mao’s previous directives . Throughout 1977 and 1978, his official policy, soon referred to as the ‘Two Whatevers,’ stated that . The Chinese people continued to obey the previous directives.
 Hua favored returning the country’s political and economic systems to a more regimented Soviet style . Hua also favored returning China's political, economic and political systems to the Soviet-style style .
 His supporters tried to buttress his position by linking his reputation with that of Mao’s, even arranging for his hairstyle and clothing to resemble that of his predecessor on huge propaganda posters . Deng's political influence continued to overshadow Hua's efforts .
 Deng Xiaoping assumed power in December 1978 at the Third Plenum of the Eleventh Central Committee . Deng's colleagues assumed power at the end of December 1978, 1978 .
 Hua toured several European countries in 1979, but his fate at home seemed sealed . Hua toured Europe, toured China and toured the Middle East .
 Deng worked to discontinue previous Cultural Revolution bans, attacked Hua’s Two Whatevers policy, and successfully aligned himself with the military . Deng effectively numbered Hua Guofeng's days as party chairman, effectively numbering his days .
 In China, the economic situation continued to change, and population control became an important issue . Population control was a key issue in China's economic situation .
 Hua called for the now famous onechild-per-family policy . Hua was forced from office in 1980 after calling for the policy .
 In 1981, he lost the post as party chairman to Hu Yaobang and chairman of the Central Military Commission to Deng Xiaoping . In 1981 he lost his post as chairman of China's Communist Party Party .
 Unlike former PRC leaders, he faced neither physical harm nor imprisonment upon leaving office . He remained a member of the Central Committee until 2002, and, unlike former leaders, faced no physical harm .
 Hua Guofeng passed away at the age of 87 in Beijing on August 20, 2008 .
 The socalled Huai-Hai Campaign took place between the Huai River in the west and Huang Hai in the east from November 1948 to January 1949 . The campaign was between November 1948 and January 1949.
 The troops of the PLA were under the command of Deng Xiaoping (19041997), Liu Bocheng , Chen Yi (19011972), and Su Yu . spN m ,3sl Huai-Hai Campaign, November 7, 1948-January 10, 1949 .
 Chinese Communist forces launched the Huai-Hai Campaign on November 6, 1948 . After the conclusion of the LiaoningShenyang Campaign, China launched the campaign in 1948 .
 The Huai-Hai Campaign was the largest military operation in the Chinese Civil War . It took place during the Huai Hai Campaign .
 Jiang Jieshi decided to hold the key city of Xuzhou, near the Grand Canal and a key railway junction . The Republic of China president of China decided to keep the city in China .
 President Vladimir Putin mobilized 920,000 troops from seven armies and three military zones . He mobilized 9,500 troops from 7 armies, 3,500 from 7 countries and 3,000 from 3,600 from 7 nations .
 Jiang attempted to appoint General Bai Chongxi, chief of the GMD Central China Command, as the commander in chief of Huai-Hai operation . Jiang was forced to resign as a result of his refusal to accept the appointment of a general in chief .
 Lieutenant General Du Yuming is deputy commander of the General Suppression Headquarters of Xuzhou Garrison . He is the deputy . General Yuming was the deputy commander .
 General Du had to rush to Manchuria to salvage the GMD situation in northeast China . But Lin Biao attacked the Nationalist troops during the Liaoning-Shenyang Campaign .
 President Jiang appointed General Liu Zhi as commander in chief of the General Suppression Headquarters of Xuzhou Garrison . President Jiang was without much choice, appointing Liu Zhli as commander of the Xuzzhou Garrison .
 This strategic plan later evolved into the decisive campaign to eliminate the Nationalist troops north of the Huai River . The campaign was the decisive operation to eliminate Nationalist forces .
 Mao ordered the deployment of two field armies, the East China Field Army under Chen Yi and Su Yu, and the Central China field Army under Liu Bocheng and Deng Xiaoping, totaling 600,000 men . Mao's forces were deployed to China's capital, Beijing, during the
 They gathered 600,000 militias and over 1 million peasant laborers, who provided logistical support . They also gathered over 1,500,000 peasant laborers . The army was mobilized by over 100,000 people in support of the rebels .
 Jiang Jieshi sent General Gu Zhutong, chief of the General Staff to Xuzhou, to chair a military conference on the coming battle . On November 3, 1948, Jiang sent .
 General Gu tasked the nationalist Seventh Army under Huang Baitao and the nationalist Sixth Army under Lieutenant General Li Yannian to withdraw from Haizhou and Lianyungang . The Seventh and Sixth armies were ordered to join up with the Second Army under Qiu Qingquan
 Lieutenant General Sun Yuanliang was commander of the Sixteenth Army . He held the vital railroad around Suxian, a key retreat route for the Nationalist army .
 Lieutenant General Liu Ruming, commander of the Eighth Army, was defending the area south of Suxian . He was the last commander to leave the country .
 President Jiang Jieshi also ordered the elite Twelfth Army under Lieutenant General Huang Wei to reinforce the Xuzhou Garrison from Queshan County, Henan Province .
 Jiang also held meetings with General Fu Zuoyi , commander in chief of the North China Command, about the possibility to give up Beijing and reinforce Xuzhou with 500,000 troops .
 Communist moles had already infiltrated Nationalist command and government structure . Jiang and other top Nationalist commanders were unaware of the moles in their command .
 Deputy chief of staff Liu Fei and director of the war-planning board Guo Ruhuai leaked vital military information to the Communists’ intelligence . They unraveled the Nationalist operational plans .
 On November 6, 1948, 300,000 Communist troops of the East China Field Army attacked the Nationalist Seventh Army near Haizhou District, Lianyungang . The long-awaited Huai-Hai Campaign began .
 Huang Baitao, the Nationalist commander who led the Seventh Army to Xuzhou, was two days behind schedule . He was led by Nationalist forces two days later . The battle was held in the southern city of Xuzou .
 He had to wait for the Forty-Fourth Corps and the 100th Corps to arrive near the Grand Canal . He was forced to wait until they arrived in the area .
 The Communist troops caught up with the rearguard elements of the 100th Corps and eliminated three divisions . The 100th corps was eliminated by Communist troops .
 On November 7, General Huang Baitao asked Li Mi, commander of the Thirteenth Army, to cover his retreat . Li Mi was the commander of Li Mi's Thirsteenth Army . General Huang asked Li to cover the retreat .
 General Liu Zhi, commander in chief of the GMD Xuzhou Garrison, ordered the Thirteenth Army to withdraw . However, the commander had already ordered the army to withdraw back to the city .
 Generals He Jifeng and Zhang Kexia revolted on the battlefield, taking 23,000 Nationalist soldiers to the Communists . The next day on November 8, General Jifang and Zhang Xexia were supposed to protect the flank of the Seventh Army .
 Communist forces proceeded to surround the Seventh Army in Nianzhuang, and set up defensive lines along the vital positions of Caobaji and Daxujia to block possible Nationalist reinforcements .
 Jiang Jieshi immediately summoned Defense Minister He Yingqin (18901987) and chief of the General Staff Gu Zhutong to discuss the situation . Eventually decided to recall Du Yuming from Manchuria .
 Communist forces under Liu Bocheng had taken over Su County, 30 miles south of Xuzhou, and cut off the GMD retreat route . The GMD retreated from Su County .
 GMD forces around Xuzhou faced the possibility of complete encirclement . The GMD had been in control of the region for more than a decade .
 First plan was to concentrate the Second, Thirteenth, and Sixteenth Armies to attack the six Communist columns . Six Communist columns occupied the vital railway link at Su County .
 General Huang Baitao’s Seventh Army was attacked by the Chinese army . Hopefully, their attack would rescue General Huang . General Huang has been in China since 2008 .
 Second and Thirteenth Armies plan to rescue Seventh Army and defend Xuzhou . Plan was to deploy five corps from Second and Third and Fourth Armies to rescue the Seventh Army .
 General Liu Zhi was not in favor of the first plan as he thought it was too risky to launch an attack . He thought it would be too risky for him to attack . General Liu Zhui said he did not want to attack the country .
 Liu Zhi also doubted whether Huang Baitao could hold on long enough for the rescue . Liu Zhou also doubted if Huang Zhi could hold onto long enough to survive the rescue effort . Liu Xiao and Huang Zhou were trapped in a cave in northern China .
 General Qiu Qingquan did not commit his elite Fifth Corps to the battle . Qiu's Fifth Corps did not participate in the battle in China's Second World War .
 CCP’s commander Liu Bocheng deployed 200,000 soldiers to surround the GMD Twelfth Army under General Huang Wei . In the meantime, CCP's commander Liu . Liu Bcheng deployed .
 On November 23, 1948, Huang Baitao’s Seventh Army was eliminated at Nianzhuang, and General Huang committed suicide . General Huang was killed by the fall of his Seventh Army .
 Jiang Jieshi ordered the Nationalist armies to retreat to the south and to save Huang Wei’s Twelfth Army . The Nationalist army was forced to retreat south of China on November 30 .
 The Communist East China Field Army surrounded the Twelfth Army before any rescue could arrive . The East China field army surrounded the army's 12th Army before rescue could be reached .
 CCP Central China Field Army destroyed the GMD Twelfth Army on December 15, 1948 . The CCP Central . China Field . Army destroyed GMD . Twelfth . Army in China destroyed in 1948 .
 The GMD Sixteenth Army broke out on its own on December 6 . The Nationalist forces already lost much of their supplies and equipment .
 The GMD air force was unable to provide enough food and ammunition for 220,000 men . The air force failed to provide sufficient food or ammunition .
 An all-out attack was launched by the Communist armies on January 6, 1949 .
 General Du Yuming was captured, and General Qiu Qingquan was killed in action while trying to break the Communist siege with his Second Army . General Du Yan was captured and died in the siege .
 The Huai-Hai Campaign was a catastrophe for Jiang Jieshi and the ROC government . The campaign was a disaster for the Chinese government and Jiang Jie-Jian .
 The scale of the campaign was unprecedented in Chinese military history . It was unprecedented for the country's military to take part in a major campaign .
 Nearly all of Jiang's best troops were wiped out by the People’s Liberation Army . By the spring of 1949, nearly all of his best troops had been destroyed .
 Jiang Jieshi was forced to resign from his presidency on January 31, 1949 . ROC vice president Li Zongren and General Bai Chongxi forced him to resign . The campaign was unsuccessful .
 Huang Chao’s Rebellion was a peasant rebellion against the Tang dynasty . Huang Chao's Rebellion was the first uprising in China's history . The Tang dynasty had gone through its golden age and entered a period of decline .
 Many impoverished farmers and merchants were under a great burden of taxation, which led to the formation of many antigovernment rebellions during that period . Many impoverished people were under the burdens of taxation .
 Tang's rebellion greatly weakened Tang’s power and accelerated the collapse of the Tang dynasty . Although his rebellion failed, it greatly weakened the power of the Chinese dynasty .
 Huang was said to be very good at riding, archery, and swordsmanship . Huang was well educated and also very good in riding and archery . It was said that Huang was very educated .
 He took imperial examinations several times but was not able to pass them, so he became a salt merchant like his father . He was unable to pass the imperial examinations so he was able to become an imperial merchant .
 Many merchants, including Huang Chao, took risks to smuggle salt instead of salt .
 Inevitably, they had several armed conflicts with the local government . The local government was also involved in several conflicts with them .
 In 874, Wang Xianzhi launched an open rebellion against the Tang’s domination, supported by thousands of peasants and merchants . The rebellion was supported by peasants, merchants and peasants . Wang was also a salt privateer, who was also an open rebel .
 After Huang Chao learned of this, he led his men to join Wang’s rebel army . Huang Chao's men were killed by Wang's rebels . Wang's rebel army was defeated by Huang Chao in the Battle of Huang Chao .
 Huang Chao became the rebel leader, and his rebel army won several skirmishes and occupied a couple of dozen counties . Soon he became the leader of the rebel army .
 The Tang government attempted to buy them off Huang’s rebellion . Huang was the leader of a rebellion against the Tang government .
 One group under the command of Huang Chao marched north toward Hebei and Shandong Provinces . Huang Chao led a group of soldiers to the outskirts of Beijing .
 Another group under the command of Wang Xianzhi took over central China . Another group took control of central China in 2012 .
 After one year of fighting in 879, the Huang army occupied Yuezhou, Quzhou, Jianzhou, and Guangzhou . The Huang army then occupied Guangzhou, Guangzhou and other parts of China .
 Huang Chao led 600,000 troops and captured Tongguan in 880 . Huang Chao's capture brought them close to the Tang’s capital city of Chang’an .
 Emperor Tang Xizong fled Chang’an to Chengdu, southwestern Sichuan Province . Emperor Tang was captured in Chang'an and died in the city of Chengdu .
 Huang Chao established a new dynasty, called Da Qi, and made himself the emperor . Huang Chao took over the capital city and established the new dynasty . Several days later, Huang Chao made himself emperor .
 Tang Xizong regrouped his forces and launched counterattacks . After settling down in Chengdu, Tang Xisong's forces moved on to Chengdu . Tang's forces eventually retreated and fought back .
 Tang army came back and surrounded Chang’an by cutting off the supplies to the city . Soon the Tang army returned and cut off supplies to Chang'an . The Tang army also cut off the city's supplies .
 Several hundreds of thousands of soldiers quartered in Chang’an ran out of food quickly . The soldiers were forced to abandon their food in the face of starvation .
 Zhuwan surrendered to the Tang government in October 882 . Zhuwan was a general of Huang’s rebel army, which guarded Tongzhou . He surrendered to Tang government .
 Huang attempted to take Chengzhou, Henan Province . After the rebels retreated to central China, Huang tried to capture Chengzhou . Huang was captured by the rebels in 2009 .
 Huang and remnants of his troops were on the run to avoid the Tang army and a total defeat . Huang was forced to abandon his troops to avoid a total Tang army . Huang died in the fall .
 Paul K. Davis, Paul K Encyclopedia of Invasions and Conquests from Ancient Times to the Present . Davis is author of Paul K . Davis' book, "Invasion of the Ancient World"
 He led the Yongxing uprising during the Xiangnan campaign in 1928 . He joined the Third Division of the CCP Red Army during the Agrarian Revolutionary War of 1927-1937 .
 Huang Kecheng was promoted to the director of the Political and Organizational Department of the Red Army . Huang was promoted .
 During the AntiJapanese War, he was appointed political commissar of the 334th Brigade, 115th Division, Eighth Route Army, in 1937 . He was also political commissar during the Anti-Japanese War .
 Along with Xu Haidong, he led the brigade against the Japanese troops in the regions of Shanxi , Hebei , and Henan Provinces .
 After 1940, he became political commissar of the Eighth Route Army and New Fourth Army . After 1940 he was the political commissar of the Eighth and Fourth armies .
 During the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949, he served as deputy commander and logistics commander of the Northeastern Democratic Alliance Army, later the Northeast Field Army, and the Fourth Field Army .
 He was elected an alternate and then formal member of the Seventh Central Committee of the CCP National Congress . He is currently an alternate member of CCP National Party's Central Committee .
 Huang was appointed the party’s Committee Secretary of Tianjin City . After the BeijingTianjin Campaign, Huang was given the title of the party's Committee Secretary .
 He served as deputy chief of the PLA General Staff and head of the General Logistics Department . Then he was transferred to Beijing and served as vice minister of Defense Ministry .
 Huang was promoted to secretary-general of the Central Military Commission and chief of the PLA General Staff . Huang was also promoted to Secretary-General of the . Central Military . Commission and Chief of the Chinese General Staff.
 Both had questioned and criticized Mao’s policies of the Great Leap Forward and the People's Communes . They had questioned the policies of China's Mao's policies .
 After Peng’s fall, Huang was deprived of all positions and was under investigation for a long time . Huang was stripped from all positions after Peng was found guilty of sexual misconduct .
 He was later persecuted again during the Cultural Revolution of 1966-1976 . He was also persecuted during China's Cultural Revolution .
 He was appointed advisor to the Central Military Commission and executive secretary of the CCP Central Commission for Inspecting Discipline . He has also been appointed Advisor to the . Central Military . Commission .
 From 1982 to 1985, he was the second secretary-general of the Central Commission for Inspecting Discipline . He was secretary general of the commission from 1982 until 1985 .
 Instead of a single battle, the hundred regiments engaged in 1,824 separate battles over a large region across four provinces during three months . The 100 regiments were involved in more than 1,800 separate battles, large and small .
 Regular troops of the Eighth Route Army also operated with the local CCP militia and underground anti-Japanese resistance . Regular troops operated with anti-Japan resistance .
 In May 1938, Mao Zedong (Mao Tsetung) wrote a treatise entitled On Protracted War that analyzed the basic characteristics of both sides of the Anti-Japanese War . Mao Zedongo (Moxox) was chairman of the CCP, chairman of China's Communist
 China could not win a quick victory, but that it would surely be victorious after a long period of struggle, he said . He pointed out that China would surely win a long struggle, not a quick win .
 Mao instructed high command to organize extensive peasant militias through the CCP network, now a mass party . Mao instructed the high command . The CCP network is now a major mass party.
 Transforming illiterate peasants into capable soldiers is part of the Chinese military tradition . Transformed illiterates peasants into able soldiers became part of China's military tradition in China .
 From July 1937 to November 1938, Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kaishek) lost 1 million GMD troops while eliminating 250,730 Japanese soldiers . The ROC president of the ROC also lost 250,000 Japanese soldiers in the same period .
 The GMD Army withdrew to China’s southwest and northwest to conserve some of their troops when Jiang moved the seat of his government from Nanjing to Chongqing in 1939 .
 The situation in north China for the CCP by 1940 was worse than it had ever been . By 1940, the situation had become worse than ever for the party .
 In late 1939 and early 1940, Japanese forces and their puppet troops launched a systematic pacification of China, called “cage’s tactics, with the goal of crushing anti-Japanese activities . The goal was to pacify China and crush the CCP .
 The strategy was first to clear an area of resistance elements and then establish a series of interconnected strongpoints with the capability of rapidly reinforcing each other . The strategy is to clear the area and establish the strongpoints .
 The framework of this tactic was the major rail lines and roads that would separate Communistcontrolled areas from one another and deprive them of their mobility . The framework was the . framework of the . strategy was the rail lines .
 Zheng-Tai railway is one of China's most important transport lines . It connects Shijiazhuang in northern Hebei Province with Taiyuan in central Shanxi Province . It was the most important railway line in China's history .
 Many CCP leaders, especially the Eighth Route Army commanders, conceived that some action was necessary to reverse the situation . Zhu De and Peng Dehuai were among those who were critical of the situation in China .
 Eighth Route Army planned a coordinated offensive campaign in all the areas reachable by their regiments . Under Peng’s command, the Eighth Route . Army planned to attack in all areas reachedable by the regiments.
 Eighth Route Army launched its largest raids of the war against Japanese troops in northern and eastern China on August 20, 1940 . The raids were one of the largest raids against Japanese forces in China .
 The term “Hundred Regiments Campaign” was created two days later and has been used ever since . The term "Hundred Regiment Campaign" has since been used .
 Eighth Route Army forces attacked Japanese garrisons with overwhelmingly numerical superiority along the Zheng-Tai rail line . During this period, the Eighth Route . Army forces were attacked with overwhelming numerical superiority .
 Destruction inflicted on railways as well as roads, bridges, and military facilities . Destruction was inflicted by railways, roads and bridges .
 The vital Jingxing coal mines were badly damaged, and shafts were even flooded by destroyed pipes . The vital coal mines are even more damaged than ever before .
 "The element of surprise was achieved everywhere. As a result, phase one was enormously successful," he said . "As a result of phase one," he added . "Phase one was hugely successful, and it was very successful"
 Second phase concerned counterattacks and CCP defense through September 10-October 6 . The second phase concerned Japanese counterattacks .
 Initial attacks on the transportation routes caused the Japanese to reinforce key points with large numbers of troops . Initial attacks in the area were unsuccessful .
 Bloodiest fighting of the entire campaign occurred during the second phase . Thus, the bloodiest fighting was during second phase of the campaign .
 CCP forces confronted reinforced enemy units that were equal in numbers but had much superior weapons . CCP forces often confronted reinforced forces that had superior weapons but were equal numbers .
 By early October, the large-scale open battle in the previous two phases was giving way to the traditional guerrilla warfare . The battle is giving way for guerrilla warfare, which began in October .
 Most regiments of the Eighth Route Army retreated into base areas in the mountains and forests . Most of the regiments were withdrawn from the battlefield . The Eighth Route army retreated to base areas .
 Throughout phase three, the CCP was largely on the defensive with merely limited engagements . The CCP has been on the defense throughout phase three of phase three .
 Communists claimed 46,000 Japanese and puppet forces killed and wounded, and 22,000 casualties of their own . After the Hundred Regiments Campaign, the Communists claimed there were 46,00 Japanese forces killed, wounded .
 The Zheng-Tai rail line was suspended for one month, and production at the Jingxing mines could not resume until six months later . Production at the mines was delayed for six months .
 The Hundred Regiments Campaign was one of the largest conventional campaigns the CCP ever engaged in its military history . The CCP was engaged in one of its biggest conventional campaigns in history .
 Lieutenant General Joseph W Stilwell’s forces progressing in northern Burma, the Japanese launched their last offensive in China . The Japanese launched its last offensive against China in China in 1945 .
 Known as the Ichi-go Campaign, it was aimed primarily at the Nationalist forces . The Japanese strategic objectives were to destroy these forces, capture air bases in southeast China, consolidate control over eastern China .
 The Japanese hoped to relieve some of the pressure on their forces in Burma and establish a stronger base in China from which to resist any potential Allied invasion of the Japanese home islands . The Japanese also hoped that they would relieve the pressure in Burma .
 The first phase began in March and lasted until July 1944, with the offensive being mounted on a broad front across central and south China .
 The early phase of the operation went well for the Japanese, with Nationalist forces quickly collapsing . Nationalist troops quickly collapsed in the early stages of the battle .
 This situation ended whatever hope remained among Western leaders that China might play a major role in the defeat of Japan . Western leaders had hoped that China would play a role in defeating Japan .
 In April and May, the Japanese cleared the Beijing-Hankou railway and took Henan Province, even though they had to move at night to avoid constant attacks .
 Despite their air superiority, the Chinese Nationalist forces lost almost every time they met the Japanese . Despite air superiority they lost almost all of their battles .
 Some Chinese soldiers were even attacked by their own people, enraged by earlier mistreatment . Some starving peasants actually killed retreating Chinese troops and welcomed the Japanese .
 Nationalist military failures exacerbated the already rocky relationship between GMD leader Jiang Jieshi and president of the Republic of China .
 Stilwell was convinced that the key to restoring China lay in reopening a land supply to Chongqing through Burma, whereas Chennault feared for the preservation of his airfields in eastern China .
 Jiang, realizing that the Americans were going to defeat the Japanese in due course, seemed more concerned with the threat posed to his regime by the Chinese Communists . Jiang realized that the U.S. was winning the war, but was more concerned about his regime .
 By November, all of Guangxi and eastern Hunan Provinces had been overrun, and the Japanese were threatening Guiyang, capital of Guizhou Province . The Japanese invaded Guangxi in November .
 In the process, the Japanese captured all but three of the United States airfields in south China .
 The Allies feared that if Guiyang fell, the Japanese might capture Kunming and Chongqing . The Allies wanted to prevent the Japanese from capturing Kunming, Chongquing .
 The Japanese were not able to advance farther, and in December, they attacked Guiyang but were repulsed . In December, the Japanese were able to repulse Guiyan .
 In early 1945, the Japanese began limited offensives to consolidate the gains of 1944, but these failed to accomplish much . The threat of war with the Soviet Union forced them to transfer several divisions to defend Manchuria and the Japanese mainland .
 Between May and July, the Nationalist Chinese used this situation to recover Guangxi and western Guangdong (Kwangtung) Most Chinese lands captured by the Japanese remained in their hands until the end of the war .
 The Ichi-go offensive also greatly benefited Chinese Communist forces in China, who took advantage of the Nationalist defeats to occupy more territory and greatly expand their army .
 On September 18, 1931, Japan invaded Manchuria in northeast China . Japan invaded the region in 1931 .
 This is also known as the September 18 Incident, or the Mukden Incident . The Mukden incident occurred in September 18, or September 18 .
 Within a few months, Japanese armed forces occupied the entire Manchuria, including Liaoning, Jilin , and Heilongjiang Provinces .
 The aggression was later considered to be the first step on the path to the Japanese invasion of the Republic of China in 1937-1945 . This aggression was considered to have led to the invasion of China .
 Protectionism and trade tariffs introduced by the United States to protect its own industry placed high barriers on Japanese trade . The U.S. placed high tariffs on Japanese imports .
 High unemployment, over-spilling population, and acute shortage of raw materials all plagued the Japanese economy . High unemployment and over-the-spill population have plagued the economy .
 Voices for a campaign to win new colonies abroad grew in popularity in Japan . In order to solve these problems, voices for winning colonies abroad were voices for the campaign .
 Supporters included political rightist and, in particular, a large number of army leaders . Supporters include political rightists and political right-wingers .
 Manchuria, with its rich minerals, fertile soil, and nearly 200,000 square kilometers of land, seemed to be a proper target . As a result, the country's rich minerals and fertile soil were a target .
 A mysterious explosion on a section of the Japanese-held rail line at Shenyang gave the Japanese army the excuse it sought to charge the local Chinese with sabotage and to launch an attack on Manchuria .
 The Mukden attack was known as the 9-18 Incident, or the Mukden Incident . Taking place on September 18, the attack took place in Mukden, Afghanistan .
 The Japanese troops promptly occupied Mukden with ease as the Chinese defensive forces were given a nonresistance order by the central government .
 Following the occupation of Mukden, the Japanese operation continued to expand to other cities and towns . However, following the occupation, Mukden was occupied by the Japanese .
 In order to retake Manchuria, the Chinese government appealed to the League of Nations . The Chinese government was forced to withdraw from Manchurland .
 The Japanese government denied that it had territorial designs in northeast China . It justified its invasion of Manchuria on security grounds, to ward off a possible attack from the Red Army .
 Lytton Commission: Japanese operations could not be regarded as measures of self-defense and should be condemned . After a one-year investigation, the commission reported in October 1932, that the Japanese operations had been condemned .
 The Japanese reacted by withdrawing from the League and furthering their occupation of Jehol Province in north China .
 Japanese de facto seizure of Manchuria exposed a constant threat to China . Japan de facto seized Manchia from China in 1940 .
 The Japanese unleashed military and political forces that led ultimately to the full invasion of China on July 7, 1937 . In fact, with the outbreak of the Manchurian Crisis, the Japanese unleashed forces .
 Anti-Japanese War; China, Republic of; July 7 Incident; Marco Polo Bridge Incident . Qing Dynasty; Red Army; RussoJapanese War of 1904-1905 . Sino-Japanese war of 1904/1905; Sino War of 1905/1907 . Soviet Union.
 Jiang Jieshi was bom in October 1887 to a salt merchant family in the coastal province of Zhejiang just as the Qing dynasty was crumbling . He was born in October of the same year as Qing dynasty began crumbling .
 While Jiang was in Japan, an uprising began in the Chinese city of Wuchang involving New Army units of the Qing dynasty . The uprising took place during Jiang's visit to Japan .
 Jiang left Japan in 1911 to become a regimental commander of Chen Qimei, who had risen to the post of military governor of Shanghai . In 1911 he left Japan to become the head of the military in Shanghai . Jiang was a member of the Shanghai-based military council of the Chinese
 Jiang allied himself early on with Nationalist leader Sun Yat-sen . He was briefly appointed president of the new Republic of China created after the Qing emperors’ abdication in 1912 .
 Sun realized that his new GMD party needed a military if it was going to survive let alone take control of China . Sun realized he needed to have a military in order to survive .
 Sun sent Jiang Jiang to Moscow in 1924 to train with the Soviet Red Army . Jiang returned to play a critical role in the formation of a new GMD military .
 The first major project for this new GMD army was the creation of a military academy .
 Jiang scored a round of victories with his new army in February and March 1925 against local warlords in the Shantou area . The NRA was ready for major combat action .
 On July 1, 1926, Jiang took his newly created army into battle in what is known as the Northern Expedition in 1926-1927 . Jiang was the first Chinese leader to take command of his army in China .
 Jiang defeated two northern warlord armies and enticed the other warlords to join him . In just a few months, he defeated two warlords armies . Jiang then enticed other war lords to join with him .
 Jiang reestablished the ROC under GMD control in nearby Nanjing with himself as president . The next month Jiang reestablished the state of Nanjing, China, in Nanjing . Jiang re-established the state with himself president .
 Jiang’s victory in the Northern Expedition, the CCP became a political and ideological threat to his authority . Jiang's victory in China's Northern Expedition was the result of his victory in Northern Expedition . The CCP became an ideological threat .
 In GMDcontrolled areas, Communists were purged and killed, and the CCP was outlawed . GMD controlled areas, Communist Party was outlawed in GMD areas .
 Mao Zedong’s rural base evaporated, and he was forced to initiate guerrilla warfare tactics to survive with what men he could convince to join him . Jiang's successful purging of CCP members in the cities, Mao Zedongo's rural base . He was forced .
 As Mao’s reputation increased, so did support from Moscow and the rural poor of interior China . Mao's reputation increased as he became a powerful figure in China .
 Jiang attempted five military campaigns into Communist-controlled provinces in the subsequent years . He committed 1 million men during the fifth campaign, committing 1 million .
 As the CCP and GMD civil war continued through the 1930s, Japan increased its territorial expansion onto mainland China . As the war raged, Japan expanded its territorial territory .
 The Chinese Civil War broke out in 1946, the Communist and Nationalist armies clashed, and slowly Jiang’s grip on control of China slipped away . Jiang was one of the leaders of the Nationalist Party in China until his death in 1946 .
 Truman ordered elements of the Seventh Fleet into the Taiwan Straits to act as a buffer between both Jiang and Mao two days after the Korean War broke out on June 25, 1950 . U.S. president Harry S Truman (18841972) ordered elements .
 Eisenhower began a program of "unleashing Jiang" in 1953 . With the Korean War stalemated, the new U.S. president decided to change Taiwan policy .
 ROC forces were given the go-ahead to begin harassing operations against coastal China and PRC shipping to put pressure on Mao . The operation began in response to the threat posed by the Chinese government .
 In July 1953, the Korean War Armistice was signed after both UN and CPVF forces were unable to win a decisive victory . The Korean War ended in July 1953 with a cease-fire between the two sides .
 Jiang received a great deal of moral and material support for his nationalist cause . In the U.S. a political battle raged over who lost China .
 Jiang had successfully used the Cold War climate to maneuver America into pledging its support for his government . Jiang's government was supported by the U.S. in the 1950s .
 The U.S. built a new air base on Taiwan capable of handling large B-52 bombers and moved nuclear-capable Matador missiles to Taiwan . The United States for its part constructed a new Air Force base in Taiwan .
 Jiang conducted military and propaganda operations against the PRC throughout the 1950s . The United States allowed Jiang to periodically conduct military operations against PRC . The PRC was eventually banned from the U.S. in China .
 Jiang's dream of a return to the mainland for Jiang was, in all practical sense, over . The dream of returning to China was, for all, over, with Jiang . Jiang is now a permanent resident of China's Guangzhou province .
 Jiang continued to make speeches and conduct his government as if they would one day return . Over the next two decades, Jiang focused on increasing his hold on Taiwan and improving the economy .
 Taiwan grew both its GNP and per capita GNP significantly in 1972 . Taiwan's GNP grew significantly through 1972 . In 1972, Taiwan grew significantly .
 Jiang ensured a faster growth rate than his counterparts in Beijing . Although Taiwan lagged behind Japan, Jiang ensured that growth rate was faster .
 Jiang maintained a dictatorial power over Taiwan and their offshore island holdings . Political dissent and the growth of democratic institutions were discouraged throughout Jiang’s rule .
 President Richard Nixon’s trip to China in 1972 created a One-China policy that only recognized Beijing as the sole representative of the Chinese people . President Jimmy Carter's official recognition of the PRC on January 1, 1979, created an official recognition for Beijing in 1979 .
 Jiang Zemin was the most important political and military leader of China at the turn of the century . He was the leader of the country's most important military and political leaders .
 Jiang was the leader of the third generation of the Chinese Communist leadership after the PRC’s founder Mao Zedong from 1949 to 1976 and reforming architect Deng Xiaoping from 1978 to 1989 . Jiang was one of the leaders of China's third generation after the founder Mao .
 Jiang was bom on August 17, 1926, in the city of Yangzhou in Jiangsu Province . Jiang was born in Yangzhou .
 Jiang participated in the CCP-led student movements and joined the CCP in 1946 . Jiang joined the party in 1946 and became a member of the Communist Party of China .
 After the founding of the PRC in 1949, he served as an associate engineer and deputy director of a factory in China .
 In 1955, he was sent to the Soviet Union and worked at the Stalin Automobile Factory as a trainee for one year . He was sent back to the USSR in 1955 and spent a year at the factory .
 After his return home in 1956, he served as a deputy division head, deputy chief power engineer, director of a branch factory, and director of factories in Changchun, Jilin Province .
 His successful experience won him election as a member of the Twelfth CCP Central Committee in 1982 . He was elected mayor of Shanghai, China’s largest city, in 1985 .
 Jiang planned a series of key infrastructure projects using overseas capital . Jiang planned to use overseas capital to build infrastructure projects . Jiang wanted to use the money to fund key projects .
 In 1987 he became a member of the Politburo at the First Plenary Session of the Thirteenth CCP Central Committee . In 1987, he became the first member of China's Communist Party Central Committee.
 In November, he became chairman of the Central Military Commission at the Fifth Plenary Session of the Thirteenth Central Committee . In November he was chairman of  the Fifth Plenary Session of the Thirteenth .
 Jiang gradually shifted the party’s ideology and political goals from radical communism to moderate nationalism . In the early 1990s, Jiang gradually moved the party's ideology from communism to nationalistic nationalism .
 The party’s transformation, however, did not improve the relationship between individual citizens and the Chinese government, according to the report .
 Jiang took tougher positions on Tibet, human rights issues, and Taiwan . He ordered Chinese forces to fire missiles near Taiwan in 1996, creating another serious international crisis with the United States .
 The party elite has employed nationalism as an ideology to unite China, resulting in one more source of legitimacy for the CCP as the country’s ruling party . China's ruling party is using nationalism as a way to unite the country .
 The “Three Represents” became the most essential requirements for the officials and officers to fulfill their obligations and duties during Jiang’s era from 1990 to 2004 as his legacy . Jiang's legacy was his legacy as the most important requirements for officials and . officers to . fulfill
 Jiang developed an institutionalized authority that enabled him to assume the top post as the CCP and CMC chairman and the country’s president . Jiang developed the authority to become the first civilian commander in chief in China .
 Jiang made a concerted effort to befriend the PLA, leading to the military’s eventual acceptance of his leadership . While CMC chairman, Jiang made efforts to befriend China's military . Jiang made an attempt at befriending the military, leading the military to accept him .
 In the early 1990s, Jiang granted the PLA high-level autonomy so that PLA interests would be well looked after . The PLA has been granted autonomy since the 1990s .
 Jiang campaigned vigorously for enlarging the military through the decade . Through the decade, Jiang campaigned for enlarged the military .
 The PLA was able to act as a fairly autonomous ‘interest group’ for the first time in its history . The PLA is now able to operate as an autonomous "interest group" for first time .
 Jiang reshaped the Chinese military through the 1990s . Having built up his own credibility in the PLA, Jiang built up credibility in his own .
 From 1991 to 1995, the high command retrained all the commanders and officers at regimental levels and above with Jiang’s principles . Jiang's principles were used to retrain all commanders and . officers .
 In December 1997, the CMC made a three-step grand plan for the PLA’s modernization from 1998 to 2040 . The plan was made in December 1997 .
 In April 1992, Jiang streamlined and restructured the PLA to consolidate the 1 million man reduction since 1985, from 4.24 million to 3.19 million men . Jiang streamlined the PLA in April 1992 .
 In 1997, Jiang announced his plan to reduce the PLA by a further 500,000 men over three years . Jiang announced the plan at the CCP Fifteenth National Congress in 1997 . In 1997 he announced his plans to reduce China's military by 500,500,000 troops .
 On July 28, 1998, the PLA stated that it had accomplished its reduction goal and that it would maintain the current 2. million troops . The PLA said in July 1998 that it will maintain its current 2 million troops.
 By that spring, the PLA had created a unified General Armaments Department alongside the General Staff Department, General Political Department and General Logistics Department . The move was a major overhaul of its command-and-control, logistics, and armament mechanisms .
 By the end of the 1990s, the PLA’s institutional reform included some major changes in the personnel system, organization, and sustainability system . The PLA's institutional reforms included major changes to personnel system and organization .
 Tension also mounted in the Taiwan Strait from July 21 to 26, 1995, when the PLA conducted its first missile test in an area only 36 miles north of a ROC-held island .
 In March 1996, the ROC was preparing its first presidential election in Taiwan since 1949 . The ROC had been preparing to hold the election for the first time in decades .
 Beijing intended to discourage the Taiwanese to vote for Lee because he had tried to separate Taiwan from China through the independence movement . Beijing wanted to discourage Taiwan from voting for Lee as he had failed to separate the country from China .
 Over 70 percent of commercial shipping passed through the targeted ports, which were disrupted by the missile test .
 Flights to Japan and transpacific flights were prolonged because airplanes needed to detour away from the flight path . Flights were delayed because of the detour .
 In 1997-2001, the PLA sped up its modernization by developing better technology and purchasing more Russian equipment . The PLA purchased more Russian technology and purchased more equipment .
 The information-based capability is the key for China’s military modernization, says the chairman of the PLA . Information-based capabilities are key for the PLA's military modernization .
 Promoting RMA with Chinese characteristics would bring about profound changes to every aspect of the Chinese army building, he said . He also said promotion of RMA would bring changes to all aspects of army building .
 John Hassard, John, Jackie Sheehan, Meixiang Zhou, Jane Terpstra-Tong, and Jonathan Morris. Hassard: "The world is changing. It's changing. We need to make sure that we have the right to know what we need to
 Jiangnan Arsenal, with its technical name “Machine Manufacturing General Bureau,” was set up at Shanghai in 1865 . Jiangnan was established in the city of Jiangnan in 1864 .
 It began with machinery purchased from abroad for armament manufacturing . It was used to make armament manufacturing for armaments .
 Jiangnan Arsenal made China’s first steel gunboat, named Huiji, in 1868 . In 1868, the Jiangnan Gunboat was made by China's first gunboat .
 From 1868 to 1876, shipbuilding was highly productive . 11 ships of diverse design were built in eight years . All parts of the ships were produced in Jiangnan Arsenal .
 Jiangnan Arsenal is the leading ordnance enterprise in the Far East and one of the greatest in the world . Its science and technology is superior to its chief competitor, Meiji Japan . The experience of shipbuilding made it possible for the Jiangnan .
 More warships for the Chinese navy were still produced in Europe, whose technological progress had been way ahead of China . However, financial difficulties, corruption among officials, and the lack of a compound engine, meant more warships were still made in Europe rather than China .
 1876 saw a cutback in the production of ships at the Jiangnan Arsenal . The year 1876 was the first year of production at the Arsenal .
 At the same time more emphasis was put on the manufacturing of modern small arms for military use . At the time, the arms industry was largely focused on arms manufacturing .
 Jiangnan Arsenal became famous for its success in producing rapid-firing machine guns in the 1890s . The weapons played a key role in China’s safeguarding of its territorial waters .
 Jiangnan Arsenal made China’s first ship in 1918 . After the Qing dynasty collapsed in 1911, despite the deficiency of leadership, the Jiangnan .
 The ship was later exported to the United States, where it served until World War II for civil purposes . The ship, which had a displacement of 10,000 tons, had been built in the 1930s .
 Jiangnan Arsenal was established in 1876 . A translation department was also established at the Arsenal in China's capital Jiangnan .
 The initiative was under the sponsorship of Xu Shou, Hua Fengfang, and Xu Jianyin, classical scholars .
 Later, English missionary John Fryer joined the effort to translate Western works related to military science and technological subjects into classic Chinese . Later, he joined the efforts to translate military science, technology and technology .
 Jiangnan Arsenal’s publications were well received among Qing officials and literati during the Self-Strengthening movement . As the main source of scientific learning, the Jiangnan .
 Jiangnan Arsenal remained in operation through the 1930s during the AntiJapanese War . It reopened in 1953 after being closed in 1953 .
 Anti-Japanese War; China, People’s Republic of of; Chinese Revolution of 1911; Li Hongzhang; New Army; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Qing . Dynasty; Self-Strengthening Movement; Zeng Guofan; Zang Gu
 On September 11, 1927, Mao led armed peasants and launched the Autumn Harvest Uprising along the Hunan-Jiangxi borders . Mao was the leader of the Chinese Communist Party in China .
 Mao’s badly damaged force reorganized into a single regiment on September 29 . Mao's badly damaged forces reorganized in the wake of the fall of the Great Depression . Mao died at the hands of the Soviet Union .
 Mao survived and successfully established a military base area for the Communist revolution in 1928-1934 . Mao survived . Mao's military base was established in 1928 and 1934 .
 The surviving CCP regiment established the Jinggangshan (Chingkang Mountains) base along the Jiangxi-Hunan border . Under Mao’s command, the surviving CCP Regiment established the base . The base is located in the Chingkang mountains in the eastern part
 Zhu De and his troops from the Nanchang Uprising joined Mao at Jinggangshan on April 24, 1928 . Zhu De joined Mao's forces in the battle for Mao's regime in 1928 . Mao was Mao's first Chinese leader to join the Communist Party .
 The Fourth Army of the Chinese Workers and Peasants Red Army established on May 4 . About 5,000 men organized into six regiments, for which they had but 2,000 rifles .
 Jinggangshan became the ‘cradle’ of the CCP’s military revolution . Soon other Communist troops joined them at the site .
 In many cases, the officer took land from the rich landlords and redistributed it among the poor and landless peasants by small allotments .
 Officers helped peasants organize a peasant association, a new government, and a self-defense militia . Officers also helped the peasants to organize a self defense militia with weapons and basic training .
 With the Soviet government, a base area, or so-called red region or the Soviet region, was founded . The base area was founded in the Soviet Union in the 1970s .
 By the summer of 1930, the Communist governments and the Fourth Army secured their base areas in Jiangxi-Hunan, including nine counties with a total population of 2 million . The Communist governments secured their bases areas in the region .
 In June-July 1928, with the help of the Soviet Union, the CCP held its Sixth National Congress at Moscow . The CCP was founded by members of the Communist Party .
 Moscow began to change its negative position against Mao’s rural guerrilla warfare, although Joseph Stalin still considered it as a supplementary method to the urban-centered revolution in China . Moscow changed its negative stance against Mao's rural guerrilla Warfare .
 Mao was absent from the meeting, but was elected a member of the CCP Central Committee . Mao was elected to the party's Central Committee even though he was not present .
 Stalin began to praise Mao’s rural guerrilla warfare during his conversations with the Chinese visitors in Moscow . After May 1930, Stalin began praising Mao's rural guerrilla guerrilla warfare . Stalin was impressed by Mao's guerrilla warfare in the countryside .
 On November 11, 1931, a Soviet-style central government was established in the Jiangxi region, or the “Central Soviet Region” Jiangxi . The region had several million in population and several dozen counties . Jiangxi was the "Central Soviet region"
 Mao created a government center for Chinese Communist authority across the country for the first time in CCP history . Mao was elected chairman of the Executive Committee of the Chinese Soviet Republic .
 Mao's military success had made him central to the Chinese Communist revolution . Mao’s military success made him a central figure in the revolution, according to a report .
 In his Provisional Central Government of the Chinese Soviet Republic ( zhonghua suweiai gongheguo linshi zhongyang zhengfu) Mao formed the Chinese . Soviet Central Revolutionary Military Committee as the high command of the Red Army .
 More than 4,000 young rural women joined the Red Army during this period . They served in a wide range of combat and noncombat military roles .
 By January 1934, the Red Army had 32 munitions factories in the “Central Soviet Region,” manufacturing rifles, hand grenades, machine guns, and mortars . The factories were manufacturing rifles and hand grenades .
 The Guantian Ordnance Factory employed more than 1,000 workers . Among them, the Guantian ordnance factory was a factory in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba .
 ROC president Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kai-shek) and the high command of the GMD Army centralized their provincial campaigns into a coordinated suppression in order to round up the Red Army . The GMD and ROC President Jiang Jie-jieshi centralized their
 Jinggangshan is one of the mountains in the middle section of the Luoxiao Mountain range, west of Jiangxi Province, along the JiangxiHunan border . It is located in Jiangxi .
 Mao led a regiment of the Chinese Workers and Peasants Red Army to join the Nanchang Uprising troops under the command of Zhu De and He Long in Guangdong .
 Zhu fled from Guangdong in early October, when Mao’s troops reached Jinggangshan, China . Zhu was captured by Mao's troops in October . Zhu had fled to China, where he was killed by the Chinese government .
 Mao became sworn brothers with two bandit heads by drinking blood wine and marrying one of their sisters . Mao married one of the sisters and drank blood wine with the bandit head .
 Some considered Mao’s move “up to the mountain” as defection from the CCP and becoming one of the bandits . Mao's move was considered a defection by the CCP .
 In November 1927, the Central Committee terminated Mao’s alternate standing committee membership in the Politburo at an emergency meeting chaired by the Soviet advisors in Shanghai .
 Mao survived and successfully established a military base area for the Communist revolution in 1928-1934 . Mao, however, survived and . successfully established the military bases for the revolution .
 The surviving regiment established the Jinggangshan base along the Jiangxi-Hunan border . Under Mao’s command, the surviving regiment set up the base in China .
 Zhu De (Chu Teh) joined Mao at Jinggangshan on April 24, 1928 . Zhu De and his troops from the Nanchang Uprising joined Mao's forces . Mao was Mao's first Chinese leader to join him in 1928 .
 About 5,000 men organized into six regiments, for which they had only 2,000 rifles . They established the Fourth Army of the Chinese Workers and Peasants Red Army .
 Fourth Army recognized the pea santry’s importance in their military revolution . The Fourth Army recognizes the importance of the santry in their revolution .
 To form a Communist revolutionary army, they created a voluntary system based on the ‘Guideline for Military Tasks’ issued by the army in April 1928 .
 Zhu and Mao tried to create an egalitarian society within their army, different from the warlord and GMD armies . Zhu's army was different from those of GMD and warlord armies . Mao and Zhu created a society of egalitarian society .
 The Fourth Army operated in remote, mountainous areas and away from the GMD military that occupied the major cities, a guerrilla warfare strategy worked . The GMD used guerrilla warfare in remote areas, away from major cities .
 Mao established the principle of the party’s absolute leadership over the army . During the formative period at the Jinggangshan base, Mao also established the concept of the . party's absolute leadership . over the military .
 The document instructed that active and brave members of the peasant uprisings be recruited into the regulars . The document was published in the 1920s .
 Zhu-Mao's Fourth Army of the Chinese Workers and Peasants Red Army became the Red Army’s Fourth Army in June 1928 . Zhu-mao’�s fourth Army of . the . Workers and . Peasant Red Army . became the . Red Army
 Zhu and Mao had created a model military center at Jinggangshan for the Communist revolution at that time . Mao and Zhu and Zhu had created an example military center .
 Stalin began to praise Mao’s rural guerrilla warfare during his conversations with the Chinese visitors in Moscow in 1930s . Stalin began praising Mao's rural guerrilla guerrilla warfare in Moscow .
 On November 11, 1931, a Soviet-style central government was established in the Jiangxi region, or the Central Soviet Region . The region had several million in population and comprised several dozen counties . It was established as a Soviet style central government .
 Jiang and the high command of the GMD Army centralized their provincial campaigns into a coordinated suppression to round up the Red Army . Jiang and his high command centralized their provinces campaigns into coordinated suppression .
 From 1930 to 1934, Jiang’s central government organized five major offensive campaigns against Communist-controlled areas and the Red Army bases in the Jiangxi-Hunan border . The Red Army was based in Jiangxi and Hunan, China .
 Red Army successfully conducted four countersuppression campaigns in 1934 . Total defense failed to slow down or stop the Fifth Offensives of Jiang’s army .
 In October, the Red Army gave up their base areas in Jiangxi and retreated westward . The Red Army retreated from Jiangxi, China, in October .
 Survivors of the Red Army began their Long March toward northwest China on October 10, 1934 . The survivors of the Long March began their march in 1934 . Red Army's Long March was the first of its kind .
 A small island group, lying less than two miles off the southeastern coast of the Chinese mainland, separated from Xiamen, a major city in southeastern Fujian Province, by a narrow strip of water .
 When the Nationalist guns fired back, the longest and heaviest artillery warfare in military history was on . The longest longest artillery warfare was on. When the war broke out, it was the heaviest artillery battle in history . The battle was the first of its kind .
 The bombardment continued until 1979, when the PRC and the U.S. normalized their diplomatic relationship .
 Jinmen played a critical role in the confrontation and communication between the PRC and the U.S. during the Cold War for more than two decades . Jinmen occupied a decisive position between the Chinese Communists and Nationalists in reshaping their civil struggle over the Taiwan Strait .
 In 1954, Jinmen and several offshore islands were at the center of the First Taiwan Strait Crisis of 1954-1955 . Jinmen is located in the Taiwan Strait .
 The PLA sank one GMD gunboat and two transportation ships, damaged seven other ships, and destroyed nine artillery positions . In the first two hours of shelling, the PLA sank a GMD ship and two transport ships .
 Two American officers were killed by the heavy shelling on this first day . Two other Americans were killed in the shelling .
 Because the PLA had not yet gained air control over the Fujian coast, the durations of the shellings were limited, lasting only about an hour or so in order to give artillery units enough time to leave their positions before GMD retaliatory air raids arrived .
 The 1954 PLA shelling of Jinmen was significant because it became a model of ‘diplomacy through militancy” in the Taiwan Strait . It became a principal means for Beijing to communicate with Washington for many years to come .
 Washington, however, chose to communicate in its own terms with Beijing in 1954 . Washington's reaction in support of the GMD defense of the Taiwan Strait was quick .
 On December 2, Washington signed its Mutual Defense Treaty with Taiwan . The treaty is a major commitment to Taiwan’s security . Washington signed the treaty on December 2 .
 The 1954 Taiwan Strait events were the first of two decades of episodic uses of the PLA by Beijing to signal displeasure over the Taiwan Strait . These 1954 events were first of the two decades .
 The Second Taiwan Strait Crisis began on August 23, 1958, when the PLA shelled Jinmen again . The Chinese military shelled the island again in 1958 .
 By August 25, Taiwan’s supplies and shipments to the Jinmen Islands had been totally stopped by the PLA shelling . The PLA shelling had totally stopped Taiwan's supplies .
 After 10 days of shelling, Jinmen was blocked, and the PLA tried to force the GMD troops to withdraw from the island . The GMD has been trying to pull out of Jinmen since the shelling began .
 Its garrison was getting only a small percentage of its regular supplies through a limited and ineffective airlift and some nighttime shipping . The base was getting a limited amount of supplies through limited airlift .
 Mao Zedong ordered shelling of Jinmen to stop for three days on September 3 in order to gauge the American response . The PLA was ready to make further moves, but the PLA was not ready to move further .
 On September 7, American warships began escorting GMD supply ships from Taiwan to Jinmen . U.S. warships have been escorting the ships since September 7 .
 Mao ordered his generals to shell the GMD transit ships only, not the American ships . Mao ordered the attack on American ships, but only the transit ships were attacked .
 PLA front command did not have enough time to identify the U.S. ships . The joint fleet did not shell the joint fleet that day .
 Mao gave the order to open fire on the joint fleet, and the PLA artilleries fired more than 20,000 shells . Mao gave an order to fire at the Soviet-Russian naval base .
 The American ships turned around without returning fire, while the GMD ships suffered heavy losses . The U.S. ships were attacked by the German ships .
 On September 11 and 13, the GMDU.U.S. joint fleet tried again, but could not get to Jinmen because of fierce PLA shelling around the harbor . The GMDUnited States joint fleet was unable to reach Jinmen on September 11 .
 On September 14, the GMD sent 17 fully loaded LVTs from large transport ships outside Jinmen, and 15 reached Jinmen’s beach . 15 of the 17 LVTs reached the beach .
 United States planes began to escort GMD shipments to Jinmen . U.S. planes began escorting shipments to the region .
 The United States also helped equip GMD F-86 fighters with new air-to-air missiles . The missiles were their first ever introduction to combat, and became a big headache for pilots .
 The PLA Air Force discovered that the GMD had the missiles only on September 24 when PLA fighters were shot down by the missiles in an engagement with GMD fighters . The GMD missiles were only discovered when the PLA discovered that they had missiles .
 The blockade of Jinmen was becoming more and more difficult to sustain, and the PLA high command put more pressures on its field generals . The blockade was putting more pressure on field generals, according to sources .
 On September 24, the CMC ordered the front command to improve the accuracy of its artillery so as to sink or neutralize these small-size vessels before they could reach the beach .
 On October 5, Mao wrote to Marshal Peng Dehuai (P’eng Te-huai) to cease the bombardment of Jinmen . Mao also wrote to the defense minister to stop the bombardment .
 Later in October, Mao and CMC arrived at a new decision to slow down the shelling of Jinmen and leave the offshore islands in Chiang’s hands as a burden for America . The decision was made in October .
 Chinese officials rationalized the slowdown in shelling by claiming that while the PLA could have seized Jinmen, it would have been merely a short-term victory . They said that while they could have taken Jinmen from Jinmen would have seen it as a victory, it was merely a temporary
 China would leave Jinmen linked to Taiwan to avoid giving the U.S. a pretext for instigating a two China plot . China would not want to give the United States a pretext to instigate a two .
 The nation’s unification and the liberation of Taiwan were much more important over the long run than the recovery of a few offshore islands, says President Obama . The U.S. should not have tried to recover the islands, he says .
 Eventually the problem of the offshore islands would be solved along with the Taiwan problem . Eventually, the problem would also be solved with the issue of offshore islands .
 On October 25, Peng announced that the PLA batteries on the Fujian front would not shell Jinmen on even-numbered days, while a continued shelling on odd numbered days would be limited by certain conditions . Peng announced the decision on October 25 that the shelling would not be allowed on even
 The PLA shelling of Jinmen continued from 1958 to January 1, 1979, the point at which the PRC and the U.S. normalized their diplomatic relations .
 China, People’s Republic of; Cold War; Guomindang; Mao Zedong; Peng Dehuai . Taiwan Strait Crisis of 1958; U.S.-PRC Normalization of Relations of Relations .
 The fight occurred between Qin forces led by Zhang Han and Chu rebels led by Xiang Yu . The Qin forces were defeated in the battle of Qin and Chu .
 Xiang Yu defeated the Qin forces with a relatively small number of troops . The Qin forces were defeated by Xiang Yu with only a few troops .
 Zhang ordered Wang Li and She Jian to surround Julu, in the state of Zhao . Zhang's army defeated Zhao’s army, Zhang said . Wang Li ordered She Jian and Wang Li to surround .
 Zhang Han himself garrisoned the rest of his army in the south of the city . Zhang Han maintained a corridor to supply Wang Li and She Jian’s forces .
 Song Yi, along with his troops, arrived at Anyang and stayed there for 46 days, which upset Xiang Yu . Song Yi and his troops stayed there in Anyang . Xiang Yu was upset by Song Yi's actions, which angered Xiang Yu.
 Song Yi betrayed King Huai of Chu and told his soldiers that Song Yi had betrayed him . So he killed Song Yi . Song Yi was killed by Huai's soldiers . Huai told his troops he had betrayed Song Yi of Chu .
 Chu had fewer soldiers than Qin, Xiang Yu ordered Ying Bu to lead a force of 20,000 soldiers to cross the river . Ying Bu was Ying Bu's first person to cross a river . Xiang Yu was Xiang Yu's third person in Chu's history .
 Xiang Yu commanded that all of his soldiers destroy their cooking materials . They won several skirmishes, and later commanded that . all of their . soldiers destroyed their . cooking materials, Xiang Yu said .
 He stated that they could bring food for only three days . After crossing the river, after crossing their boats, they must destroy their boats . The only choices would be to win the battle or perish .
 Xiang Yu’s soldiers won every battle through their bravery . The strategy succeeded, with Xiang Yu's soldiers winning every battle . Xiang Yu won the battle through bravery .
 Not only did they destroy Qin’s corridor, they also caught Wang Li alive . Wang Li was captured alive by the Chinese army in 2010 .
 Before Xiang Yu started to attack Qin’s armies, there were more than 10 troops formed by other states waiting outside . More than 10 other states were waiting outside of Qin's army .
 Xiang Yu was afraid to attack until Xiang Yu had won a certain number of skirmishes . Xiang Yu won't be able to attack again until he had won enough skirmishes to do so .
 They won the battle of Julu after Zhang Han, Sima Xin, and Dong Yi surrendered . Zhang Han and Sima . Xin surrendered .
 Han, Cavalry of; Han Dynasty, Qin Dynasty; Qin Shi Huangdi, Emperor; Rebellion Led by Chen Sheng. Han, cavalrymen of Han, Qin and Qin Dynasty .
 Kangxi , Emperor The second emperor of Qing dynasty (16441911) reigned from 1661 to 1722 . See Marco Polo Bridge Incident in China .
 Kangxi emperor expelled the last of the anti-Manchu forces from south China, gained control of Taiwan, and increased China’s territory in the north . Kangxi was one of China's most powerful emperors .
 Culturally, China blossomed during his reign, and if he failed to make constructive civil reforms, he nevertheless strengthened his country for the eighteenth century . Culturally .
 Kangxi emperor was born on May 4, 1654, in Beijing . He was the third son of the Shunzhi emperor . Kangxi was born in 1654 .
 His mother was Empress Xiao Kang (Hsiao Kang), the daughter of a famous Manchu general . He was born in China . His father was a Manchu .
 Kangxi emperor ascended the throne above his five brothers, whose mothers were of lower birth . When his father died of smallpox at age 23 in 1661, he ascended to the throne . His mother was born to a lower birth mother .
 Because he was only seven years old, the government was administered by four conservative attendants . Sonin, Suksaha, Ebilun, and Oboi were among the attendants .
 Kangxi emperor first married at age 11, and he eventually had three wives and more than 30 consorts . 28 of his 56 children survived childhood, 28 survived childhood .
 Kangxi emperor attempted to take over the responsibilities of government when he was 13, but the regents refused to relinquish their power . As his father had done, he had tried to take control of government, but he was only 13 .
 Sonin died, Suksaha was put to death by Oboi, and Ebilun bowed out, leaving Oboi as a virtual dictator . Oboi was arrested by the Kangxi emperor in 1669 on charges of dishonesty .
 Oboi died in prison, and the Kangxi emperor began his reign at the age of 15 . Oboi was imprisoned in prison . Kangxi was the first Chinese emperor to rule China .
 Kangxi emperor’s first task was to consolidate China under Manchu control . Kangxi was the first Chinese emperor to take over China .
 The Manchu people had taken over their homeland of Manchuria, moved south to conquer Beijing in 1644 . They established the Qing dynasty (meaning “pure” or “clear”), which ended the period of the Ming dynasty .
 In 1673, one of the generals, Shang Kexi, asked the emperor if he could retire in Manchuria . The other generals, Wu Sangui and Geng Jingzhong, also sent similar requests .
 Wu renounced his allegiance to the Qing and declared the for mation of his own dynasty, the Zhou, in December 1673 . The Kangxi emperor readily agreed, but after he attempted to deprive Wu of his army, he renounced the Qing . Wu renounces his allegiance and
 The resulting war became known as the War of the Three Feudatories . The young emperor’s astute military strategy proved triumphant .
 The three feudatories were unable to coordinate efforts, which proved disastrous in light of the tenacity of the Manchu warriors and the Kangxi emperor’s ability to develop long-range plans for conquest .
 Geng surrendered to the Qing in 1676, and Shang followed the next year . Shang followed Geng and Geng to China's capital, the city of Shang .
 Wu died of dysentery in 1678, but his grandson fought in his name for three more years before being trapped by Manchu generals . Wu's grandson fought for three years before he was trapped by the Manchu .
 New governors were sent to the rebellious provinces to assimilate them into the Qing realm . Taxes began to flow into Beijing from those areas, although they remained somewhat peripheral to China .
 Taiwan was ruled by the Cheng family, powerful seafarers who refused to submit to the Manchus . They used the island as a trade center and used it as a trading center .
 Shi delivered a crushing victory, and Taiwan surrendered three months later . Shi delivered the crushing victory and ordered Taiwan to hand over power .
 The island became a prefecture of the Fujian Province and was placed under the jurisdiction of the Qing dynasty . The island was placed in the province of Fujian and placed under Qing rule .
 Kangxi emperor attempted to drive the Russians out of the north in 1685 . Kangxi tried to secure Taiwan and south China in order to drive them out of China . He then attempted to take over the north of China in the 16th century .
 Qing armies began a siege on Albazin in 1686, and in 1689, the Kangxi emperor and Russia’s Peter I signed the Treaty of Nerchinsk, which gave the Amur Valley and Manchuria to China . The treaty was signed by Peter I
 Kangxi also gained Outer Mongolia through an attack on the Dzungars at Dzuunmod, which became an important part of the Qing Empire . Kangxi's attack on Outer Mongolia was the first to take over Outer Mongolia .
 Kangxi emperor had mixed results in civil reforms . Despite his high success rate in the areas of political unification and border consolidation, he had mixed success in civil reform .
 Life for most rural Chinese was a struggle between corrupt officials and roving bandits . Taxation and rural administration programs were stagnant, according to Chinese officials .
 His attention to the Yellow River and Grand Canal was helpful to farmers, however, and their flows were stabilized to allow for better rice transit .
 In 1670, he issued the Sacred Edict, 16 maxims summarizing Confucian values that ensured a wide diffusion of the emperor’s views on generosity, obedience, and hard work . The edict was issued in 1670 .
 He continued the examination system put in place by his father, which brought only the most promising men into the civil service . He assembled groups of scholars to write dictionaries and encyclopedias .
 Large geographical studies were started, and creative writing flourished . Many geographical studies started, including geographical studies, started .
 Kangxi emperor was interested in new developments from Europe, which led him in the late seventeenth century to employ many Jesuit missionaries in his court . An avid reader, he was an avid reader .
 He also allowed them to practice their religion in Beijing and other provinces, though he issued an edict insisting that the Chinese rituals of ancestor worship and homage to Confucius were civil ones .
 Catholic leaders felt that the mixture of Christian and Chinese rituals weakened the integrity of the Church . The edict did not sit well with Catholic leaders, who felt that it weakened the church's integrity .
 Most Jesuits signed an approval of the emperor’s position, but many did not . The split seriously encumbered the spread of Western thought in China . Most of the Jesuits did not agree with the emperor .
 He declared his first-born son, Yinreng, his successor soon after his birth in 1674 . Anxious to end the practice of regency government until young emperors came of age, he declared his son Yinreang as his successor .
 In 1707, the Kangxi emperor began to hear rumors of his son’s ill behavior . It came to light that Yinreng was a tyrant who bullied members of the household and purchased boys and girls from the south for sexual favors .
 The emperor withdrew Yinreng’s heirapparent status in 1708 and put him under house arrest, only to release him in 1709 . He was released from house arrest and put on house arrest by the emperor .
 The emperor rearrested his son in 1712, after learning that Yinreng planned to assassinate him . The emperor re-arrested the son after learning he planned to kill him .
 Kangxi emperor never named another heir, and the Qing Empire faced an uncertain future . Disheartened, the Kangxi Emperor never named a successor .
 In 1720, the Kangxi emperor made his last major stand in foreign affairs, expelling the Dzungars from Lhasa, Tibet, after they invaded the city in 1717 . Kangxi was the last emperor to make a major stand against the Chinese in Tibet .
 Tibet was incorporated into the Qing Empire, and a new Dalai Lama was installed in Tibet . Tibet is now incorporated into Tibet .
 Chinese interference in the politics of Tibet began during the reign of the Kangxi emperor . Chinese interference began during Kangxi's reign .
 By that time, the emperor was nearly 70 years old and increasingly depressed . The emperor was also increasingly depressed.
 After a celebration of his long reign during the Chinese New Year of 1722, he fell ill . He died of his illness in 1722 .
 Kangxi emperor died on December 20, 1722 . Neglecting to name an heir, he left China without naming an heir .
 His son Yongzheng became emperor after the Kangxi emperor’s death . He did little to build on the firm political and economic foundation that his father had established during his 61-year reign .
 Banner System; Confucian-Mencian Paradigm; Dalai Lama; Grand Canal; Li Zicheng; Manchus, Manchuria; Ming Dynasty; Nerchinsk and Kiakhta, Treaties of; Qing Dynasty; Russia, Relations with China;
 The first shooting war of the Cold War was also the first limited war of nuclear age . The first limited battle of the nuclear age was fought in the Korean War .
 Korea was long the scene of confrontation among China, Japan, and Russia . North Korea has long been a source of tension between China, Russia, and Japan .
 Wartime agreements called for the U.S. to temporarily occupy southern Korea up to the 38th Parallel . The Soviet Union did the same north of that line .
 Efforts to establish a unified Korea failed in 1947 . The United States referred the issue to the United Nations . The U.N. called for a unified Korean government .
 In January 1948, Soviet authorities refused to permit UN commission to oversee elections in northern Korea . Elections for an assembly proceeded in southern Korea that spring that spring .
1953 formed with its capital at Seoul and was headed by 70-year-old Syngman Rhee .
 Washington terminated its military government and agreed to train South Korea’s armed forces . Washington then terminated its own military government . South Korea then agreed to cooperate with the United States .
 Both Korean governments claimed authority over the entire peninsula . UN General Assembly endorsed the ROK as the only lawfully elected government .
 USSR announced it had withdrawn its forces from North Korea in March . USSR announced that it had pulled its forces out of North Korea that month .
 The United States withdrew all its troops from South Korea by June 1949 . The U.S. withdrew all of its South Korean troops from the Korean peninsula .
 Washington, fearful that the United States might be drawn into a civil war, purposely distanced itself from these clashes . Washington was worried that the U.S. might be in danger of being drawn into civil war .
 President Harry S Truman announced that fighting in Korea would not automatically lead to U.S. military intervention . Truman announced in 1945 that the Korean conflict would not lead to military action . Truman: "Fighting in Korea will not automatically result in US military intervention"
 In January 1950, Secretary of State Dean Acheson excluded Korea from the United States strategic Asian defensive perimeter . Korea was excluded from the U.S. strategic Asian defense perimeter .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff agreed with this, as did U.S. Far Eastern commander General of the Army Douglas MacArthur . Douglas MacArthur also agreed .
 Such pronouncements undoubtedly encouraged Kim to believe that the U.S. would not fight for Korea . The U.N. has not responded to the threat of North Korea .
 North Korea, the USSR, and the People’s Republic of China maintained that the Korean War began with a South Korean attack on North Korea . North Korea and the USSR maintain that the war began with an attack on South Korea .
 The Republic of Korea Army lacked equipment and trained leaders because of Washington’s unwillingness to fight in Korea . The meager U.S. defense budget would not allow it .
 ROKA training was incomplete and lacked heavy artillery, tanks, and antitank weapons . ROKa training was completed in the 1950s and 'was incomplete'
 The South Korean military numbered 95,000 men in eight divisions, only four of which were at full strength . Only four of those divisions were in full strength, according to reports .
 Washington was aware of the North Korean military buildup but believed that the Communist powers would not risk war . Washington knew of the buildup but did not want war with North Korea .
 The United States military was also woefully unprepared and ill-equipped . The U.S. military is woefully under-equipped and unprepared .
 Kim planned to use his military superiority to invade and quickly conquer South Korea . Kim's military superiority was meant to be used to quickly conquer the country .
 Twice he consulted Soviet leader Joseph Stalin . Twice he promised him victory in a manner of weeks, assuring him that there would be a Communist revolution in South Korea, and insisting that Washington would not intervene .
 Moscow and Beijing were actively preparing for the invasion as early as the spring of 1949 . Russian military advisors assisted in the planning of the Chinese invasion .
 Stalin concluded that even if the U.S. decided to intervene, it would come too late . Stalin concluded even if it were possible, the United States would be too late for Stalin .
 Stalin pledged military assistance but not direct Soviet military involvement . Stalin pledged support for the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1953 .
 He also insisted that Kim meet with PRC leader Mao Zedong and secure his assent to the plans . The North Korean leader is expected to meet with the PRC's leader in North Korea .
 In late 1949, Mao released the People’s Liberation Army 164th and 166th Divisions of Korean volunteers who had fought against the Japanese and in the Chinese Civil War, providing North Korea with 30,000-40,000 seasoned troops .
 The Security Council asked UN member states to furnish assistance to South Korea . The UN Security Council has asked for assistance to the South Korean government .
 Truman extended U.S. air and naval operations to include North Korea . Truman also authorized United States Army troops to protect the port of Pusan. Truman also extended United States Air and Naval operations .
 Truman committed United States Far Eastern ground forces to Korea on June 30 . Truman committed U.S. Far Eastern forces to North Korea in June 30, 1950 .
 U.S. intervention was almost certain, given the Truman Doctrine and domestic fallout from the Communist victory in China in 1949 . Truman Doctrine, the belief that success in Korea would embolden the Communists elsewhere, was also a factor .
 At the time of the invasion, the U.S. had four poorly trained and equipped divisions in Japan . The invasion was the first invasion of Japan in 1945 .
 MacArthur cannibalized his Seventh Infantry Division . MacArthur was able to dispatch the 24th and 25th Infantry Divisions and the First Cavalry Division to Korea within two weeks .
 Most of South Korea’s equipment was lost when the bridges spanning the Han River were prematurely blown up . Most of the South Korean military equipment was destroyed in the blast .
 On July 5, the first American units battled the KPA at Osan, 50 miles south of Seoul . The first U.S. units were based in Osan .
 At the request of the UN Security Council, the UN set up a military command in Korea . The UN has a permanent military presence in the region .
 At peak strength UNC forces numbered about 400,000 South Korean troops, 250,000 United States troops, 35,000 troops from other nations . Seventeen nations contributed military assistance to UNC forces .
 Two British and Canadians units formed the First Commonwealth Division . The division was formed by British and Canadian units .
 Turkey provided a brigade, and there were troops from Australia, Thailand, the Philippines, Colombia, Ethiopia, France, Greece, Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and New Zealand .
 Difficult terrain, primitive logistics, poor communication, and refugees did as much to delay the North Korean offensive as did the defenders . The North Korea offensive was delayed by a host of factors .
 In the chaotic atmosphere of the UNC retreat, both sides committed atrocities . In the chaos of the chaos, the students committed atrocities. Both sides commit atrocities.
 U.S. and UNC troops shot a number of innocent civilians as the KPA infiltrated throngs of refugees and used them as human shields . The KPA used the refugees as a human shields, killing civilians and using them as shields .
 North Korea committed far greater atrocities during its occupation of South Korea . An estimated 26,000 political opponents were killed by North Korea during the occupation .
 U.S. and ROK forces bought valuable time and ultimately held. Here United States and R.O. forces buy valuable time .
 Eighth Army commander Lieutenant General Walton Walker’s brilliant mobile defense . UNC artillery, control of skies, and control of the skies, were key to success . Eighth Army was credited with victory in the Battle of Gettysburg .
 The KPA also failed to employ its early manpower advantage to mount simultaneous attacks along the entire perimeter . The Taliban failed to use their early manpower advantages to counter-attack .
 MacArthur deliberately weakened EUSAK to build up an invasion force . Confident that he could hold Pusan, MacArthur weakened Pusak to prepare for an invasion .
 As Korea’s second-largest port, Inchon was only 15 miles from Seoul . It was close to the KPA's main supply line south . It is Korea's second largest port and is only 15-miles from the capital .
 MacArthur knew he could deal a major political blow if Seoul were promptly recaptured . MacArthur also knew that he could . deal North Korea a major . political blow .
 The Inchon landing was a risky venture, and few besides MacArthur favored it . The landing landed in South Korea in 1969, landing in the South Korean peninsula .
 Inchon posed the daunting problems of a 32-foot tidal range that allowed only 6 hours in 24 for sea resupply, a narrow winding channel, and high seawalls . The island was built in the 1970s .
 On September 15, Major General Edward Almond’s X Corps of the First Marine Division and the Seventh Infantry Division commenced the invasion .
 The Marines secured Inchon with relatively few casualties . Supported by naval gunfire and air attacks, the Marines secured the site with relatively little casualties . The Marines were able to secure the Inchong base in Korea .
 At the same time, EUSAK broke out of the Pusan Perimeter and drove north, linking up with X Corps . X Corps joined forces with the U.S. on September 26 . The U.N. says it has been conducting operations in North Korea .
 Only one-quarter to one-third of the KPA escaped north of the 38th Parallel . Only a third of the captured KPA survived the invasion .
 North Korea ignored MacArthur’s call for surrender, and on October 1, South Korean troops crossed into North Korea . North Korea has never been seen to surrender .
 On October 7, the UN General Assembly passed a resolution calling for a unified, independent, and democratic Korea . Two days later, MacArthur ordered United States forces across the 38th Parallel .
 He ordered X Corps transported by sea around the Korean Peninsula to the east coast port of Wonsan . He ordered the troops to be transported around the world by sea .
 The two commands would be separated by a gap of between 20 and 50 miles . The commands would have to be between 20 to 50 miles apart .
 MacArthur believed, falsely as it turned out, that the north-south Taebaek Mountain range would obviate large-scale Communist operations there . MacArthur thought, falsely, that . the . north-east of the mountain range would . obviatate large scale Communist operations
 The Eighth Army crossed the Chongchon River at Sinanju . By November 1 elements of the 24th Division were only 18 miles from the Yalu .
 Several days earlier, a South Korean unit reached the Yalu, the only UNC unit to get there . Several days ago, the South Korean military unit was the only unit to reach the island in the region .
 Mao had issued warnings over possible U.S. bases adjacent to Manchuria . Mao had also issued warnings about potential Chinese military intervention .
 He believed that the United States would be unable to counter the Chinese numerical advantage . He viewed American troops as soft and unused to night fighting .
 Stalin agreed to move Soviet MiG-15 fighters already in China to the Korean border . Stalin agreed with Stalin to move the fighters to the border with North Korea . The MiG15 fighters were already deployed in China, but were never deployed .
 In this position they could cover the Chinese military buildup and prevent U.S. air attacks on Manchuria . They could also prevent United States air attacks .
 Soviet pilots began flying missions against UNC forces on November 1 . Soviet pilots bore the brunt of the Communists’ air war . UNC forces began fighting against the Soviet Union in October .
 Stalin ordered other Soviet air units to deploy to China, train Chinese pilots, and then turn over aircraft to them . Stalin also ordered Soviet units to train and turn over Soviet aircraft to China .
 Stalin had no intention of using his air units for anything other than defensive purposes . Sources disagree on what the Soviet leader promised Mao Mao . Stalin's air units were never used for anything else than defense purposes .
 China claimed Stalin had promised complete air support for their ground forces, but this never materialized . China later claimed that Stalin promised to provide them with air support, but it never happened .
 Chinese also attacked in northeastern Korea before halting operations . The Chinese also halted operations in northeastern North Korea .
 On November 8, the first jet battle in history occurred when an American F-80 shot down a MiG-15 over Sinanju . The first jet fight was fought in November 2008 .
 General MacArthur had assured the president that the war was all but won but that if the Chinese were to intervene, their forces would be slaughtered . In a meeting with President Truman at Wake Island on October 15, General MacArthur said that the Chinese would be killed if they tried to intervene .
 MiGs so dominated the Yalu River area that U.S. B-29 bombers had to cease daylight operations from 1950 to 1951 . MiGs dominated the area from November 1 to October 1951 .
 The initial Chinese intervention had consisted of 18 volunteer divisions . Initial Chinese troops had been deployed in the area .
 In early November, they moved an additional 12 divisions into Korea, totaling some 300,000 men . The Korean War has been a major source of tension between the U.S. and South Korea .
 MacArthur ordered the air force to destroy the bridges over the Yalu . MacArthur responded by ordering the destruction of the bridges . The bridges were destroyed .
 MacArthur complained that this threatened his command . Washington revoked the order, but MacArthur complained to MacArthur . The order was revoked .
 At the time, most of the Chinese were in North Korea, and the Yalu was soon frozen . At the same time of the incident, China was in the grip of North Korea .
 The political leadership and the JCS under the chairmanship of General Omar Bradley believed that Europe was the top priority . Europe was a top priority for the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 MacArthur could take other military steps that he deemed advisable, including resumption of the offensive . Manchuria would remain off-limits, but the U.S. could also take military action .
 The Democrats were reluctant to show weakness in Korea, and the Republicans had gained seats in the November 1950 congressional elections .
 The Communist side exercised restraint in Manchuria, the Communist side also exercised restraint . The U.S. was making the case for strikes in the region, but the U.K. was not .
 Communist airpower was restricted to north of Pyongyang . With the exception of a few ancient biplanes that sometimes bombed UNC positions at night, .
 No effort was made to strike Pusan, and UNC convoys traveled without fear of air attack . Convoys were allowed to travel without fear from air attacks .
 MacArthur had made X Corps dependent logistically on EUSAK instead of Japan . Walker insisted on delaying resumption of the offensive until he could build up supplies .
 MacArthur seemed oblivious to any problems, seeing the advance as an occupation rather than an offensive . MacArthur's "occupation" was the result of the invasion, not an invasion, but an occupation .
 The Americans held, but on the 26th, the South Korean II Corps disintegrated, exposing EUSAK’s right flank . The Americans hold, but the Koreans hold, and the Americans retreat .
 The Chinese poured 18 divisions into the gap, endangering the whole Eighth Army . The Chinese pour 18 divisions in the gap .
 The United States Second Division bought time for the other EUSAK divisions to recross the Chongchon . The U.S. Second Division held off the Chongchon for two hours .
 MacArthur now ordered a retreat just below the 38th Parallel to protect Seoul . MacArthur now orders a retreat to protect the city from Seoul .
 Washington directed MacArthur to pull X Corps out of northeastern Korea to prevent it from being flanked . Washington ordered the withdrawal of X Corps from northeastern Korea .
 The retreat of the 1st Marine Division and some army elements from the Chanjin Reservoir to the coast was one of the most masterly withdrawals in military history . The retreat was a masterly withdrawal of 1st Marines and army elements .
 At Hungnam through December 24, 105,000 officers and men were taken off . About 91,000 Korean refugees who did not want to remain in North Korea were also taken off from Hungnam . 105,00 officers, men and women have been taken off since March 23 .
 MacArthur refused to accept a limited war and publicized his views to his supporters in the U.S. He made reference to “inhibitions” placed on his conduct of the war . MacArthur refused the war, making reference to "inhibition" placed on him .
 General Walker died in a jeep accident on December 22 . UNC morale plummeted, especially with General Walker’s death . General Walker's death was a major blow to UNC morale .
 Not until Lieutenant General Matthew Ridgway arrived to replace Walker did the situation improve . Not until he was replaced, the situation began to improve .
 Truman found himself under heavy pressure from Republicans to pursue the war vigorously . Truman faced pressure from both sides of the war in the U.S.
 The administration reduced its goal in Korea to restoring the status quo ante bellum . But the U.S. has reduced its goals in the Korean Peninsula to restoring status quo . The U.N. Korea situation has been described as 'normal'
 UNC forces again had to retreat when the Chinese launched a New Year’s offensive, retaking Seoul on January 4 . UNC forces were forced to retreat again after the offensive was launched .
 The Chinese outran their supply lines, and Ridgway took the offensive . Ridgways took the lead in the battle for the first time . But the Chinese were unable to hold on to their supplies .
 His methodical, limited advance was designed to inflict maximum punishment rather than to secure territory . He said: "His methodical advance was . designed to inflicted maximum punishment instead of . securing territory"
 By the end of March, UNC forces had recaptured Seoul, and by April they were again north of the 38th Parallel . UNC forces were able to recapture Seoul in March .
 On April 11, 1951, President Truman relieved MacArthur of command, appointing Ridgway in his stead . MacArthur was relieved of command by President Truman in 1951 . President Truman also relieved MacArthur from command .
 MacArthur’s removal was fully supported by the JCS, as MacArthur had publicly expressed his disdain of limited war . Although widely unpopular at the time, the removal of MacArthur was widely unpopular . The removal of the Japanese general was widely supported .
 He returned home to a hero's welcome, but much to his dismay, political support for him promptly faded . He returned to the U.S. after a tour of Africa .
 Van Fleet ordered a methodical withdrawal with maximum artillery and air strikes against Communist forces . Rather than expend his troops in a defensive stand, Van Fleet decided to withdraw with maximum air strikes and artillery .
 The Chinese pushed the UNC south of the 38th Parallel, but the offensive was halted by May 19 . The offensive was stopped by May 20 .
 By the end of May, the front had stabilized just above the 38th Parallel . UNC forces then counterpunched, and the front stabilized in May .
 JCS generally limited EUSAK to that line, allowing only small local advances to gain more favorable terrain . The JCS also limited EusAK to a line of about 500 miles .
 The war was now stalemated, and a diplomatic settlement seemed expedient . Diplomatic settlement seemed to be expedient, and the war was stalemate .
 On June 23, 1951, Soviet UN representative Jacob Malik proposed a cease-fire . The Soviet Union representative proposed a ceasefire on the Korean peninsula .
 Truman authorized Ridgway to negotiate with the Chinese . With the Chinese expressing interest, he was authorized to negotiate .
 Meetings began on July 10 at Kaesong, although hostilities would continue until an armistice was signed . Meetings would continue to be held until an end to hostilities .
 UNC operations from this point were essentially designed to minimize friendly casualties . UNC operations in the U.S. were essentially aimed at minimizing friendly casualties from the enemy .
 Each side had built deep defensive lines that would be costly to break through . Each side's defensive lines were built deep and strong enough to keep the ball safe .
 In August, armistice talks broke down, and later that month the Battle of Bloody Ridge began . The Battle of Heartbreak Ridge lasted until mid-October, lasting until mid October .
 In late October, negotiations resumed, this time at Panmunjom, although the fighting continued . Talks resumed, but fighting continued in October .
 Half the war’s casualties occurred during the period of armistice negotiations . Half of the war's casualties occurred in the period during the negotiations .
 On November 12, 1951, Ridgway ordered Van Fleet to cease offensive operations . Van Fleet was attacked by the U.S. in November 1951 .
 Fighting devolved into raids, local attacks, patrols, and artillery fire . Fighting now devolved to raids and local attacks .
 UNC air operations intensified to choke off Communist supply lines and reduce the likelihood of Communist offensives . UNC air operation intensified to . choke off . supply lines, reduce the . likelihood of . Communist offendsives .
 In November 1952, General Dwight Eisenhower was elected president of the United States on a mandate to end the war . Dwight Eisenhower's victory in the war ended in November 1952 . Eisenhower was the first president elected to end World War II .
 With U.S. casualties running 2,500 a month, the war had become a political liability . With United States casualties running at 2,000 a month . The war has been a major political liability for the United States .
 Eisenhower instructed the JCS to draw up plans to end the war militarily including the possible use of nuclear weapons . The plans were made known to the Communist side .
 Stalin’s death on March 5, 1953, was more important in ending the conflict . More important was Stalin's death, however, was the death of Stalin in 1953 .
 Chinese stepped up military action in June and July to remove bulges in the line . As the armistice negotiations entered their final phase in May, China stepped up its military action .
 If all KPA prisoners were repatriated, many South Koreans would be sent to North Korea . Many of the prisoners would have been sent to the North Korea.
 Truman determined that no prisoner be repatriated against his will . Truman was determined to ensure no prisoner was repatriated without his will.
 Some U.S. officials saw a moral and propaganda victory in the Chinese and North Korean defections . This stance prolonged the war, but some officials saw it as a moral victory .
 North Korea accepted a face-saving formula whereby a neutral commission would deal with prisoner repatriation . Following intense air strikes on North Korean hydroelectric facilities and the capital of Pyongyang, the Communists accepted the deal .
 On July 27, an armistice was signed at Panmunjom, and the guns finally fell silent . The guns fell silent after the end of the conflict .
 Of 132,000 North Korean and Chinese military POWs, fewer than 90,000 chose to return home . Fewer than 100,000 returned home to North Korea and China .
 Twenty-two Americans held by the Communists also elected not to return home . Twenty-three Americans held in the Communist Party also elected to stay in Soviet Union .
 South Korea sustained 300,000 casualties, of whom 70,000 were killed in action . South Korea suffered 70,500 casualties in the war, of which 70,00 were killed .
 UNC casualties came to 17,260, of whom 3,194 were killed in action . Other UNC casualties were 17,200, of which 3,200 were killed .
 North Korean casualties are estimated at 523,400 and Chinese losses at more than a million . North Korea casualties are . estimated at . 523.400 and China losses at over a million, according to Chinese losses .
 The war devastated Korea and hardened the divisions between North and South . North Korea was devastated by the fall of communism .
 After the war, the United States military establishment remained strong . The U.S. remained strong after the war .
 For America, the Korean War institutionalized the Cold War national security state . For America it was a war of sorts for the U.S. for the first time . The Korean War was a Cold War for America .
 It accelerated the integration of the armed forces, which in turn encouraged the wider U.S. civil rights movement . It also accelerated the racial integration of American armed forces .
 China gained greatly from the war in that it came to be regarded as the preponderant military power in Asia . China gained the title of Asia's pre-eminently dominant military power .
 This is ironic, because the Chinese army in Korea was in many respects a primitive and inefficient force . This is despite the fact that it was a primitive, inefficient force in Korea . The Chinese army was an inefficient and primitive force, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Over the years, exaggeration of Chinese military strength was woven into the fabric of American foreign policy . It influenced subsequent U.S. policy in Vietnam .
 Before the war, Marshall Plan aid had been almost entirely nonmilitary . The Marshall Plan was used to provide nonmilitary aid .
 It also impacted Japan and was a major factor fueling that nation’s economy . It also fueled Japan's economy .
 Militarily, the war was interesting for the extensive use of helicopters and jet aircraft . Helicopter and jet planes were used extensively in the war .
 The conflict was also a reminder that airpower alone cannot win wars, and it revealed the importance of command of the sea . The conflict also showed that air power alone can't win wars .
 The 38th Parallel remains one of the Cold War's lone outposts . Technically, the two Koreas remain at war, and the 38th parallel remains a Cold War outpost .
 China, People’s Republic of; Chinese Civil War; Chinese People's Volunteer Force; Cold War; Gao Gang; Korean War Armistice Agreement; Manchuria; Mao Zedong; People's Liberation Army; Soviet Union . China,
 The cease-fire agreement that brought military combat in Korea to an end on July 27, 1953 . The Korean War Armistice Agreement was signed in 1953 .
 The armistice agreement was signed by the military commanders of the three major Korean War combat forces . It was signed in 1950s and 1950s .
 The signing took place at Panmunjom, an encampment that had been built specifically for the truce talks that led up to the armistice . The signing of the peace treaty took place in the early hours of the day .
 The ROK political leadership had, in fact, strenuously opposed the truce negotiations, but on July 9, 1953, after negotiations with U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Walter Robertson and Army chief of staff J Lawton Collins .
 On August 7, 1953, the 16 contributing states signed a declaration supporting the armistice . The 16 states signed the declaration, which was signed in 1953 .
 A subsequent agreement provided that the ‘civil police’ may be military police armed with nonautomatic weapons . The agreement also provides that the civil police may be “military police” armed with weapons .
 Civilians who previously lived in the area that became the DMZ were permitted to return after the cease-fire . Both sides have maintained small farming villages in the vicinity of Panmunjom, near the border .
 After a fight on August 18, 1976, that resulted in the death of two UNC officers, a subsequent agreement of September 6, 1976 divided the JSA along the MDL, separating the guard forces .
 The MAC, consisting of five members from each side, was a joint organization with no chairman that met at the call of either side to discuss armistice violation charges . The MAC was formed from five members of each side .
 Armistice provided for 10 Joint Observer Teams consisting of officers of both sides to investigate alleged armistice violations . Joint Observer teams were formed to look into alleged violations of armistices .
 The teams were unable to reach agreement on the circumstances of the alleged violations they investigated . After 1967, the KPA/CPVA side refused to participate in JOT investigations .
 One final JOT took place in 1976 to survey and delineate a boundary within the JSA following the fatal August 18, 1976, clash between the two guard forces . The final OOT was held in 1976 .
 Czechoslovakia and Poland were nominated by the KPA/CPVA side . Sweden and Switzerland were also nominated for the UNC side .
 Ten operated at five ports of entry on each side . 10 mobile teams were available to investigate violations in other areas outside the DMZ if requested .
 The inspections were controversial from the beginning, and both sides found the restrictions against introducing new equipment to be unrealistic and burdensome . The inspections have been controversial since the beginning .
 By 1957, the NNSC supervisory system was essentially defunct, but the commission served for many years as an informal channel of communication between the two sides and moderating influence in the potentially volatile Panmunjom conference area .
 As of 2009, the Swiss and Swedish NNSC delegations continue to meet weekly . Poland sends a representative to South Korea several times a year to sign and validate documents .
 Representatives of three nations meet periodically in Europe to discuss NNSC business . Representatives of the three nations also meet periodically to discuss business .
 Article III dealt with the arrangements relating to prisoners of war . The thorniest of all the truce talk issues was the prisoner of war arrangements . Article III was the arrangement relating to the prisoners of peace .
 All prisoners who wished to return to their home countries were to be repatriated . Within 60 days of the armistice agreement being signed, all prisoners who wish to return were to return home .
 Those refusing repatriation were to be turned over to a Neutral Nations Repatriation Commission . The commission was formed by representatives of the NNSC nations and India .
 Representatives of the two sides were to be given the opportunity to persuade the nonrepatriates to return home . Under NNRC supervision, representatives of both sides were given the chance to persuade them to return .
 The NNRC arranged for prisoners still refusing repatriation to go to a country of their choice or to a neutral country . Once this process was completed, the prisoners still refused repatriation were to be moved to a different country .
 Obstruction by both sides and coercion among prisoners prevented the process from working as intended . The political conference did not take place within the intended time period . Obstruction and coercion from prisoners themselves prevented the political conference .
 The NNRC was dissolved in February 1954 . The rest were returned to the control of the two sides, and the rest of the NRC was returned .
 In October 1953, representatives of China, the DPRK, and the U.S. met at Panmunjom to discuss the location and organization of the conference . The meeting took place in October 1953 .
 In February 1954, foreign ministers of France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States agreed in Berlin to convene a conference in Geneva to discuss Korea and other issues . The meeting was unsuccessful, but the meeting was held in Geneva in 1954 .
 The conference took place in April 1954, but there was no agreement on any of the Korean issues . The conference was held in Korea in 1954 .
 Over the years. various subsequent agreements were reached in accordance with this article . Over the . years . various . subsequent agreements have been reached in . accordance with . this article.
 In 1994, the KPA unilaterally withdrew from the Military Armistice Commission and declared the armistice defunct . The KPA has since withdrawn from the commission and declared it defunct .
 The North Koreans continued to maintain a negotiating organization at Panmunjom under the title ‘Korean People’s Army .” As of 2009, much of the administrative and communications work of the Military Armistice Commission continues .
 China, People’s Republic of; Chinese Intervention in the Korean War; Chinese Summer Offensive in Korea; Chinese People's Volunteer Force; Korean War . Peng Dehuai; Soviet Union; Chinese intervention in Korea .
 Kublai Khan firmly established the Mongol-Chinese Yuan dynasty of China . He was the grandson of Genghis Khan (Chinggis Khan or Chengiz Khan) Khan .
 As a statesman and military leader, he inherited an empire that stretched from the Adriatic Sea to China . By 1279, the empire extended to southern China, by 1279 .
 Kublai was the fourth son of Tolui, the youngest son of Genghis Khan and his wife Sorghaghtani . He was born in 1215 and died in 1217 .
 Kublai didn’t figure in Mongol leadership until he was in his thirties . As a youth, he participated in campaigns along with his father until his death when he was 17 . He was a member of the Mongol army until his father died at the age of 17
 Genghis spelled out directions for succession, which his children followed with little trouble . But his grandchildren divided the empire beyond the hope of reunification .
 After the death of Ogadai, his widow Toregene ruled for a short time before she was followed by her son Guyuk . Guyuk ruled for the short time after his mother died .
 After Guyuk’s death, his widow Oghul Ghaimish tried to govern as regent until Mongke was elected great khan . Mongke, a son of Sorghaghtani and Tolui, was elected Great khan in 2011 .
 The youngest (designated “keeper of the hearth” to rule over the Mongol homeland) was Arigboge, who had the support of his brother Baiku of the Golden Horde and his nephew Kaidu of the steppes to the north .
 The next in line for the throne was Kublai, but Arigboge’s supporters rejected his leadership because he had become too Chinese and not sufficiently Mongol in his actions . The next-in-line for the Mongol throne was the next-line Mongol leader Kubl
 Kublai proved as capable and successful as any Mongol general . Using the techniques developed by Genghis and the siege engines adapted from Chinese and Muslim forces, he was able to defeat the Mongol army .
 He had seen the advantages of Chinese culture as adjuncts to the traditions and military prowess of the Mongols . He embraced them as an adjunct to his military prowess .
 His interest in Chinese culture seemed to be a betrayal to the more conservative Mongols in the homelands . The Mongols were more conservative than traditional Mongols .
 In 1260, Kublai Khan made a quick truce with the Song and then turned his forces into war chariot atop four armored elephants . The Song was defeated by the Mongols in 1260 .
 Kublai captured the city and held it against Arigboge’s counterattacks until, in 1264, the younger brother submitted to the older's leadership . The city was captured by the brother of the same name, Kubai .
 Kublai forgave him and gave him lands of his own . But he punished his brother’s advisors for urging the revolt . He punished them for their actions .
 Kublai’s nephew Kaidu, however, refused to submit and spent the next 30 years harassing China's borders . Kaidus spent the time harassing the borders of China . He spent the rest of his life in China .
 Kublai returned to China and Shangdu, better known as Xanadu . Never to see the Mongol capital of Karakorum again .
 He also returned to his campaign against the Song, who had violated the truce in his absence . The Song had violated a truce between the two nations .
 By 1276, the seven-year-old Song emperor had surrendered to him . That promise, coupled with benevolent treatment of refugees, won the hearts of most of the Song people .
 Kublai had to continue campaigning against Song supporters in the southeast . He captured Guangzhou and waged a naval war against the final holdouts . With the submission of the emperor, the war was won .
 Kublai’s significance lies not in new military developments but in his political leadership, writes CNN.com's John Defterios.com . He adds: “Kublai's significance lies in his leadership’
 Public works were of prime importance, and new roads and canals were constantly constructed while he was emperor . New roads, canals and bridges were constantly built .
 Kublaiya proved to be a benevolent master to the poverty-ridden peasantry by providing the first public assistance program .
 He maintained the Chinese bureaucracy yet kept the Mongols as a separate class in society . The Mongols were kept separate from Chinese society . He maintained that he maintained the . Chinese bureaucracy .
 He sponsored intellectual pursuits by ordering printing of many books and the construction of observatories for updating astronomical observations . He also ordered the printing of several books .
 The expansion of printing brought Chinese drama to heights never before experienced and spread its influence widely over the population . It was the first time Chinese drama was printed in China .
 Kublai maintained a large military, the cost of which was a severe burden on the taxpayers . The cost of the military was a huge burden on taxpayers .
 He sponsored two disastrous invasions of Japan, which cost money and thousands of Chinese lives . He also sponsored a disastrous invasion of Japan that cost money .
 In order to maintain the splendor of his palaces, he collected vast sums of silver for his treasury . But he introduced printed money to the Chinese economy and overprinted it to the point of high inflation .
 He protected China from the raids of his nephew Kaidu and unified the country into a form it would basically hold to present times . But the costs to the peasant taxpayers proved too much of a burden .
 Kublai the Wise laid the groundwork for the fall of his dynasty . Though called the Wise, he laid the foundations for the downfall of the dynasty . He was called the "Kublai The Wise" by the Chinese Emperor .
 He oversaw the breakup of the Mongol Empire . He also oversaw, somewhat by default, the birth of Mongolia .
 Birkai of Russia never acknowledged his supremacy and made his portion of the empire independent . Hulegu established an independent state of the Il-Khanid dynasty in Persia . Birkai established a state of Russia in Russia, but never acknowledged it .
 Kublai was left with China, a nation that reached new heights under his leadership . But that quickly overthrew his successors and reestablished Chinese dominance in the Ming dynasty .
 Kublai has remained the very symbol of the Mongol potentate . Thanks to Venetian traveler Marco Polo, Marco Polo .
 Genghis Khan; Ming Dynasty; Mongols; Mongolians, Cavalry of; Russia, Relations with China; Song Dynasty . Song Dynasty; Song-Mongol War; Tributary System; Yuan Dynasty .
 General Li Desheng became one of the top national leaders with his unique personal experience and special contribution to the party during the Cultural Revolution of 1966-1976 . General Desheng is one of China's top leaders .
 In 1916, Li was born into a poor peasant family in Lijia’ao, Chendian Village, Xinxian County, central Henan Province . He was born in 1916, and died in 2003 .
 He became a member of the Chinese Communist Youth League in June 1931 . He joined the Red Army and became a Communist Party Youth League member .
 Li served in the Eleventh Army (later changed to be the First Army) of the CCP Red Army . Li became a CCP member in 1932 . Li was a member of the Communist Party in China .
 In 19341935, he participated in the Long March with the Fourth Red Army . He was a member of the Red Army during the Great Depression of the 1930s .
 Li Desheng served in the Eighth Route Army during the Anti-Japanese War of 1937- 1945 . Li Deseng served in many battles against the invading Japanese troops, especially the Hundred Regiments Campaign .
 From 1938, he was promoted to the company, battalion, and later on regimental commander . From 1938 he became the regimental leader of the British Army .
 When the Anti-Japanese War ended in 1945, he was the commander of the Nineteenth Regiment, Seventh Brigade of the Jin-ji-lu-yu Regional Command . When the war ended, he had been the commander .
 Li participated in important battles such as the Battle of Shangdang and the Handan Campaign . During the Chinese Civil War of 19461949, Li fought in China . Li was a member of the Chinese Nationalist Party of China .
 Li Desheng continued to serve in the PLA as the division commander . After the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, he continued his role in the army .
 In 1951, he and his division went to North Korea and participated in the Chinese Fifth Offensive Campaign in April-June 1951, the Battle of Shangganling in October 1952, and the Kimsong Counteroffensive Campaign in 1953 . In 1951-53, he was in charge of the Chinese
 When he returned from Korea in 1954, he became the commander of the Twelfth Army . He was granted the rank of major general in 1955 .
 Li developed new drilling methods by summarizing the ‘Guo Xingfu Training Techniques’ which was introduced and disseminated across all corners in the PLA during the early 1960s . Li developed the new drilling techniques after his return to the army .
 In the summer of 1966, the Cultural Revolution became a nationwide political struggle with extensive purges . The Cultural Revolution was the result of a national political struggle in China .
 Since early 1967, the situation has been worsening across the country . The Cultural Revolution entered the phase of a ‘total taking-over’ of authority .
 The Red Guards took over the government offices across all levels, jailed officials, and administrated provincial and local affairs . The government offices were taken over by the Red Guards .
 Different factions within the Red Guards had contradictory political orientations and different plans, leading to violent conflicts . In many places, the conflict resembled a civil war .
 The Chinese military replaced civilian governments at the provincial, district, county, and city levels through its military administration, or the “Military Administrative Committee,” from 1967 to 1972 . The military administration took over civilian governments from 1967-1972 .
 Li played an important role during the Cultural Revolution to stabilize the political and social orders in eastern Anhui Province . Li played a key role in stabilising the political, social orders during the revolution . Li was born in China's Guang Guangxi Province .
 In 1967, he was the commander of the Twelfth Army, which was stationed in that province . He was also the commander in 1967, when he was stationed there in the province .
 When the situation in Anhui became too violent, Li was summoned urgently to Beijing by Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai . Zhou met him right after he landed at the airport, with Zhou meeting him immediately .
 Li was asked to bring his troops to stop all the conflicts and civil wars in the province . The militant actions had spread from major cities to small towns, Li said .
 He immediately returned to his army headquarters and ordered his troops to move first into Hefei, capital city of Anhui Province, China .
 Many buildings were used as fighting bases, and the conflicting sides were shooting each other, causing huge casualties for the city residents . The city residents suffered huge casualties .
 Li deployed military vehicles to form a defense line to separate the two sides . Li arrived at Li's request to form the defense line . The two sides were separated by military vehicles .
 After the shooting stopped, he began to negotiate with the leaders of both sides and persuaded them to withdraw . He began negotiating with both sides of the border .
 After he stopped the civil war in Hefei, he moved his troops to the other cities and put an end to the violence . He moved troops to other cities in order to end the violence in China .
 In 1968, Li Desheng was appointed the director of the Anhui Provincial Revolutionary Committee and the deputy commander of the PLA Nanjing Military Region .
 In 1969, he was a member of the Central Military Commission in Beijing . In 1969 he became a member . He became a prominent figure in the Chinese military .
 He was elected a member of the CCP Central Committee at the CCP Ninth National Congress on April 1-24, 1969 . He was also reserve member of Politburo .
 Mao Zedong switched the commanders of eight PLA regional commands in China . After that congress he switched the commandments of eight regional commands . Mao changed the commanders in China after that congress .
 Li served as the commander of the Beijing Military Region . At that time, Li was the head of Beijing's military region . Li is now the president of China's military council .
 Li needed to exchange his commanding post with Chen Xilian, commander of the Shenyang Military Region, and report to the post within 10 days . After the switch, Li must report to his new commanding post within a 10-day period .
 Mao met Mao before he met him and asked for his opinions on the switch . Mao met him before the switch, and asked him his opinion on the matter .
 Li served as the commander of the Shenyang Military Region . From December 1973 to August 1977, Li was commander of Shenyang military Region .
 After Mao’s death and the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1976, Li was reelected a member of the Central Military Commission in August 1977 . Li was elected to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China in 1977 .
 Even as his reputation suffered through association with a series of humiliating treaties, Li indefatigably sponsored projects crucial to China’s modernization .
 He served as one of Zeng Guofan’s (Tseng Kuo-fan) assistants during the Taiping Rebellion in 1851-1864 .
 The uprising was led by utopian Christians who threatened many aspects of Confucian China, including the beliefs and property of local landlords who received no protection from the ineffective armies of the Qing dynasty government .
 Zeng had raised his own Xiang Army to defend his home area of Hunan, and Li served him initially in the drafting of written communications . Li served Zeng in drafting of his own written communications.
 Li came to criticize Zeng's decisions, even though he had willingly engaged himself to act as Zeng’s subordinate . Li came out of the role as a subordinate to Zeng, Li said .
 When Zeng seemed to be conducting the campaign against the Taipings too cautiously and moved to punish a subordinate who had been vanquished after defying Zeng's orders, Li abruptly resigned .
 He was accepted back into Zeng's private bureaucracy after adopting a more humble attitude . Some months later, he returned to Zeng’s camp and adopted a more modest attitude . He returned to the camp and was accepted into the bureaucracy .
 Later in the war, Zeng recommended Li for the governorship of Jiangnan (south of the Yangzi River), and once Li had recruited and trained a redoubtable local army, known as the Huai Army . Zeng invited Li to join in a three-prong
 Li was involved in many of the selfstrengthening activities initiated by Zeng . Li was also involved in the self-strenning activities of Zeng during his time in China .
 The ziqiang, or Self-Strengthening, movement called for the selective adaptation of Western learning and technology to China .
 During the Taiping Rebellion, most ziqiang activities focused on military improvement . Most ziqi activities were focused on improving the military .
 Zeng had been commanded to suppress the Nian Rebellion in northern China . He soon ran into trouble and was forced to flee the country .
 The Huai Army that had been organized by Li was assigned to Zeng’s command . Zeng was the first Chinese leader to take command of the Huai .
 Zeng chose men not only for loyalty but for their moral integrity, Li focused on the former quality to the detriment of the latter . Li's officers did not respond readily to commands issued by anyone but himself . Zeng, in building the Xiang Army, had chosen men for their loyalty
 Even after Li was called in to control the troops, however, it took him well over a year to suppress the rebellion . It took Li more than a year for Li to get control of the troops .
 During 1869 and 1870, Li resolved a number of local and national crises through his diplomatic finesse and military ability . Li resolved many of the crises through diplomacy and military skill .
 His increasingly frequent dealings with foreigners were preparing him for the subsequent three decades of Chinese humiliation at the hands of the governments of Japan, Russia, the United Kingdom, France, and the United States .
 Qing court stationed in treaty ports to deal with foreigners . Li was one of a host of officials stationed in the treaty ports, to keep those traders in the ports, and prevent them from confronting the government in Beijing .
 Li was reluctant to put a nascent naval program to the test of battle . The Qing court was predisposed to accommodation with the foreigners . Li soon became the negotiator of choice .
 In resolving conflicts with foreign nations, Li argued against the use of force and in favor of compromise . Li consistently argued against using force in resolving conflicts .
 Li approved of a commercial treaty like those China had already signed with Western nations . Li also approved of the idea when the Japanese government requested in 1870 . Li was the prime minister of China's first state of peace with Japan in 1881 .
 When Japanese forces were sent to Taiwan four years later in a reprisal against aborigines who had killed Ryukyuan sailors, Li rejected a Chinese show of force . Li rejected the move, saying it was a response to a Japanese attack on Taiwan's aborigine .
 Li refused to consider declaring war on a state that clearly enjoyed military superiority . Li's refusal came after France reacted violently to the participation of an unofficial Chinese army in a war against French colonial efforts in Annam (present-day Vietnam)
 The greatest challenge Li faced was the diplomatic and military crisis that grew out of China’s relations with Korea, he says . Li: "The greatest challenge was the diplomacy and military response to the crisis"
 For many centuries, Korea had sent tributary missions to China on a regular basis . Each mission renews its acknowledgment of Chinese hegemony .
 During the latter half of the nineteenth century, Koreans had begun to talk about a greater degree of autonomy . But during the latter . half of . the nineteenth . century, Korea had begun . to talk . about a . greater degree . of autonomy, Korea's leader said .
 China sent Yuan Shikai to Seoul to train the Korean Army and cultivate the Korean court . When Japan exhibited an interest in forging strong ties to Korea, China sent him to Korea to train and cultivate court .
 An attempted coup by pro-Japanese Koreans in league with Japanese troops and diplomats ended in failure in 1884 . Japanese government capitalized on the situation by demanding an indemnity and other reparations .
 A preoccupied Li met with a Japanese emissary and agreed to a set of mutually binding terms . Li was the prime minister of China's Guangxi province . Li is now the leader of the Guangdong province in China .
 The result of his delay and of superior Japanese military planning and equipment was a catastrophic defeat for China during the Sino-Japanese War of 1894-1895 and the profoundly humbling Treaty of Shimonoseki of 1895 .
 Li was shot in the face by a Japanese fanatic, obliging the Japanese government to relax its demands . The military loss would have been an even worse blow had Li not been shot by the fanatic .
 Li's diplomatic career amounted to a series of setbacks for China, but his career as “self-strengthener” made him one of China’s great modernizers . Li's career as a ‘self-studded’ modernizer made him
 When Li strengthened the Huai Army, he was also strengthening his own position and support . Li strengthened his position in order to gain support for his own army .
 He was subsequently involved in many other projects, however, that improved the nation apart from the modernization of the army .
 Because of his role in defeating the Taiping and Nian Rebellions, he was trusted by the Empress Dowager Cixi and was thus very influential in the late part of the century .
 Li's endeavors fell into the categories of entrepreneurial and educational . Li’s endeavors included educational and entrepreneurial endeavors .
 Qing organized a new system whereby the Qing government and individual merchants worked together to aid the country’s long-term development . The Qing government organized the new system to help the country's development .
 China Merchant Steam Navigation Company founded in 1872 to reduce foreign domination of China’s coastal shipping . Mining operations using Western techniques in Shanxi, Zhili, and Shandong .
 Li’s educational reforms included sending promising students to the United States . But this program was abandoned when United States officials refused to let the graduates enroll in such military academies as West Point to finish their education .
 Li Hongzhang made a diplomatic trip around the globe in 1896, stopping in Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Britain, and the United States . He met with many heads of state .
 His final duty as a treaty negotiator was the negotiation of terms with foreign powers after the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 . His last duty was to negotiate terms with the foreign powers .
 Boxer Rebellion; ConfucianMancian Paradigm; Ever-Victorious Army; Qing Dynasty . Qing Dynasty; Self-Strengthening Movement; Shimonoseki, Treaty of; Sino-French War; Taiping Rebellion . Xiang Army; Yuan Shikai
 Sui rebellion ended the Sui dynasty and led to the defeat of several of their most dangerous rivals . Their rebellion ended their dynasty and ended their reign .
 Li Shimin was ceremonially regarded as a cofounder of the Tang dynasty along with Emperor Gaozu . He was a member of the dynasty . He is now considered a co-founder of Tang dynasty .
 When he was young, he followed his father to fight against the Sui’s military and defeated it . Then helped his father build the Tang dynasty, which became one of the most glorious and powerful dynasties in Chinese history .
 Li Shimin had successfully commanded four large campaigns . Before he helped his father establish the Tang dynasty in 618, he had led four large battles .
 The Longdong army group defeated Li’s military in Changwu in one of the few battles he lost . The army group was defeated by Li's army group in the Changwu battle . Li lost one of his last battles against Li's military .
 He exterminated the Longdong army group in the battle of Qianshuiyuan . But soon, he exterminated them in battle . He then exterminated his army group .
 The second campaign was against Liu Wuzhou, who helped the Tujue and conquered the city of Jinyang . Liu helped the Tijue and helped them to victory in the second campaign . Liu was killed by the Tuijue in the first campaign .
 Li engaged Liu in battle for three days and killed Liu, taking the city . Li engaged him in battle to take the city, taking it over .
 Li Shimin fought with Wang Shichong and Dou Jiande, who had more than 200,000 soldiers . Li Shimins fought with the two men, who were also fighting for China .
 The final campaign was fought with Liu Heida, a subordinate of Dou Jiande . The final battle was fought in the final campaign of the Great War .
 Liu Heida wanted to avenge Dou Jiande, but just two months later, he was defeated by Li . Liu was defeated in a rematch of his defeat by Li.
 After the four victories, Li Shimin’s reputation was the highest of all his brothers, who were jealous and worried that Li might become the next emperor . Li's reputation became highest of his brothers .
 Li, however, found out about their plot and preemptively killed his brothers . Li became the second emperor of the Tang dynasty after his father died . Li's brothers were killed and he became the emperor .
 Li is considered one of the greatest emperors in Chinese history . Li was one of China's most famous emperors .
 His reign was regarded as the model against which all other emperors were measured . His ‘Reign of Zhenguan’ was considered a golden age of Chinese history and required study for future crown princes .
 During his reign, the Tang dynasty flourished economically and militarily . The Tang dynasty was known as one of China's most powerful statesmen .
 Tang China enjoyed peace and prosperity for more than a century after his death . Tang China was ruled by the state of Tang dynasty in Tang dynasty .
 Tang was the largest and the strongest nation in the world under Taizong . Tang was known as the strongest and largest nation in China .
 It covered most of the territory of present-day China, Vietnam, Mongolia, Mongolia and much of central Asia and eastern Kazakhstan . It was also known as the Great Depression .
 It laid the foundation for Xuanzong's reign, which is considered Tang China’s greatest era . The Tang dynasty is considered one of China's greatest dynasts .
 In 630, Emperor Taizong sent his general Li Jing against Eastern Tujue, which the Tang had once submitted . In 630 the Tang was defeated in a battle against Eastern Tijue, but was not defeated .
 Li Jing captured Jiali Khan Ashina Duobi and destroyed Eastern Tujue power . Li Jing was captured by Ashina duobi and captured by Li .
 Emperor Taizong was, in opposition to nobility of the time, was a frank rationalist . He openly ridiculed superstitions and divine portents and modified traditional rites in order to ease agricultural labor . Emperor's actions were intended to ease farming .
 Emperor Taizong’s wife, Empress Zhangsun, served as an able assistant as well as his wife . The Emperor's wife was also an assistant to him .
 An-Shi, Rebellion of; Fubing; Han Dynasty; Mongols; Song Dynasty; Sui Dynasty; Tang Dynasty . Sui Yangdi, Emperor; Tang . Tang Gaozong, Emperor . Tang .
 Li Xiannian Vice premier during 1954-1983 and president of the People’s Republic of China during 1983-1988 . Li Xian was vice premier of the Chinese Communist Party of the 1950s-1980s .
 Li Xiannian was born in Hong’an County, Hubei Province, on June 23, 1909 . He was trained as a carpenter, having received little formal education .
 During the Anti-Japanese War of 1937-1945, Li fought with Communist forces in central China . He earned him command of the Central China Military Region in 1944 .
 During the Chinese Civil War of 19461949, he served as deputy commander of the Central Plains People’s Liberation Army . He was political commissar of the Hubei Military District .
 Li became the chairman of the provisional government of Hubei in 1949 . Li was the first Chinese politician to hold a post in China's capital, Beijing . Li became a prominent figure in Chinese politics .
 Li was assigned to serve in Hubei after the PRC’s birth in October 1949 . He became mayor of Wuhan, provincial capital of Hubean, in 1952 . Li was also assigned to become mayor of the provincial capital in 1952, when he was mayor
 In mid-1954, he was transferred to Beijing when he became the vice . Li Xiannian, Chinese politician and president, received the key to the city of Madrid at the City Hall, 1984 .
 In 1957 Li was also appointed minister of finance of the PRC, in which he reformed the Chinese economy along Soviet lines, resulting in the disastrous failure of the Great Leap Forward in late 1959 . Li was the first Chinese politician to become prime minister of the Chinese Communist Party .
 As vice premier, he led delegations abroad to nurture PRC ties with other socialist and third world nations . He led a number of delegations .
 Despite several political purges, he retained his government positions . He was one of China's most prominent leaders .
 After the revolution ended, he took up more positions, first as vice chairman of the CCP Central Committee in 1977 . He then became chairman of state financial and economic commission in 1979 .
 In 1983, Li succeeded Deng Xiaoping as president of the PRC, a post he held until 1988 . Li succeeded him as China's first president, until 1988, when he died .
 He devoted much attention to advancing his nation’s international status . During this time, he devoted much . attention . to advancing . his nation .
 He was chairmanship of the People’s Political Consultative Conference in which he supported the order to crack down on student demonstrators in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989 . In 1988, he retained only the chairmanship he held only the capacity of the conference .
 Li Zicheng's life tells a great deal about conditions in China during the late Ming dynasty . Li's life in China tells a lot about conditions during the Ming Dynasty .
 Li was forced into banditry by the lack of opportunities in a province of little importance to the Ming government . Li organized his followers into a dangerous opposition force . Li's followers eventually organized into a powerful opposition force.
 Ming forces captured the Ming capital and ended the Ming dynasty, even as the dynasty’s armies were fighting for its life against the Manchus in the northeast . He was not the only man to engage in such activities .
 Li forced the last great Ming general to go over to the Manchus, and this combined force then turned on Li and quickly defeated him . Li then forced the combined force to turn on him and defeat him . The last Ming general was then forced to leave the Ming to join the
 Li was born on October 3, 1605, in the province of Shaanxi in northwestern China . He was born in 1605 .
 As a youth, he gained a reputation for enjoying quarrels and combat . He was admired for his skill in horsemanship and archery and was admired .
 The era in which Li grew up was a period of economic depression and government corruption . Li's father is a former president of the United States .
 Ming officials were increasingly preoccupied with the military threats of the Manchus in the east . They tended to ignore the conditions of Shaanxi and other western provinces .
 As the financial situation of the Ming court worsened, the government began to lay off employees to save money . The government laid off employees as a result of the situation .
 Li had an uncle named Gao Yingxiang , an important bandit leader who enjoyed some success in the mountainous terrain of Shaanxi during the Chinese peasant’s revolts . Li's uncle Gao was an important leader in the Chinese peasants' revolt .
 As famine struck the province in 1628, a great gathering of bandits came together, including Li’s uncle, who was given the name Daxing King . Li's uncle, Li, became a bandit king after famine hit the province .
 Li himself joined the imperial army in 1630, seeking a different way to support himself . Li was born in China and died in 1631 . He was the son of Li Li, who died in his native China .
 Ming officials could not provide the army with any supplies, and a general mutiny took place . The Ming officials were unable to provide any supplies and the army mutiny began . The mutiny was the result of a mutiny by the army .
 By 1631, in the two provinces of Shaanxi and Shanxi, there were more than 36 bands of outlaws that comprised some 200,000 men . In 1631 in the province of Shanxi and the city of Xianxi, more than 300,000 outlaws
 Li and his uncle remained on the move, traveling from one area to another . Li's uncle was also traveling with Li .
 At one point, they raided the burial grounds of the Ming emperors, which lay outside Beijing . The men raided one of China's most important historical sites .
 The response of the reigning Ming emperor Chongzhen was to emerge in mourning dress to apologize to his ancestors for this great affront . Chongzhen's response to the incident was to come out of mourning dress in mourning .
 By 1639, a serious drought in Henan had created such terrible social conditions that thousands of followers began to sign up with Li . Thousands of followers of Li signed up to join Li .
 The situation in Henan was so bad that even scholars joined Li's band . Even scholars joined his band, and these men counseled Li to act in a compassionate way toward the people and try to encourage them .
 Li had not developed any sort of philosophy to guide his actions . With the advice of his new followers, he began to speak of freeing the people from the taxes of the oppressive Ming .
 People suffering from drought and pestilence were looking for a different way to live, or a way to escape their barren circumstances . People looking for ways of escaping their barren conditions .
 In 1641, Li killed the prince of Fu, one of the members of the Ming family who might have had a claim to the throne . Li killed a member of the family in 1641 . Li's death was the first of its kind in China since 1641.
 Li distributed Fu’s riches among his hungriest followers, and his reputation grew not only as a rebel against the Ming but as a popular leader . Fu's riches were distributed among the hungrievest followers .
 Ming armies remained preoccupied in the northeast and did not deal with the growing bandit problems or popular uprisings in any serious way . The Ming armies were preoccupied throughout the 1630s and early 1640s .
 By 1643, Li had decided to take advantage of the situation and attempt to overthrow the Ming government itself .
 Li and his hundreds of thousands of followers moved north across China . Promising a new era of peace and prosperity, Li promised to move north across the country . Li's followers followed him as he promised to lead China to a new age of peace .
 Courtiers and royal family members fled the city and went to their substantial estates in the countryside . Ming army had not provided for adequate defense of their capital, and as Li approached, courtiers fled .
 Emperor Chongzhen rang the bell to summon his ministers for their advice on how to deal with the situation . But none of the ministers responded to the request, and the emperor rang bell .
 Li soon left Beijing to defeat or win over the great Ming commander . At the time, Ming forces led by Wu Sangui were in the northeast trying to resist the Manchus .
 Wu, weighing his own and China’s future, made the decision that the Manchus might make better rulers than the bandit Li . Yet Wu made a decision to make the decision to protect China from Li .
 So he allied with the Manchus and turned to fight against the rebel Li . So he turned to the Chinese and allied with them to defeat Li .
 A month later, Li and his 200,000 troops were defeated by Wu’s forces, and he retreated back to Beijing . A month after the defeat, Li was forced to retreat back to China .
 While there, he melted down all the silver he could find into ingots . On June 3, he set fire to palaces and defense towers and continued his retreat back .
 By early 1645, the forces of the Manchus, now enthroned as the Qing dynasty, were in pursuit of China . By 1645 they had been defeated by the Chinese forces .
 Li died sometime in June or July 1645, though the actual cause of his death remains something of a mystery .
 Some historians believe he was killed by villagers as he was attempting to steal food . Some historians say he may have been killed as he tried to steal from villagers .
 Others say he escaped to a monastery, and still others that he committed suicide . Others say that he escaped from a monastery . Some say he was involved in a suicide attempt .
 Surviving members of Ming family came to think of him as a hero . Ironically, because he ended his life fighting against the Qing, surviving members of the Ming family considered him a hero.
 The prince of Chu named him Loyal Heart after hearing of his death, and immortalized his dwindling forces as the Loyal and True Battalion . He immortalized the dying Chu prince's dwindling forces .
 Liao-Shen Campaign was the first of three large campaigns that effectively destroyed the Nationalist army in mainland China during the Chinese Civil War or Liberation War of 1946-1949 .
 Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung) and the Secretariat, the political-military high command of the CCP, argued for an attack against Jinzhou . Lin and his staff wanted to first capture Changchun, but Mao wanted to capture Changun . Mao Zed
 Mao believed the Nationalists would have to leave their defenses and engage the NFA in the countryside, where Lin’s army could ambush and destroy it piecemeal . By seizing this city and severing the link with Beiping, Mao hoped the Nationalist would leave their . defenses
 The Secretariat was concerned about Wei’s army escaping and tipping the balance in other theaters like north China or the central plains . Furthermore, the Secretariat feared that Wei's army escaped and tipped the balance .
 The Secretariat’s plan promised great rewards, but it also came with a lion's share of risks . The plan was created by the Secretariat of the U.N. agency .
 The most obvious issue was that it exposed the NFA to a conventional battle with Nationalist forces deep behind enemy lines . The NFA was exposed to the conventional battle against the Nationalists, which is expected to take place in the region .
 Lin’s army only had enough fuel for a one-way trip to Jinzhou, China . Logistics was also a problem as the army had no fuel for the trip . Lin's army was only able to make a single-way journey from Jinzhou .
 Defeat would cripple the NFA and allow the Nationalists to recapture the initiative . Defeat or stalemate would allow the opposition to regain control of the Nationalist Party .
 The Secretariat's overriding concern was preventing Wei’s army from escaping intact to bolster the defenses in other regions . However, the Secretariat was concerned that Wei's army would not escape intact .
 The Secretariat allowed Lin to try and capture Changchun, but his failure at the end of the summer settled the debate in the Secretariat's favor .
 NFA initiated the Liao-Shen Campaign on September 12 . The NFA has been forced to accept the Secretariat’s strategy .
 The main effort was against Jinzhou, which was defended by eight Nationalist divisions . Jinzhou is defending against eight divisions, including eight divisions .
 After seizing this objective, the Communists planned to destroy a relief column from Shenyang, when and if it appeared . The Communist Party was planning to destroy the relief column when it appeared.
 A smaller force further south was set to block any reinforcements from Beiping, and a similar force was left behind to maintain the siege on Changchun . In the meantime, a smaller force was also left behind in China to block the Beiping .
 Nationalist commander in chief Jiang Jieshi ordered Wei to lift the siege by dispatching a force from Shenyang . In response to these movements, Nationalist forces were dispatched from the city .
 Wei and his leading subordinate Liao Yaoxiang balked at this, having anticipated a Communist ambush . Both Wei and leading subordinate . Liao Yao had anticipated an ambush by the Communist Party .
 Liao departed Shenyang on October 1 at the head of the West army, which consisted of four corps and three cavalry divisions . Jiang persisted and Liao left Shenyang, China, at the end of October 1 .
 Jiang ordered 11 divisions to form the East army at Huludao . Jiang ordered the formation of the East Army . Jiang orders 11 divisions of the army to form .
 By using sea transport to assemble this army, the Nationalists effectively circumvented the Communist blocking force at Shanhaiguan . The Nationalists used the sea to build the army .
 Jiang envisioned the East and West armies trapping the NFA in a massive pincer movement outside of Jinzhou . Jiang envisioned a massive, double pincher movement outside the city .
 Lin received intelligence reports about the East army of the GMD forces . On the evening of October 2, Lin got intelligence reports on the East Army . Lin received the intelligence on the night of the night .
 He panicked and called off the operation . Because he had not anticipated such a large enemy force so close to Jinzhou, he panicked .
 Lin Lin sent a telegram to the Secretariat without informing his staff . Lin sent the telegram without informing staff .
 Lin retracted his original message before incurring the full wrath of Mao and the Secretariat . However, cooler heads prevailed and Lin retracted the message .
 The fate of the NFA now hinged on the Four Column’s ability to hold off the East army . NFA's fate is now hinging on the success of the East Army .
 The ambush force Lin had positioned near Shenyang now assumed a blocking function . The West army was too large for the Communists to contain or destroy, he says .
 By October 10, the West army had pushed Lin out of his headquarters at Zhangwu, and the East army had begun attacking the Fourth Column defenses at Tashan .
 Combat at Tashan was especially fierce, with some fighting positions changing hands 10 times or more . Some fighting positions changed hands ten times over the course of a fight .
 With its flanks collapsing, the NFA launched an all-out assault on Jinzhou on October 14 . The NFA says it has been forced to withdraw from Jinzhou .
 After nearly 24 hours of fighting, they captured the city and inflicted 90,000 casualties . Most of them were prisoners of war that would soon be integrated into the Communist ranks . They suffered 24,000 of their own casualties .
 Jiang insisted that the East and West armies continue their course and recapture Jinzhou . Despite this, Jiang insisted on the West and the East to continue their march .
 He believed they could still destroy the NFA in the field while the Communists were disorganized and weakened after the fight for Jinzhou . He said they were still able to defeat the Communists while they were weakened .
 Wei, now virtually defenseless in Shenyang, ordered his remaining forces to recapture the port at Yingkou and begin evacuation operations . In the meantime, Wei's remaining forces have recaptured the port and begin evacuations .
 Lin reinforced the defenses at Tashan and took the rest of the army north to intercept the West army . In response to Jiang’s plan, Lin reinforced his defenses . Lin was able to defeat the West in China .
 With NFA units piling on, the weight of numbers proved decisive, and the Communists prevailed . The Communists prevailed on October 28 .
 The NFA swept over Shenyang, capturing what remained of its garrison on November 1 . Flush with victory, the NFA then swept over the city .
 The Communists continued their pursuit to Yingkou, capturing the town just as the last Nationalist troop ship departed . The Communists captured the town .
 A week later, the West army, having never broken through the defenses at Tashan, retreated to Huludao and boarded ships for Tianjin . The West army never broke through the defense and boarded a ship to leave the port .
 Lin Biao was born as Lin Yu-rong to a small landlord family in Huanggang County, Hubei Province, on November 1, 1906 . He was born to a family of a landlord family .
 At 14, he enrolled in the Wutai Middle School at Wuchang, capital city of Hubei . He joined the Chinese Socialist Youth League in 1923, and joined the Communist Party in 1923 .
 Lin Biao was defense minister of the People's Republic of China in 1959-1971 . Joined the CCP in 1925 and joined the party the same year .
 Zhou Enlai was a young cadet at the beginning of the Communist Party of China . Zhou became a close friend of the CCP leader and leader of the Chinese Party . Zhou was also close to General Vasily Blyukher, Soviet military advisor at Whampoa .
 He served as deputy platoon leader, platoon leader and battalion commander . He became a colonel in 1927 . He served in the Army during the war .
 Lin participated in the Nanchang Uprising against the Jiang government and joined the CCP’s armed force . After the collapse of the CCP-GMD coalition, Lin joined the party's armed force. Lin is now a member of the party and the state of China .
 During the Agrarian Revolutionary War of 1927-1937, he served as a battalion, regiment, and division commander in the Fourth Army of the Chinese Workers and Peasants Red Army . He also served in the Red Army of China's Fourth Army .
 Lin became one of the best commanding officers in the Red Army . He became a commanding officer in mountain skirmishes and guerrilla tactics . Lin was a major commander in the Soviet Union .
 He rose quickly through the ranks because of his success in combat and loyalty to Mao Zedong, political commissar of the Fourth Army . He rose to the top of the ranks as a soldier in China's revolutionary revolution .
 Lin was the commander of the First Army Corps of the Red Army in 1932 . Lin was a member of the Chinese Communist Party of the 1930s .
 During the Long March of 1934-1935, Lin supported Mao’s rise as the top leader of the CCP and the Red Army . Lin was a member of the Communist Party of China's Communist Party Party Party .
 When Japan invaded China by attacking Shanghai and Nanjing in August 1937, the GMD government came to an agreement with the CCP on joint resistance through a political and military coalition . When Japan attacked Nanjing and Shanghai, the agreement was reached .
 Lin Biao commanded the 115th Division, which had two brigades and two regiments, totaling 15,500 men . The 115th division was the Eighth Route Army’s 115th Brigade .
 The division crossed the Yellow River eastward and moved into the countryside and mountainous areas . The division then moved eastward into the country's countryside .
 Lin conducted guerrilla campaign in the mountains behind the Japanese lines . Lin conducted a guerrilla campaign behind Japanese lines in 1928-1934 . As the Red Army did in the Jinggangshan Chingkang Mountains) Revolutionary Base area .
 From there they could easily attack Japanese supply lines and small garrisons . From there, they would be able to attack small supply lines . The U.S. could also attack small Japanese garrrisons and small Japanese bases .
 Lin was severely injured by one of the GMD sharpshooters by mistake . Lin was injured in the Battle of Pingxingguan . Lin died in hospital .
 Starting in 1939, he spent three years in Moscow to further his recovery . He spent the rest of his recovery there .
 Lin continued to serve on the Central Military Commission and was involved in strategic planning and officer training . After returning to Yan’an in 1942, Lin continued his role in the war .
 At the beginning of the civil war, the CCP Central Committee planned to take over northeast China during the withdrawal of the Soviet Red Army . The CCP Central Party Central Committee wanted to take control of northeast China .
 Lin was appointed commander and political commissar of all the CCP forces in the northeast to fight against Jiang’s arriving armies . Lin is the leader of the forces in China's northeast .
 From 1946 to 1947, Lin reorganized his troops into the Northeast Field Army . He employed Mao’s strategy of guerrilla warfare, receiving peasant support in the countryside .
 In September-November 1948, following the Central Committee’s orders, Lin launched the Liao-Shen Campaign, the first of three large campaigns that destroyed the main strength of the Nationalist army in the civil war . Lin launched a series of large campaigns to destroy the main
 Lin first encircled northern Changchun in September, and then southern Jinzhou to entrap the GMD troops in between . In this decisive battle for the northeast, Lin encarcled northern . In September, he first encored northern ChangChun, then Jinzhou .
 Jiang Jieshi tried to rescue Jinzhou by ordering 11 divisions from the east and 4 army corps from Shenyang in the west to counterattack Lin’s troops . In early October, Jiang ordered 11 divisions and 4 corps from the west .
 On October 14, Lin committed 250,000 men and the majority of his armor and artillery to the attack at Jinzhou . The attack took place in Jinzhou, China .
 After two days of fighting, Lin captured the city and inflicted 90,000 GMD casualties . The NFA suffered 24,000 of their own . The GMD inflicted 24,500 casualties .
 In November 1948, the CCP reorganized its troops into the Chinese People’s Liberation Army . The CCP established four field armies .
 Lin Biao became the commander of the Fourth Field Army, totaling 800,000 troops . Lin Bao was the first Chinese commander to take command of the Chinese army .
 On November 23, the Fourth Field Army seized Shanghaiguan and severed the Beiping-Tianjin railroad . The Beiping and Tianjin railroad was severed from China .
 On December 19, Lin’s Second and Third Armies destroyed the GMD’S Thirty-Fifth Army Corps and captured Zhangjiakou . The Chinese general's Second and Three Armies proceeded to destroy the GeneralD's Thirty- Fifteenth Army Corps .
 Lin transferred his armies east to reinforce the sieges of Beiping and Tianjin . Lin then transferred his army east to strengthen the siege of Tianjin and Beiping .
 On January 15, 1949, the PLA captured the city and inflicted 130,000 casualties to the GMD garrison . The city was captured by the PLA in 1949 . The GMD suffered 130,500 casualties .
 On January 22, Fu left Beiping and his armies, about 250,000 GMD troops, which were integrated into the PLA . The agreement for a peaceful path was reached by Fu .
 After the Ping-Jin Campaign, the Fourth Field Army advanced southward from 1949 to 1950 to carry on civil war battles all the way to the southernmost point, Hainan Island, which was captured in April 1950 . The Fourth Field army captured the southern part of Hain
 The Fourth Field Army was regarded as the best of the four field armies . It was one of the most successful field armies in the world .
 Lin’s successful campaigns against the GMD forces brought about an early victory for the CCP in the civil war and made him one of the top CCP leaders . Lin is a member of the CCP and is one of its most successful leaders .
 Lin had a low profile in the CCP leadership due to his ill health . After the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, however, he had low profile due to ill health.
 He declined Mao’s request in 1950 that he be the commander in chief of the Chinese forces in the Korean War against the UN and United States forces .
 He went to the Soviet Union for medical treatment during the Korean War . Instead, he went to North Korea for his medical treatment .
 Lin became China’s defense minister in 1959-1971, vice premier in 1965-1971 . Lin became vice chairman of the CMC in 1960-1971 and vice premier of China . Lin was China's defense minister and vice prime minister .
 The whole nation was fired up to imitate the PLA’s unconditional dedication to Mao . Soon the whole . nation was . fired up . to imitate . the PLA's unconditional dedication .
 A large number of PLA officers and soldiers were dispatched to the villages and towns to promote the study of Mao’s thoughts . Mao's thoughts were also promoted by the Chinese government .
 Lin brought the people's army back by emphasizing the people’s war principle and military-civilian integration . Lin: “People's war principle” is a key to the people-war principle .
 He published his book in 1966, Long Live the Victory of People's War, which emphasized the PLA’s guerrilla warfare experience . He published it in 1966 . The book was published in 1966.
 During the Cultural Revolution in the late 1960s, the PLA moved into the center of domestic politics . The PLA became a powerful force in China's political sphere .
 Marshal Lin Biao became the second most powerful leader in the country, next to Mao, in 1969 . Mao made Lin his successor in 1969, and Lin was made his successor . Lin is now the most powerful person in China .
 A new political struggle between Mao and Lin erupted, a struggle that would rip a great hole in a political arena already gasping for breath from the battering it had endured . The struggle would rip the political arena in China's political arena, which had been battered by years .
 In Mao's eyes, what Lin proposed was not a simple political opinion, but his ambitions . Mao’s eyes were not simple political opinions, but ambitions . Lin proposed what Lin said was not just a simple opinion .
 Mao considered Lin’s ambitions and personal influence in the military to be dangerous . Mao was angry and disappointed with Lin's ambitions, Mao considered his influence dangerous .
 Mao never expected Lin to challenge his authority and openly stand up against him as an equal . Mao had never expected his son to challenge him . Lin had never been expected to openly stand against his authority .
 Lin would be the next victim of Mao’s brutal political movement . Just like Peng, Lin would have been the next victims of Mao's brutal political movements .
 Lin, his family, crew members, and others on board, eight people, were killed in the crash . Lin's family and crew members were among those killed . Lin was the only person to be killed aboard the plane .
 Lin Zexu expelled from Guangzhou the British merchants who had been smuggling opium into China and destroyed their illegal cargo . Through righteousness, shrewdness, and persistence, he expelled the British .
 This action constituted one of imperial China’s last victories against foreign imperialism . It contributed to the Opium War from 1840 to 1842, which would constitute the Qing dynasty’�s first major defeat . This action was one of the last victories for imperial China .
 Lin was born on August 30, 1785, in the south Chinese coastal city of Fuzhou (Foochow) in Fujian Province . Lin was also known for his work in China as a painter and photographer .
 He was the son of a poor scholar, Lin Binri, who supported his wife, Chen Zhi, and children on the slim salary he made as a teacher . He was born in a poor family, and his wife supported her family on a slim salary .
 Lin Binri had won the lowest degree in the prestigious civil service examinations . He had failed to pass the higher examination that would have allowed him to become a government official .
 Such an auspicious portent was welcome to the poor family, and as the child matured, he proved an able scholar . As the child grew, he indeed proved an impressive scholar .
 Lin succeeded in the lowest civil examination at the age of 12, passed the provincial examination six years later, and the metropolitan and palace examinations in Beijing aged 25 . Lin passed the metropolitan examination in Beijing at age of 25 and had passed the .
 Lin was named governor-general of Hubei and Hunan Provinces in 1837 . Lin was also named governor general of the Hunan Province . Lin died at the age of 92 in 1901 .
 Lin initiated a campaign against the sale and use of opium, part of a national effort to stem the flow of silver out of China . During his tenure in these centrally located provinces, Lin initiated an anti-opiate campaign .
 Most of the opium entered the country through Guangzhou on foreign ships . While some opium was grown in China, the vast majority of the drug was smoked in China . Opium is grown in some parts of the country, but most of it entered via ships from abroad .
 British merchants in particular used opium grown under their supervision in India as the means to offset the imbalance in trade caused by huge exports of tea from China to the United Kingdom . British merchants used opium as a means of offseting the imbalance caused by tea exports from China from the UK .
 On March 10, 1839, Lin arrived in Guangzhou, China, and the following day, leapt into action . Lin's first voyage to Guangzhou began in March 1839 .
 Lin issued a series of bulletins warning the Chinese inhabitants of Guangzhou that he would tolerate no further collusion with foreigners involved in the opium trade . The use of opium would be severely punished .
 Lin had been able to keep track of the movements and machinations of the British merchants, and he did not mince words . Thanks to a set of carefully cultivated contacts, Lin had kept track of British merchants' movements .
 The emperor and Lin may have felt that this firm action had put an end to the smuggling of opium and demonstrated Chinese sovereignty to the British, but nothing could have been further from the truth .
 On July 7, 1839, a Chinese peasant was beaten by a group of drunken British sailors and subsequently died from his wounds . The incident occurred in China in 1839 . A Chinese peasant died of his wounds after being beaten by British sailors .
 Lin Lin immediately demanded that Elliot hand over the culprit for punishment . When he heard of the murder, Lin demanded the culprit be punished .
 Elliot refused to hand over a British subject to the Chinese authorities . Elliot steadfastly refused to turn over British subjects to the authorities in China .
 This led to a skirmish in Hong Kong Harbor on September 4, 1839, in which British sailors were killed . Ultimately, this led to the death of British sailors .
 Lin was spending much of his time tending to military preparations, and soon British warships appeared on the Chinese coast . By late June of the following year, Lin was .
 Lin was disappointed that the warships did not attack and test his defenses . Lin says he had worked so hard to prepare for the attack .
 The British left four ships to blockade the mouth of the harbor, then sailed north . Instead, the British left a blockade of the mouth, and sailed north.
 The Qing court designated a Manchu named Qishan to enter into negotiations with the British . The Manchu was designated to enter negotiations with British .
 Emperor Daoguang upbraided Lin for standing idle while opium trade was back in full swing . By October 1840, Lin had been sacked by Emperor .
 In May, he left Guangzhou for Hangzhou, and in July, he learned that he had been exiled to Yili, Xinjiang, on China’s northwest frontier .
 His journey to Yili was interrupted by a directive sent him to Henan to assist in rebuilding dams . He stayed in Yili for three years before returning to China .
 Exile was not unusual for high Chinese officials who had earned the emperor’s displeasure, but the period of such punishments was often brief . While in Yili, Lin was given important local assignments, that he was recalled to Beijing in 1845 .
 At the time of his death on November 22, 1850, he was on his way to confront the Taiping rebels in Guangxi Province .
 Hong Kong; Manchus; Nanjing, Treaty of; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Sino-French War; Taiping Rebellion . Nanjing: Nanjing Treaty of . Opium war, First, Qing Dynasty . Qing Dynasty: Qing Dynasty, Sino
 During the latter part of the Han dynasty, eunuchs and empresses’ relatives took turns in the enjoyment of supreme power . They openly traded in official ranks and extorted money from the people .
 Many peasants, having lost their land and other means of subsistence, drifted into refugees . Many peasants became refugees after their land was lost .
 Among many peasant uprisings was the Yellow Turban Rebellion (184- 191), which exploded on a nationwide scale . Among many peasants, the uprising was the popularization of the Chinese tea tea .
 The storm started by the Yellow Turbans ended the Han regime in all but name . The storm was the beginning of the Han era in China .
 In the process of trying to suppress them, local officials and powerful landlords recruited or expanded armies of their own, and quickly they developed into territorial magnates .
 These territorial warlords fought among themselves to gain more territory and population at each other’s expense . Warlords fought for more territory, population and territory .
 Cao Cao gained control over the Yellow River valley, Liu Bei (161— 223) the province of Sichuan , and Sun Quan the middle and lower Yangzi River . Cao Cao also gained control of the Yellow and Yangzi rivers . Liu Bei was the first to gain control of
 When he grew up, he ran a small shop selling straw sandals in his hometown . He now runs a small business in the Philippines .
 Liu’s hometown was attacked by the Yellow Turban Rebellion army at the age of 24 . Liu was killed in the attack by the army . Liu's hometown is now located in China .
 Liu Bei joined the local volunteer force and later the army of the Han dynasty to suppress the rebellion . Liu Bei was a member of a volunteer force to fight against the rebellion in China .
 During the war, Liu became the provincial commander and gained more military power by collecting military and political elite under his command . Liu became a provincial commander during the war .
 Liu Bei approached other warlords for alliance or engaged against one at the time . After the Yellow Turban Rebellion was over, Liu Bei sought alliances to further develop his military and political power . Liu Bei was one of the most successful warlords in China .
 In 196, Lu Bu, one of the northern warlords, was incited to fight against Liu Liu . Liu was killed by Lu Bu in 196 . Lu Bu was one of Lu Bu's most powerful warlords .
 Liu had insufficient power to defeat Cao Cao, so he retreated and went to seek refuge with Cao Cao . Liu was defeated by Cao Cao and died in Cao Cao's hands . Cao Cao died in his first year of power .
 In 199, Liu borrowed 80,000 soldiers from Yuan Shao and helped him defeat another warlord Yuan Shu . Liu borrowed the money to help him defeat Yuan Shu in 199, when Yuan Shu died .
 Liu escaped to Yuan Shao’s region for a while, and then he sought refuge with Liu Biao, the lord of Jing Province . Liu escaped for a time, but then sought refuge in Yuan‘s region . Liu‘died in his native province,
 Sun’s army attacked Jing Province, but they faced off for months without a decisive result . Sun's army attacked the province, but it was never decisive result. Sun and his army fought for months .
 Liu kept some of Wu's western territories that he was entrusted with under Sun Quan’s service . Liu expanded into southwestern China and expanded into southwest China .
 In 220, Liu claimed the founding of the state of Shu with the capital at Chengdu and himself as emperor . Liu claimed to have been emperor of Shu and claimed the title in 220 .
 Liu Bei efficiently maintained the irrigation works centered on the Dujiang Dam . Liu Bei encouraged and promoted rice farming and agricultural development among the minorities in southern Sichuan, Yunnan, and Guizhou Provinces .
 In 222, Sun Quan killed Guan Yu, who was the supreme commander and the best friend of Liu Liu . Guan Yu was killed by Sun Quan in 222, which led to the death of Liu's best friend .
 Liu brought almost all his military against Sun Quan . This precipitated Liu bringing almost all of his military into Sun Quan's territory . Liu's defeat of Sun Quan precipitated the death of Sun .
 Liu Chan proved to be incapable at both administration and warfare . When Zhuge Liang died in 234, Liu Chan was incapable of administration and war . Liu Chan died at the age of 234 .
 Cao Cao; Chibi, Guandu, Battle of; Han Dynasty; Han Wudi, Emperor; Northern-Southern Dynasties; Sui Dynasty; Three Kingdoms . Cao Cao was one of China's most powerful men .
 Liu joined the army when he was very young and served in it his whole life . Liu was born into a poor peasant family in Sichuan (Szechwan) Province in December 1892 .
 After the 1911 Revolution, he participated in military campaigns against the local warlords to protect the newly founded republic . He was influenced by Sun Yat-sen's revolutionary theories .
 He became a company commander, chief of a brigade staff, and then a colonel in the Sichuan army . He was a colonel and company commander before becoming a colonel .
 In 1923, he was promoted to the commander of the Eastern Route Army and later commanding general in Sichuan . He was promoted in 1923, when he became the first Chinese general to be promoted .
 Liu met some CCP members in Sichuan and stayed there from 1923 to 1925 . Liu stayed in the city from 1923 until 1925 .
 He accepted the Communist ideology and joined the CCP in May 1926 . Having learned the theories and policies of the CCP, he accepted the party's theories .
 During the CCP-GMD coalition in 1925-1927, Liu became the military commissioner of Chongqing, the largest city in Sichuan . Liu was also military commissioner in 1925/1927 .
 In 1927, he was appointed army corps commander of the Fifteenth National Revolutionary Army . In 1927 he was given the title of the French army corps . He was also appointed as the head of the army corps of the Army Corps of Russia .
 The GMD government in Nanjing terminated the CCP-GMD coalition to contain the increasing Soviet influence and leftwing activities in the GMD and the Nationalist army . In the spring of that spring the government terminated the alliance to contain Soviet influence .
 GMD outlawed the CCP and purged Communists in the government and military . The GMD also purged Communist Party members in the military and government .
 The rebels created the CCP’s own armed force in the city of Nanchang, central Jiangxi Province . The rebels have been fighting for years in China .
 Liu served as chief staff of the front committee in the Nanchang Uprising . Liu served in front committee of front committee . Liu is a former member of the Communist Party Party of China .
 In early 1928, he was transferred to the more prestigious Frunze Military Academy to study military strategies and tactics . He was transferred from the academy in early 1928 to study strategy and tactics at the Frunzes Military Academy .
 He became a master of the Russian language and the first translator of Russian military theoretic works . He became the first Russian translator of military theory .
 In 1932, he became president and political commissar of the Red Army College in Jiangxi Province . In 1932 he was president of the College of Red Army . He was also president of Jiangxi province's Red Army college .
 At the Zunyi Conference in January 1935, Liu showed his support for Mao Zedong . Liu later became the top leader both of the party and the army . Liu was a member of the Communist Party and the Chinese army .
 After the Long March, Liu maintained his support for Mao and stayed the Red Army’s chief of staff . Liu maintained support for the Maoist regime and stayed with the Red Party . Liu was the top commander of the Chinese Army in China .
 In December 1936, the GMD government agreed to establish the coalition with the CCP for the second time against the Japanese invasion of China . GMD agreed to the coalition in December 1936 . The coalition was formed in response to Japanese invasion .
 Liu served as the commander of the 129th Division, which crossed the Yellow River eastward in 1937 until it reached east and north China . Liu served in China during the Second World War . Liu was one of China's top generals in the war .
 Liu followed Mao’s strategy and conducted guerrilla warfare in the mountainous areas behind the Japanese lines . Liu was the son of Mao's Maoist, who followed Mao's strategy to conduct guerrilla warfare against Japan .
 During the AntiJapanese War of 1937-1945, he worked with Deng Xiaoping (19041997), then political commissar of the 129th Division . During the anti-Japanese War, he was the political commissar of the 129th Division. During the
 CCP bases in parts of Shanxi , Hebei , and Henan Provinces after successful battles against the Japanese troops . They set up CCP bases after their successful battles . CCP bases set up in Shanxi, HeBei and Henans .
 Liu integrated regular operations with guerrilla tactics and defended CCP bases effectively . Liu successfully defended bases effectively in the face of a growing insurgency .
 129th Division increased from 12,000 men in 1937 to 60,000 troops in 1939 and 100,000 in 1940 . The 129th division was the largest unit in the Army's history .
 In 1940, Liu and the 129th participated in the Hundred Regiments Campaign, a major offensive campaign led by Peng Dehuai (1898), to break the Japanese blockage on CCP base areas . In 1974, Liu was the deputy commander of the Eighth Route Army, deputy commander
 Liu was one of the top military leaders of the Chinese Communists . Liu attended the Seventh National Congress of the CCP in 1945 . Liu was a top military leader of the Communist Party in China .
 The Chinese Civil War began in the summer of 1946 . After the CCP-GMD coalition collapsed by the end of the Anti-Japanese War, the Chinese Civil war began .
 GMD leaders believed that if they could squeeze the CCP forces out of their bases in three to six months, they could win the civil war . The GMD leader said if they were able to squeeze CCP forces from their bases, they would win the war .
 The main battlefields had by this time moved to the GMDcontrolled areas . The battle was over for the first time since the fall .
 Mao ordered Liu and Deng to lead their armies from their northern China bases to south China . Mao ordered them to move from their bases to the south China in 1947 . Mao's orders were followed by the deaths of Liu, Deng and other Chinese leaders .
 Liu launched the southern campaigns and led 120,000 troops across the Yellow River, breaking through the GMD’s line . Liu led the army to break through GMD's line and bring it to an end in central China . Liu: The GMD offensive was an attempt to
 PLA launched nationwide offensive campaigns against the GMD in mainland China . Then the PLA launched national offensive campaigns . The GMD was launched in China's Guangzhou province .
 Liu became the vice chairman of the CMC after the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949 . Liu is now the vice-chairman of the National People's Congress . Liu was vice chairman and chairman of Southwest Military and Political Committee .
 He was one of China’s top military experts both in theory and in practice with few equals at home or abroad . He was known for his work in China as a top military expert .
 He taught Sunzi’s The Art of War at China Academy of Military Science when he served as its president . He served as president of the academy .
 Deng praised Liu, stating that he had made a great contribution to the shaping and development of Mao Zedong’s thinking on military matters, which was true . Deng also praised Liu for his contribution to shaping and developing of Mao's thinking .
 In the 1950s, Liu stressed Chinese experience, proposed the Chinese ways to build a modern and regular army . Liu opposed entirely copying the Soviet model . Liu: "China's experience is a model for a modern, regular army"
 He questioned the copying of the Soviet model and suggested that the PLA treasure the Chinese experience and not lose sight of the ‘people’s war’ doctrine .
 From December 7, 1953, to January 26, 1954, an unprecedented meeting was held in Beijing . The meeting took place in Beijing, China, between December 7 and January 26 .
 Marshals Zhu De, Peng Dehuai, Chen Yi, Ye Jianying, Nie Rongzhen (1899— 1992), He Long, and other top military leaders engaged in the debate on the PLA’s reform . Marshals . Zhu De . Peng Dehua
 With Mao on his side, Peng silenced any dissenting opinions and signaled the beginning of the Soviet-style military reform . Peng's victory in China signaled the start of the military reforms .
 The meeting set new principles for the PLA’s modernization over the next decade . The meeting agreed that they must learn advanced military science and technology from the Soviets .
 Liu was forced to confess his ‘mistakes’ and ‘wrong ideas’ under political pressure . Liu was criticized and forced to admit his “mistakes, and wrong ideas under the political pressure’
 Marshal Ye replaced Liu Liu as CAMS president and political commissar . Marshal Ye was replaced by Marshal Ye as CAMs president .
 The 1958 Antidogmatist Campaign criticized some of the officers and followed by a top-down purge . The 1958 campaign was followed by the 1958 purge of some officers .
 The political campaigns undermined unity and promoted grievances and rivalry in the military, military sources say . The military says the political campaigns undermine unity .
 When the Cultural Revolution began in 1966, he had become completely blind and survived the political purge . He survived the purge and is still blind .
 He supported his longtime friend Deng’s return to power in 1978 and his power struggle against the Gang of Four . Deng was a longtime friend of Deng's and supported his efforts to win power .
 He advocated Deng’s economic reform and opening up to the outside world . He also advocated Deng's economic reform .
 National Security and Strategic Competition from the Nuclear Age to the Information Age . National Security from the nuclear age to the information age . National security and strategic competition .
 Liu Shaoqi was purged and dismissed from all of his governmental and party positions by Mao Zedong (1893- 1976) in 1968 during the Cultural Revolution of 1966-1976 . Liu was a member of the Communist Party of China .
 He returned to China in 1922 and was assigned to organize the labor movement . He became chairman of the All-China Federation of Labor in 1931 .
 Liu served as head of the north, central plains, and central China Bureaus during the Anti-Japanese War of 19371945 and the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949 . Liu is credited with helping ensure eventual victory in both wars .
 During Liu’s presidency, the Sino-Soviet split became increasingly irreconcilable, taking on a heavy ideological tone . Liu's presidency was one of the most successful in China's history . Liu: "During Liu's time in China, the split between China and the
 Liu viciously attacked the Soviets’ revisionism and rapprochement with the West . Liu said permanent revolution should be the ultimate goal of the Communist bloc . Liu: "Permanent revolution" should be ultimate goal .
 Liu became active in diplomacy as he tried to enhance the PRC’s international status vis-a-vis the Soviet Union . Liu became a diplomat in the 1980s and 1990s . Liu is now a senior PRC official .
 In 1963, he toured noncommunist nations in Asia, becoming the first PRC president to visit countries outside the Communist bloc . He was the first president of the PRC to visit non-Communist countries .
 Mao's growing influence and power ultimately aroused Mao's suspicion . Mao’s growing influence was ultimately aroused by his growing power .
 In October 1968 Liu was relieved of all his posts, and his position as the second to Mao was passed on to the defense minister, Marshal Lin Biao (19061971), in 1969 .
 Liu died in prison in Kaifeng, Henan Province, of medically neglected diabetes on November 12, 1969 . Liu was sentenced to life in prison for his diabetes .
 Jiang wished to create a government free of Communist influences . After the success of the Northern Expedition in getting rid of the warlords and uniting China, Jiang wanted a free government . Jiang wanted to create an independent government .
 Jiang began to carry out his operation to purge the country of Communists . Although the Communists and GMD had collaborated before and during the Northern Expedition, Jiang nevertheless began to .
 One main Communist stronghold was the central province of Jiangxi, which Jiangxi attempted to take over several times . Jiang tried to take control of the province several times, including in Jiangxi .
 Mao Zedong helped in repulsing the attacks thanks in part to the leadership of the Chinese government . Mao's efforts ended in failure thanks to the leader's leadership of China .
 GMD successfully surrounded the Jiangxi Soviet government in 1933 . By 1933, the GMD had been able to successfully surround the Chinese government .
 Mao and the Red Army retreated from their stronghold of Jiangxi Province on October 16, 1934 . GMD forces threatened Mao's forces in Jiangxi province . Mao retreated from his stronghold on the Jiangxi region .
 The Communists undertook a march from the region in an attempt to salvage what was left of the Red Army . After numerous defeats, the Communists were forced to retreat . They journeyed to northwestern Shaanxi Province .
 Communist forces knew that the surest route to breaking out was through the southwest portion of the encirclement where GMD forces were weakest, and prepared for this in September 1934 . Communist forces ascertained that the . surest . route to break out was . through southwest portions of the
 Leadership took care of important documents by either taking them with them or destroying them . Food and supplies were packed, and the leadership took care for important documents .
 Behind the bulk of the military units were the members of the Central Committee, intelligence units, and an antiaircraft battery . Behind the majority of the . military units was the . Central Committee and intelligence units .
 Field medical personnel, support units, equipment for making arms small arms and ammunition, and printing supplies for making propaganda pamphlets . Traveled along with them were field medical personnel and support units .
 The trek lasted from October 16, 1934, to October 20, 1935, and involved marching over 6,000 miles of dangerous country . The trek took place in dangerous conditions .
 Zhou Enlai coordinated the breakout, with the forward troops of the withdrawal commanded by experienced veterans of the Northern Expedition . Zhou enlai led the breakout of the Chinese troops .
 The Red Army was split into two columns, the First Army Corps numbering 15,000 combat troops and the Third Army Corps, numbering 13,000 . The First and Second Army Corps were formed from the First and Third Army .
 Other smaller army corps helped defend the flanks, and in total the number of those on the Long March would number roughly 80,000 personnel .
 Mao’s pregnant wife He Zizhen, along with 35 other women, traveled with the First Army Corps . Mao's pregnant wife was among the 35 women who traveled with Mao's army .
 Two Communist army corps broke through southwest perimeter of GMD defensive line . GMD made a rush for the north of Guangdong Province .
 GMD forces were fast catching up to them, many of their baggage carriers deserted them, and the roads were almost nonexistent . GMD . forces were quickly catching up with them, with many of the roads being almost nonexistent.
 Participants in the Long March took over several market towns in Guizhou Province, where they resupplied themselves and got rid of their heavy artillery, as they no longer had the ammunition for it .
 On January 7, 1935, Communist forces entered the city of Zunyi, a rich merchant town . Communist forces stormed the city in a bid to take control of the city .
 Communist leaders decided to transform the town into a socialist example . Communist leaders wanted to turn it into an example of socialism . The town is now a tourist destination .
 Beginning by dispersing land to the peasants, they also distributed goods as well as forming revolutionary committees among them . The peasants also formed revolutionary committees .
 A conference was later held in the city from January 15 to 18, and 18 important Communist leaders attended .
 This group argued over the reasons for their defeat at Jiangxi and came up with resolutions stating these reasons . This group of men argued over why they lost to Jiangxi .
 Mao was named a member of the Standing Committee of the Politburo and chief assistant to Zhou Enlai for the purpose of military planning . Mao was also named as chief assistant for Zhou En lai's military planning after the conference . Mao died at the end of the war in
 The participants of the Long March then began their dangerous trek across the snowy mountainous regions near Tibet . Mao caught malaria several times and had to be carried by his men . The Long March took place in the snowy mountains near Tibet, where he caught malaria .
 Mao met with Zhang Guotao, commander of the Fourth Army Corps, who added another 50,000 men to the Long March . Mao later met with the Chinese general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Party .
 Mao argued that they needed to drive to Shaanxi or Ningxia (Ningsia) Mao wanted to settle and defend the area in the Sichuan -Xikang border region . Zhang wanted to stay in the area and defend it . Mao argued with Zhang that he needed
 Unable to reach a compromise, the two groups split once more and carried on their separate ways . The two groups were unable to find a compromise and split again .
 Mao traveled across the Qinghai -Gansu border and regrouped with Shaanxi Communists . Mao traveled from Qinghai to Gansu . He traveled across Qinghai-Qinghai border . Mao was a Chinese Communist Party leader .
 Many Chinese suffered from the ill effects of the journey, and Mao's forces suffered especially . Mao’s forces suffered most of the march .
 From exhaustion to lack of supplies, many faced death on this hazardous trip . Many faced death due to exhaustion, lack of sleep and disease .
 By the time they reached Shaanxi, only one-tenth of the original 80,000 troops survived . Only one- tenth of those who survived survived the battle .
 Mao established headquarters at Yan’an, Shaanxi, from 1935 to 1945 . Mao and the CCP established their headquarters there from 1935-1945 . Yan'an was the headquarters of the Chinese Communist Party .
 Lord Shang was a prince of the small state of Wei . Originally named Gongsun Yang, or Shang Yang, he was originally known as Shang Yang .
 Shang is one of the early reformers in Chinese history . Shang is a reformer named after him . Shang was one of China's first reformers and reformer .
 Shang marks the beginning of the so-called feudal system in Chinese history . Shang also lays the foundation of Qin’s unification of China . Shang was the first stage of the Chinese revolution in the history of the country .
 Shang was recommended to the king of Wei by the prime minister of China . Shang is a member of the Chinese royal family of Wei . Shang was born in China .
 Gongshuzuo suggested that if the king did not want to promote Shang, the king should kill him to prevent him from leaving Wei and serving an enemy state . The king refused to kill Shang, and Gongzuzuo said he should be killed to prevent Shang leaving Wei .
 Shang foreseen, while the king of Wei verbally agreed with Gongshuzuo, he told his close servants afterwards that he would not follow the paradoxical suggestion to kill Shang . Just as as Shang had foreseen he foreseen .
 To make Qin a stronger and more influential state, Qinxiao, still only 21, was determined to reform the state . He was only 21 years old when he decided to reform his country .
 He stated how Zhao, Wei, and Han had taken the territories of his ancestors west of the Yellow River, an intolerable humiliation . He stated that Zhao and Wei had taken his ancestors' territories west of Yellow River .
 He appealed to his people that if they conceived of any proposals to make Qin strong, he would appoint them with official positions and share his power with them . He considered the intentions of his father and appealed for them to join him .
 Shang heard about the notice and went to Qin Qin and talked to Duke Qinxiao about his ideas . As soon as the notice was issued, Shang went back to Qin to discuss his ideas. Shang heard the notice, and talked about his plans .
 Qin divided Qin into 31 counties . Qin created a system of counties to achieve his goal . Qin was the first Chinese emperor to become a leader .
 Each county would have a magistrate, but all magistrates had to be appointed by the ruler . Each county had to have its own magistrate, and the ruler would appoint them .
 He imposed collective punishment and encouraged people to expose the crimes of their neighbors . He also imposed collective punishments .
 The purpose of those units was to ensure mutual supervision among neighbors . It was intended to ensure that neighbors were supervised by neighbors .
 If anyone violated the law or tried to harbor the criminals his neighbors were to make a report to the local government . If anyone violates the law, his neighbors would report them to the police .
 Failing to do so would result in severe punishment of all his neighbors, he would be punished . The punishment would include severe punishment for all the neighbors .
 He deprived the nobility of their hereditary privileges and based promotions and benefits in the military on merits . He also made a change in the system of the military .
 A common soldier who could fight bravely in the battle would be granted promotion . The soldier would be promoted if he fought bravely and was given promotion .
 Any soldier who betrayed or fled in the battle would be harshly punished . But any soldier who fled would be severely punished for their actions .
 He abolished the relatively egalitarian well-field system and allowed the trade of land . Third, he abolished the free well-fields system and let the trade .
 He argued law should be equally applied to nobility and commoners . He argued that law should equally apply to the nobility .
 People who had received rewards previously would still be punished if they violated the law . People who received rewards would be punished for violating the law.
 He suggested punishment should be harsh but reward should be light . He also suggested that punishment should not be harsh .
 Light reward would encourage people to work harder and fight more audaciously . Big reward for small merit would dampen people’s ardor for merits . Light reward is a light reward for people who work hard and fight hard .
 Shang ordered a long pole be erected near the south gate of the capital and said that whoever could move the pole to the north gate would be given 50 ounces of gold . Shang also ordered a pole erected near a north gate to be erected and said whoever moved the pole would receive 50 ounces
 Shang noted the reason the law could not be implemented effectively was that the people at the top often violated it . Shang noted that the law was not implemented effectively because it was often violated by the top people .
 Because the heir apparent was the successor of the ruler, he could not be punished . Heir apparent was not punished because he was heir apparent to the ruler .
 Shang ordered both teachers of the heir apparent to be mutilated as a warning to other nobles . Shang ordered the mutilation of the teachers as a threat to other noblemen . Shang then ordered the teachers mutilated to protect his heir apparent .
 Lord Shang also had tremendous military achievements in Qin's reign .
 He told Duke Qinxiao about the importance of attacking Wei because of its proximity to Qin . He also said that Qin was too close to Qin to attack Wei .
 He lured and captured the commander of the Wei army in a meeting and defeated them . The Wei army was defeated by the Liang army in China .
 Wei regretted that he had not followed the advice of Gongshuzuo and killed Shang . After losing several battles to Shang’s army, the king of Wei regretted not killing Shang .
 The king of Wei fled to the east and left those territories in the west to the Qin . The Qin left Wei territory in the east to the west . Wei territory left to Qin territory in west .
 As a reward for his reform policies and military accomplishments, Duke Qinxiao granted Shang the title of “Lord” and rewarded him with 15 counties . Shang was also granted 15 counties as a reward .
 Shang had many enemies among the Qin nobles due mostly to his harsh laws . Shang had been the prime minister of the Qin for 10 years . Shang's harsh laws included harsh laws and harsh taxes .
 As long as Duke Qinxiao was in power, Shang felt no danger and thus no sense of a need to change some of his unpopular policies . Shang was not in danger and therefore felt no need for a change of his policies .
 Shang escaped to the state of Wei, but he was turned away because of his previous attacks . Shang escaped when some persons accused him of attempting to rebel, Shang escaped . Shang was also turned away from Wei because of previous attacks.
 King Huiwen had his corpse tom tom ripped apart by chariots . King had an intense animosity toward Shang, and had the corpse tom taken apart .
 Despite repeated attacks on his reform, Shang remains as one of the important reformers in the history . Shang remains a reformer despite repeated attacks against him .
 Many of his policies, good or bad, including ‘equality before the law,” ‘collective punishment,’ and ‘neighboring reports, were continuously adopted in the late periods .
 China is China, People’s Republic of; Qin Dynasty; Qin Shi Huangdi, Emperor; Rebellion Led by Chen Sheng; Terra-Cotta Army . Warring States Period; Zhou Dynasty; Warring State Period .
 Luo Ronghuan was bom in Hengshan County, Hunan Province, on November 26, 1902 . He was born in China in 1902 and died in 1952 .
 During the Nanchang Uprising, he joined the Red Army as a political officer . He joined the Communist Party of China's First National Socialist Party .
 His first position was as special political representative to the First Regiment of the First Division . He served in the Army in the Second World War .
 Luo started as a battalion political officer and moved steadily up the ranks . Luo started in Jinggangshan at the start of his career as a political officer .
 During the Jiangxi Soviet period, he became an army-level political officer, most notably for the Eighth Army . The Eighth Army was destroyed during the GMD’s Fifth Encirclement Campaign .
 Luo served as deputy director of the Political Department of Mao’s First Front Army . Luo served during the Long March of 1934-1935 . Luo is a member of the Chinese Communist Party of China .
 Luo served as director of the Political Department of the Red Army’s Rear Command . Luo arrived in Yan'an with the rest of the survivors of Mao's army . Luo served in Yan’an during the Second World War II .
 Luo was director of the Political Department of the 115th Division in 1937 . Luo was a member of the Second United Front with the Nationalists in China . Luo is the current PLA marshal of the PLA .
 Luo replaced Nie, who had been promoted to command the new Shanxi Chahar-Hebei Military Region . Luo was promoted in 1938 to command a new military region in Shanxi . Luo became Luo's successor to Nie .
 Luo was in the forefront of expanding Communist territory east during World War II . Luo eventually took command of the Shandong Military Sub-district in addition to his duties with the 115th Division . Luo was also involved in expanding Communist territories east .
 Luo coordinated large-scale efforts in Shandong to seize cities and railroads, as well as disarming Wang Jingwei’s (Wang Chingwei) regime and Japanese troops . Luo died in August 1945 .
 Luo’s command provided the bulk of the forces for the expedition to Manchuria in September . Luo is a former member of the Communist Party Party of China .
 Luo himself transferred to northeast China to serve as Lin Biao’s political commissar for both the Northeast Bureau and the Northeast Field Army . A few months later, Luo himself moved to Northeast China . Luo is now serving as the head of the Northeast bureau and the military's
 Luo’s contribution to the struggle in Manchuria during the Chinese Civil War or Liberation War of 1946-1949 has often been overlooked . Luo was a key figure in the struggle for the Chinese government in the Second World War .
 Lin is remembered as a calm, steady figure, often in contrast to his reputation as a moody and somewhat erratic military genius . He has been remembered for his calm and steady figure during his time in the US .
 Luo played a major role in some of the key campaigns and strategic decisions in northeast China . Luo was a key figure in the liberation war . Luo is now a prominent leader in China's democracy movement .
 Luo convinced Lin's will faltered during the Liao-Shen Campaign in the fall of 1948 . Luo convinced the general to stay the course during the campaign . Luo: "Luo is a great leader of the Chinese revolution in China"
 Luo retained his position as political commissar with the Central China Committee prior to the crossing of the Yangzi River . Luo was with the South Central China Military District, and with the Northeast Field Army . Luo became the Fourth Field Army and became the fourth Field Army in China .
 The workload exacerbated his poor heath, which included high blood pressure and coronary heart disease . However, he also suffered from high cholesterol and heart disease, which led to his death .
 His health had always been an issue, as seen in his treatment at Dalian by Soviet doctors during the Liberation War . His health was always an issue .
 Luo's last act was to question the military policies of Lin Biao, who had replaced Peng Dehuai as minister of defense . Luo was one of Luo’s last acts in the wake of Great Leap Forward .
 Lin disagreed with Lin's slavish devotion to Mao Zedong’s military principles and emphasizing being “red” over military proficiency, he said .
 Luo died on December 16, 1963 in Beijing, thus sparing him the backlash that might well have come his way during the Cultural Revolution . Luo died in 1963, but his death spared him a backlash .
 Luo was buried with full state honors, and his funeral was attended by the highest figures in the party including Mao and Lin . Luo was a member of the Communist Party of China .
 Luo’s subsequent ranks and positions included column political department chairman, division political committee member, and army group political security bureau chief . Luo has also been a political and political affairs committee member . Luo was a member of the army's political security committee .
 During the Long March of 1934—1935, he served as chief of staff of the Red Army advance column . He served in Red Army's advance column during Long March .
 He became head of the Political Security Bureau of the First Front Red Army after arriving in northwestern Shaanxi Province . He is now head of a political security bureau in northwestern China .
 Luo also became an instructor, and later director of studies, with the approval of Mao Zedong . With the reestablishment of the Red Army College on June 1, 1936, Luo was also an instructor . Luo was an instructor at the reestablishment of the college .
 Luo, supposedly guided by Mao, wrote a lengthy tract titled Political Work among the Anti-Japanese Military Forces . Luo's work became a canonical text on the issue and structure of party-military relations . Luo was a member of the Communist Party of China .
 Luo was involved in the creation of a network of military recruitment and training institutions in north China, behind Japanese lines . In July of that year, Luo was . He created a new network of . military recruitment . institutions in . north China behind Japanese . lines .
 He was promoted to political director of the Eighth Route Army in May 1940, and was transferred to the Taihang base area . He was then transferred to Taihang Base area .
 Luo’s notable contributions during this period included his writings on “antienemy work,” or psychological warfare, conducted by north China guerrilla units in their encounters with Japanese and Chinese “puppet” military forces . Luo's writings included his work on psychological warfare
 Luo occupied several overlapping positions within the vital Jin-Cha-Ji military region during the Chinese Civil War period . Luo was the director of the North China Military Region Political Department . Luo is a member of the Chinese Communist Party Party Central Bureau .
 Luo was famously demonized in the pages of Life magazine . Luo presided over a series of campaigns against counterrevolutionary organizations and enemies of the state, real and imagined . “New China” was consolidated internally during the early 1950s .
 Luo was awarded the rank of grand general, the highest rank of general in the PL A, in 1955 . Luo is a former general general of the PLA A . Luo was also awarded a grand general in 1955, when he was awarded his highest rank in PL A .
 Luo had risen to many of the highest public positions related to PRC state security in 1959 . Luo was one of China's most prominent state security officers . Luo died of a heart attack in 1959 at the age of 50 .
 He presided over the professionalization and modernization of the PRC’s national defense industries . He oversaw the successful manufacture and detonation of China's first nuclear bomb on October 16, 1964 . He also oversaw the development of the country's defense industry .
 Luo, along with Yang Chengwu, was responsible for implementing Mao’s vision of creating a hinterland “third front,” or strategic rear base, in preparation for possible war with the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Luo was also responsible for creating
 Mao removed Luo from military posts during the December 8-15, 1965, expanded meeting of the CCP Politburo in Shanghai . Luo’s career came on the eve of the Cultural Revolution, when Mao removed him from his military posts . Luo was removed from his post during the
 He died unexpectedly on August 3, 1978, in West Germany, while receiving medical treatment .
 The conference’s name is derived from the meeting place, a resort on Mount Lushan in southeastern Jiangxi Province . The conference is named after the resort, which is located in the area of Jiangxi .
 The original objective of the conference was to review the developments in China during 1958 and solve some practical issues brought forth by those developments . The conference was originally intended to discuss the situation in China .
 Mao Zedong also intended to use the conference to contain the “leftist tendency” elements in the Great Leap Forward . Mao Zedongs intended to include the ‘leftist tendencies’ in the Chinese Communist Party of China .
 Marshal Peng Dehuai wrote his well-known long letter to Mao to emphasize the problems that had appeared during the “Three Red Banners” movement . Marshal Peng wrote the letter to the defense minister of the PRC on July 14, 2013 .
 The relationship between workers and peasants was undermined . For instance, the relationship between peasants and workers was undermined. For example, it was undermined by the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Peng apparently tried to disconnect Mao from these problems . Despite his criticism, Peng appeared to try to disconnect himself from Mao .
 Mao launched a major assault on Peng, whose criticism probably would have been tolerated if it had been raised by another military leader . Worrying about Peng’s disloyalty and his military power, Mao launched an assault on him .
 Mao addressed the whole conference on July 23, rebuking Peng and his letter . Mao rebuked Peng and rebuked the letter .
 Peng was dismissed from all of his positions in the party and the People’s Liberation Army . Peng lived under virtual house arrest in China .
 Peng wrote long letters to Mao and the CCP Central Committee appealing for suspension of his disgrace . Peng wrote many long, personal letters to the Communist Party Central Committee pleading for suspension .
 These letters brought even more criticism and troubles for him in the 1960s . The letters were sent to him from his home in New York City in 1964 .
 Criticism of party actions and policies became equated with criticism of Mao . Criticism of Maoism was equated to criticism of the party's policies .
 He defended himself by saying that he, like all of the great writers, Confucius, Karl Marx, and Lenin, had made mistakes . He said that focusing on them would not help the situation .
 Mao's personal victory over Peng Dehuai at the Lushan Conference led Mao to proceed with the Great Leap Forward . Mao's victory in China's first major victory in the war of China in 1945 .
 More than 3 million officials within the party were indicted, and “class struggle” was brought for the first time into the upper echelon of the party apparatus . “Class struggle’s’ first time brought into upper echelons of party apparatus.
 Manchuria is China’s northeastern region, which includes Liaoning, Jilin and Heilongjiang Provinces . The eastern part of the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region includes Inner Mongolia . See Shimonoseki, Treaty of; Sino-Japanese War Man
 Manchuria is Romanization of Manzhou to designate the region after the Manchu conquest of China in the seventeenth century . The region was named after Manchu who conquered China in 16th century .
 According to Chinese historical annals, the Yan kingdom during the Warring States Period conquered Manchuria . The Yan kingdom was conquered by the Chinese state of Manchia during the period .
 The Qin dynasty established military garrisons, and the Han dynasty further consolidated power there . Qin and Han ruled China for centuries . Qin, the Qin dynasty, established a military presence in the region .
 During the Tang dynasty, the Chinese controlled South Manchuria, but North Manchuria was dominated by Bohai Kingdom . During the Chinese ruled South, North, and North, Manchutia .
 The constant regime changes made Manchuria a battlefield for various rival powers . It was a constant source of instability between Russia and China .
 Jurchen tribes enjoyed autonomy in their domains during the Ming dynasty . Manchuria was under Chinese jurisdiction, but Jurchens enjoyed autonomy . During the Ming Dynasty, Manchurians were under Chinese control .
 As the Ming declined, the Jurchens, under the leadership of Nurhaci, rose as a power . The Jurchens rose as an important power in the region of China .
 In 1635, the title of Jurchen was changed to Manchu, from which the region gained its name . Jurchen became Manchu in 1635 . The region is now known as Manchu .
 The Manchus conquered China in 1644 and established the Qing dynasty . Through political maneuver and military combat, they conquered China . The Qing dynasty was established in China in the 16th century .
 The Manchus deemed Manchuria as their homeland into which Chinese immigration was officially prohibited . Manchia was officially banned from Chinese immigration in the region of China .
 For about two centuries, the Qing only stationed Manchu troops led by military generals . The Qing only sent troops to China in order to protect China .
 Qing started to open some parts of Manchuria to Chinese settlement in the late 19th century . Only by the late nineteenth century, the Qing began to open parts of China to Chinese settlements .
 The rich natural resources attracted Russian and Japanese expansionists . However, the rich natural . resources attracted Russia and Japan .
 Russia annexed a huge chunk of land beyond the Heilong and Wusuli Rivers . The Treaty of Aihui in 1858 and the Treaty of Beijing in 1860 were signed in 1860 .
 Qing troops were routed in South Manchuria during the Sino-Japanese War . During the war, Qing forces were defeated in South China .
 Russia lost ground in Manchuria and was forced to evacuate the disputed territory as part of the Peace of Portsmouth that ended the war in 1905 .
 South Manchuria but relinquished it under pressure from Russia, Germany, and France . Russia, France, Germany and France relinquished control of the region .
 Russia dispatched troops to occupy Manchuria in the name of suppress ing the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 . In 1900, Russia sent troops to China to suppress the Rebellion .
 Russian refusal to withdraw prompted Japan to launch a preemptive attack . Japan beat Russia in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905 .
 After this war, Russia maintained its influence on North Manchuria . Japan gradually established its sphere of influence in South Manchia .
 The Qing opened all of Manchuria in 1904 to Chinese immigration and settlement as a part of the policy of border defense . The invasion of the neighboring countries compelled the Qing to open all of the region in 1904 .
 In the following decades, many millions of Chinese farmers from north China (particularly Shandong) flowed into the region .
 In 1907, the Qing established the provincial governments in Liaoning, Jilin and Heilongjiang and assigned civilian governors as administrators . The Qing established these provinces as provinces .
 In 1931, Japan launched a war against China and rapidly occupied Manchuria . Japan occupied the region in 1931 and occupied it .
 The last Qing emperor Henry Puyi, Xuantong (1909— 1912), was installed as the head of the puppet state of Manchukuo . The puppet state collapsed in 1945 when the Soviet Union declared war against Japan and occupied Manchuria .
 The Soviets acknowledged Chinese sovereignty over the region and recognized the regime of Jiang Jieshi (1887— 1975) but secretly allowed Chinese Communist forces to enter to establish effective control over strategic locations before their withdrawal in 1946 . The Soviets withdrew in 1946, recognizing Chinese sovereignty .
 During the Chinese Civil War (1946— 1949), Manchuria was a battlefield between Mao Zedong's Communists and Jiang Jieshi’s Nationalists . During the 1950s, China fought the Nationalists and Communists in China .
 Through the Liao-Shen Campaign in 1948, the Communists took over Manchuria and turned it into a stronghold for their final victory in 1949 . The Communists turned the area into a bastion of power .
 During the Maoist era, Manchuria became an industrial base and a granary . During that era, it was an industrial and granary.
 Some scholars trace the origin of the Manchus to the Sushen people who lived in the northeast during the Zhou dynasty . This is challenged as groundless . Some scholars believe this is groundless, but it is not a myth .
 Sushen during the Zhou, Yilou during the Han dynasty, Wuji during the Wei dynasties, and Mohe during the Tang dynasty (618— 907) were all related to the Tungusic peoples, including the Manchus . Sushen and Y
 Jurchens, ancestors of the Manchus, rose to power during the Song dynasty . Wanyan Aguda established the Jin dynasty in the northeast of China . Jurchens are the ancestors of Manchu .
 The Jin launched a series of wars to unify the Tungusic tribes, conquer the Liao dynasty in 1125, and expand its domain into north China . The Jin was the first Chinese dynasty to conquer north China in the early 1125 .
 Jurchens were divided into three main tribes and under Ming control during the Ming dynasty . Jurchens are known as the Jurchens and Jurchens of China .
 Jianzhou chief Nurhaci unified the Jurchens and built Late Jin in 1616 . As the Ming declined, Jianzhou had a strong influence in the region of China .
 He modified Mongolian script into the Manchu written language . He established the banner system to turn the Jurchens into a fighting force .
 In 1635, Huangtaiji changed the name of Jurchen to Manchu, a permanent name for this ethnic group . In the name Jurchen, Jurchen was Jurchen until 1635 . The name Manchu means Manchu .
 In 1636, the Manchus established the Qing dynasty with Mukden as its capital . Mukden was the capital of the Qing Dynasty .
 Through two decades of wars, the Manchus conquered all of China and even expanded Qing territory into central Asia, Tibet, and Taiwan .
 Traditionally, the year 1644 is seen as the beginning of the Qing . The Manchus relocated their capital to Beijing in 1644 .
 The Manchu population was only about 1 percent of the Chinese population when they conquered China . The Chinese population was about 1% of the population at the time .
 The small number of Manchus maintained their rule over China for almost three centuries . Historians have interpreted the phenomenon as a strange fusion of a Manchu head implanted on the Chinese body .
 In fact, the Manchu population equated to the number of Ming ruling elites . The Manchchu population was roughly equal to the size of the Ming rulers .
 During the Qing, the Manchus, as a hereditary military ruling caste, were scattered through the empire . They were scattered throughout the empire as a result of the Qing .
 The Manchus soon lost this tradition as they enjoyed a new life among the Chinese . However, the Manchuans soon lost their tradition and moved to China .
 Sinification took place as the Manchus adopted Chinese language and culture . Sinification validates the statement that the conquerors were conquered by the conquered .
 Around 1900, the Manchus were seen as barbaric aliens by the revolutionaries led by Sun Yat-sen . The Manchuans were seen by the revolutionists in China .
 During the Chinese Revolution of 1911, some Manchus were killed . However, most were not attacked but had to embark on a painful transition from warriors to urban laborers .
 Soon after the establishment of the Republic of China, the Manchus were recognized as one of the five great Chinese ethnic groups . They would continue to be treated as such as such until the present day .
 For example, Han Chinese banner men and their descendants are also recognized as Manchus . Han Chinese banners men and descendants of them are now recognized as the Manchu .
 Even though the Manchus lost their language, many of them still observe Manchu customs, such as the prohibition of eating dog meat . Nurhaci was once saved by his dog .
 In terms of other dietary habits, the Manchu “fire pot” and “whole sheep banquet” ( quanyang xi) are renowned .
 In the 1980s and the 1990s, over 10 Manchu autonomous counties were established in Liaoning, Jilin , and Hebei Provinces .
 Manchu autonomous townships were created throughout northeast China and China proper . Manchu autonomy townships are created throughout China and the rest of China .
 Today, the Manchu population is around 11 million, among whom nearly 10 percent live in Liaoning Province . Nearly 10 percent of the population live in the province .
 Banner System; Chinese Revolution of 1911; Great Wall; Manchuria; Ming Dynasty; Mongols; Qing Dynasty; Song Dynasty; Sui Dynasty; Sun Yat-sen; Tang Dynasty; Tibet; Zhou Dynasty . Great Wall and Great Wall of China: Great Wall, Man
 Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861-1928 . Ethnic relations and political power in late Qing and early Republican China in 1861-28 .
 Mao Zedong was born in Shaoshan, Hunan Province, on November 19, 1893 . He graduated from the Hunan First Normal School in 1918 . Mao was born on the same date as Mao's father .
 In so doing, he bought time for the infant CCP to grow under the GMD shield . In doing so, he paid attention to the fact that GMD has been given the power to protect the CCP .
 United Front broke down in mid-1927 when GMD leader Jiang Jieshi decided to purge the Chinese Communists . The CCP-GMD power struggle lasted for two decades . The United Front was a two-decade power struggle .
 Mao worked on his own to develop a unique Chinese path to carry out the socialist revolution . Mao and other frustrated Chinese Communists worked on their own after the United Front split .
 In January 1935, Mao became the CCP chairman, a post he held until his death . Mao held the post until he died in January 1935 . Mao was the leader of the Communist Party Party of China .
 His ascension to power is attributed to his ideological and tactical pragmatism . He rejected the rigid application of Soviet orthodox thinking and instead emphasized uniqueness of Chinese history and culture .
 Mao proclaimed the establishment of the PRC on October 1, 1949, officially ending the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949 . Mao ended the war by expelling Jiang Jieshi’s (1887— 1975) GMD government from China .
 The first period was characterized by imitation of the Soviet model in reconstructing China and consolidating the CCP’s power . First period was the first period of imitation of Soviet model, followed by the Second period .
 Mao’s policy of lean to one side signaled a pro-Soviet and anti-American stance . Because the PRC's birth coincided with the Cold War, Mao's policy of leaning toward the Soviet Union signaled anti-U.S.
 His first foreign policy initiative was a visit to Moscow in December 1949, culminating in the Sino-Soviet Treaty of February 1950 . His visit to Beijing in 1949 paved the way for the treaty .
 The PRC’s anti-American stance was vividly showcased around the question of Taiwan, as well as in the Korean War, the Geneva Conference, the first and second Taiwan Strait crises .
 Politically, he preferred a democratic dictatorship, along with the principles of democratic centralism and coexistence with other revolutionary parties and noncommunist classes .
 The terms “dictatorship” and “centralism” suggested. Yet he ensured that real power and leadership rested in the hands of the CCP, as the terms ‘dictatorships’ suggested .
 In economic matters, Mao strictly adhered to the Soviet model, with Soviet technical and material assistance . Mao's economic policy was based on the model of the Soviet Union .
 In early 1950, he ushered in land reform, which involved government confiscation and the redistribution of agrarian land to peasants . The land reform involved confiscation of government property and redistribution of land .
 This stage was completed in late 1953 and succeeded by collectivization aimed at boosting agricultural production . Collectivization was succeeded by collectingivization to boost production .
 In 1953, Mao launched the First Five-Year Plan, which strove to develop heavy industries . Mao's plan was completed a year ahead of schedule . The plan was launched a year before schedule .
 Mao adopted mass socialization by encouraging the formation of numerous mass organizations in the early 1950s to mobilize the population to participate in such movements as the Resist-America Aid-Korea Campaign . Mao also encouraged the creation of the Three-Anti movement to combat corruption and wasteful bureaucracy .
 The second period of Mao’s rule demonstrated his determination to establish a unique brand of Chinese socialism, designed to wean China from Soviet aid . Mao's second period was the second period in Mao's rule in China . Mao was determined to establish his own brand of socialism .
 The year 1958 began with the Second Five-Year Plan, which was much more ambitious than the first . The year began with a new five-year plan for the country .
 Mao launched the three-year Great Leap Forward program at year’s end . Mao was trying to catch up with and surpass British industrial output . Mao launched it to accelerate China's industrialization .
 He ordered the establishment of nationwide People’s Communes, which was also an essential step in facilitating the socialist transformation of China . To this end, he ordered the . establishment of . the establishment .
 The Great Leap Forward, however, was doomed to failure, as the PRC was not ready for such a radical transformation . The PRC did not have the time to prepare for such an ambitious transformation .
 Another adverse impact was the growing division within the PRC leadership . The PRC has a history of growing divisions within the leadership .
 Mao relieved Peng Dehuai (P’eng Te-huai) of his post as defense minister because of his opposition to the Great Leap Forward . In September 1959, Mao relieved his post because of Peng’s opposition to Great Leap forward .
 Mao reluctantly agreed to relax economic socialization by dismantling communes and using material incentives to revive the Chinese economy, he says . Liu and Deng were among those who proposed to relax socialization .
 Mao’s drive for independence also resulted in the collapse of the Sino-Soviet alliance . Mao's drive to independence also led to the collapse in the Soviet-China alliance .
 His insistence on proceeding with the radical Great Leap Forward alarmed Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, who decided to stop assisting the PRC's national reconstruction in 1958 .
 Mao was forced to pursue a lone course in implementing both the Second Five-Year Plan and the Great Leap Forward . This forced Mao to pursue his own course of action .
 Mao’s unilateral initiation of the Second Taiwan Strait Crisis in September 1958 prompted Khrushchev to withhold nuclear information . Khrushchen withheld nuclear information in response to Mao's unilateral initiation in September .
 The Sino-Soviet split became official after Mao passed the chairmanship to Liu . Liu intensified the ideological attack against Soviet revisionism and Khrushchev’s advocacy of de-Stalinization and peaceful coexistence with the West .
 Mao promoted closer PRC ties with Asian and African countries . To compensate for the loss of Soviet aid, Mao promoted the PRC .
 His success in this enabled the PRC to become an influential leader in the developing world, transforming the bipolar Cold War world into a tripolar one . The PRC's success enabled the Cold War to transform the world into an international superpower .
 The decade-long Cultural Revolution constituted the third period of Mao’s era . The PRC experienced violent chaos and disorder during the Cultural Revolution . The Cultural Revolution was a decade of chaos and chaos .
 Mao packed the party and the government with his supporters, such as his wife and Hua Guofeng . To ensure his personal control, Mao packed his party and government with supporters .
 Mao incited the Red Guards, radical youths indoctrinated with Maoism, to criticize old customs and practices by employing such means as violence, public trials, and mass rallies . Outside the government, Red Guards used violence to attack old customs by using violence and public trials . The Red Guards
 The Red Guards were also sent into the countryside to encourage the so-called cult of Mao . Red Guards also sent to the countryside in order to encourage Mao's cult of China .
 The 10-year period constituted the darkest days of the PRC's history, characterized by a reign of red terror that badly damaged Mao’s revolutionary legacy . Red terror was the darkest period of Mao's revolutionary legacy, with Mao's legacy badly damaged .
 Cultural Revolution also had a direct bearing on the PRC’s foreign policy . The Cultural Revolution was also a direct influence on the Chinese government .
 On the one hand, the revolution aroused grave hostility and suspicion from the PRC’s allies, who either severed diplomatic relations with the PRChina or recalled their foreign service delegations . On the other hand, China's allies have recalled their diplomatic delegations to the country .
 The Cultural Revolution almost completely isolated the PRC within the international community . Combined with the Sino-Soviet split, the Cultural Revolution also isolated the country from the world .
 The Cultural Revolution made possible the normalization of U.S.-Chinese relations because of their mutual desire to enhance each other’s bargaining position vis-a-vis the Soviet Union . On the other hand, the Cultural Revolution helped normalize relations between China and the United States .
 In February 1972, Mao received United States president Richard M Nixon in Beijing, which culminated in American diplomatic recognition of the PRC in 1979 . Mao received U.S. President Richard Nixon in February 1972 .
 The revolutionary movement in China during the 1920s provided the most important Communist military leaders, such as Mao, Mao . Mao thought eclectically about social and military issues . Mao was one of China's most important military leaders .
 As one of the first generation of the Communist leaders, his political and social concerns were unprecedented for military leaders in previous periods of Chinese history . He was inspired not only by heightened awareness of ideas transmitted to China via Russia, France, and Japan, but also by robust local traditions dating back
 His visions and insights grew out of his active participation in the political and military campaigns of the period, often as an organizer in the 1920s .
 The Chinese Communist military began during the CCPGMD political coalition against the warlords in 1924-1927 . Eventually the Communist forces took over the country in 1949 . The military took control of the Chinese Communist forces in 1949.
 Mao led the peasants’ Autumn Harvest Uprising in Hunan and Jiangxi Provinces in 1927 . Mao was Mao's first leader after the collapse of the CCP-GMD coalition in spring 1927 .
 Mao organized the First Division of the “Chinese Revolutionary Army of Workers and Peasants” (CRAWP, 19271928) with three regiments and 5,000 men . The First Division was organized in late August with 3 regiments .
 Zhu De (Chu Teh) was the commander, and Mao was the political commissar . Zhu De was Zhu De, the commander of the Chinese army . Mao was Mao's political commissar and the political commissionar .
 To form a Communist revolutionary army, created a voluntary system based on the ‘Guideline for Military Tasks’ issued by the army in April 1928 . The system was created by the Communist Party .
 The land revolution movement became attractive to the peasants in this mountain area, one of the poorest areas in the country .
 Officers helped the peasants organize a peasant association, a new government, and self-defense militia . The peasants also helped organize a self-defence militia with some weapons and basic training .
 Mao developed guerrilla tactics during these formative years . Mao's guerrilla tactics were developed to win battles . Mao was Mao's first leader in China in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Mao inserted party representation through the Red Army down to the company level . Mao inserted the party representation down to company level. Mao inserted a party representation into the army's ranks .
 When Jiang lost some of his best troops in the war against the Japanese invasion, Mao’s successful guerrillas recruited a large number of peasants into his forces .
 In May 1938, Mao wrote a treatise entitled On Protracted War that analyzed the basic characteristics of both sides of the Anti-Japanese War . Mao's treatise was published in May 1938 .
 Elaving defined the Anti-Japanese War as a revolutionary war . China could not win a quick victory but would surely be victorious after a long period of struggle, he said .
 In 19431944, the “liberated areas’ under CCP control launched partial counteroffensives and won important victories against Japan . In 1943 and 1944, the "liberations areas" under CCP under control launched counter-offsives . In 1945, the CCP launched partial
 By the spring of 1945, the U.S. had 19 “liberated areas” with a total population of 95 million . The nation had 19 "liberated" areas, a total of 93 million people .
 Eighth Route Army increased from 3 divisions in August 1937 to more than 40 in August 1945 . Eighth Route army increased from three divisions in 1937 to over 40 divisions .
 After World War II ended in 1945, the Chinese Communist and Nationalist armed forces began a full-scale war against each other for supremacy of the country in 1946 . In 1946, China's communist and nationalist forces fought for supremacy in China .
 The focus of their struggle was in the northeast, where lay China’s heavy industry, coal, oil, and chemistry sources, established by the Japanese .
 Japan’s surrender and the withdrawal of the Russian Red Army created a power vacuum in that strategic region . GMD-CCP competition over its cities, industrial and commercial centers, and key points of transportation .
 Jiang reinforced a large number of his best troops to the northeast in early 1946 . Jiang reinforced his forces with a large force of troops to northeast China in 1946 .
 The PLA’s strategy was to maintain and concentrate a superior force in order to destroy the GMD effective strength . The PLA's strategy was . to maintain . and concentrate superior force, according to sources .
 The CCP strove to form a united front among all the people for opposition to “ United States imperialism” and Jiang Jiang . The CCP also strove . to form . a united . front . against Jiang .
 China’s spiraling inflation, government corruption, and factional struggles within the GMD made elimination of the Communist forces impossible . The GMD is still in charge of the country's largest state capitalist state .
 Between June and September 1947, the PLA launched some offensive operations . The main battlefields had by this time moved to the GMD-controlled areas .
 In terms of scale, or the number of enemies destroyed, the three campaigns were unprecedented in Chinese military history . The three campaigns are unprecedented in China's military history.
 All of northeast, most of north, and central areas north of the Yangzi River were liberated . As a result of the action, all of northeast and most of the north were liberated. The area was liberated from Soviet control .
 On October 1, 1949, Mao declared the birth of the PRC and the new republic’s alliance with the Soviet Union . The PRC was born in 1949 and joined the USSR in 1949 .
 The CCP and the PLA had acquired the experience, vision, and self-confidence to create a new Communist state in the world . After 22 years of military struggle on the road to power, the CCP and PLA are now in power .
 Armed clash between Japanese and Chinese troops in north China at Lugouqiao (Lukouch’iao) sparked full-scale warfare between the two countries . Marco Polo Bridge Incident was the first armed clash between Japan and China in China .
 Japan seized China’s northeastern Manchurian region in 1931, establishing the puppet state of Manzhouguo the following year . Japan and China had poor diplomatic relations from at least 1931 .
 Japan sought to increase its influence in north China, holding Hebei Province, administering much of the Shandong Peninsula as a virtual protectorate, and claiming special rights over various strategic railway lines .
 In 1935, troops commanded by Marshal Zhang Xueliang (Chang Hsiiehliang) defied orders to launch another campaign against the Chinese Communists . Zhang had sworn allegiance to Jiang Jieshi, the president of China .
 They contended that all Chinese political factions should unite against the Japanese invaders, not fight each other . They said all Chinese factions should not fight against each other, not each other.
 Zhang kidnapped Jiang at a spa in Xi’an in China’s far west Shaanxi Province, in December 1936 . Zhang released him until he agreed to an anti-Japanese rapprochement with Communist leaders . Jiang was released in 1936 after agreeing to a rappro
 Jiang also agreed to take a harsher line toward future Japanese incursions . In all probability, Jiang agreed to a tougher line toward Japan .
 On July 7, 1937, a skirmish took place between Chinese and Japanese troops stationed near the historic Lugouqiao Marco Polo Bridge 10 miles outside Beijing in Hebei . The landmark stood next to a strategically significant railroad bridge .
 Japanese forces on night maneuvers fired blank cartridges, prompting nearby Chinese soldiers to retaliate with live fire, though without injuring anyone . The incident occurred during Japanese military maneuvers in China .
 The initial incident was, in all probability, a spontaneous accident, not a premeditated effort to provoke a broader crisis . Japanese officials undoubtedly sought to increase their influence in Wangping and the neighboring Lugouqiao area .
 Officials in both governments seized on the event as a pretext to demand a broader, comprehensive settlement of outstanding issues dividing Japan and China . In this case, however, officials in both countries seized on a pretext for a broader issue dividing them .
 Jiang feared that further acquiescence in Japanese demands would irretrievably damage his political standing . Japanese military commanders in Manzhouguo and north China sought extensive concessions .
 On July 20, Jiang sent several Chinese divisions to reinforce north China . Japanese forces quickly seized control of the entire Beijing-Tianjin area, killing several thousand Chinese .
 Japan sought outright control of north China, whereas Jiang insisted on maintaining full Chinese sovereignty there . Japan sought to control north China but insisted on full sovereignty .
 Both Chinese and Japanese policies hardened until no compromise was possible, although neither side formally declared war . Neither side officially declared war, but neither did .
 On August 7, Jiang and his advisors decided to wage a full-scale war of resistance against Japan . Eight years of bitter and brutal warfare between the two countries ended only when Japan surrendered unconditionally to the Allies in 1945 .
 Anti-Japanese War: Guomindang; Guominang; Manchuria . Jiang Jieshi; Zhang Xueliang. Zhang Xueueliang .
 Marshall’s efforts were not motivated by humanitarian peacemaking . General Marshall visits United States Marines in China . Marshall visited the U.S. Marines in the region .
 They aimed to avert further civil war that might culminate in a Communist victory . The goal was to establish a stable government to prevent Soviet intervention in China .
 Neither the Nationalists nor the Communists turned out to be sufficiently committed to the success of Marshall’s efforts .
 Their long-term goals simply did not embrace mutual accommodation, and in the short term, they each used the cover of the Marshall mission to their advantage . The two sides used their short-term objectives to gain the advantage of each other .
 Marshall arrived in China on December 20, 1945, and initially achieved impressive results . A cease-fire was established on January 10, 1946, after Marshall arrived .
 A Political Consultative Council, with representatives from all of China’s warring parties, agreed to the outlines of a new, more democratic political system that would be discussed further via the National Assembly . That same month, a political consultative council agreed to a new political system .
 Communists agreed to merge their military with the Nationalist army on the condition that military and political reorganization proceeded simultaneously . In February, in February, the Communists agreed that the merger would take place . The Communists and the Nationalists agreed in February .
 The fly in the ointment, however, turned out to be north China and Manchuria . North China is one of the world's most populous countries .
 U.S. policy was to transport Jiang’s troops there to take over from the defeated Japanese and establish order . Jiang's troops were transported to China by the United States .
 Soviet forces entered Manchuria to fight the Japanese in August 1945 but had withdrawn in April 1946, leaving behind a vacuum into which warring factions expanded .
 When the Communists captured Changchun on April 18, 1946, Jiang expanded the conflict . Despite Marshall’s efforts to secure a cease-fire, the conflict continued .
 Jiang laid down unacceptable political terms as the price for reestablishing the cease-fire . Early victories against the Communists emboldened Jiang, he laid down political terms .
 A brief lull in June offered some hope, but by July, Marshall had concluded that Jiang was not interested in a long-term cease-fire . Rather, he was set on wiping out the Communists .
 Marshall sought to rescue the mission from complete collapse with the assistance of United States ambassador to China John Leighton Stuart . Stuart was trusted by the Communists, and by cutting off United States arms shipments to Jiang Jiang .
 President Truman called for progress, without which U.S. policy toward China might change . President Truman said progress was necessary for progress . Truman: Progress is necessary to change China policy .
 Jiang announced an attack on Kalgan, a town in Inner Mongolia held by the Communists . On September 30, 1946, Jiang announced that he would attack the town . The attack was the first of Jiang's attacks on the town in 1946 .
 Nationalist forces captured it in October, conceding to a ceasefire a month later . Nationalist troops captured it after a month of fighting in the area .
 By October, Marshall had concluded that a political solution was impossible . Marshall concluded that political solution would be impossible .
 He concluded that United States military intervention was not a viable solution . He also concluded that U.S. military intervention would not be a viable option .
 Marshall returned to the U.S. in January 1947 as the Chinese Civil War continued . Marshall returned home to the United States as the war continued .
 Larry I. Bland, Larry I., with Roger B Jeans and Mark F. Wilkinson, eds. Bland and Wilkinson are co-authors of the book .
 George C Marshall’s Mediation Mission to China, December 1945-January 1947 . Marshall was on a mission to China from December 1945 to January 1947 . He was on the mission to mediate with the Chinese government .
 Soviet-American Rivalry and the Origins of the Chinese Civil War, 1944-1946 . Soviet-U.S. Rivalism and the origins of the China Civil War are discussed .
 Almost all peoples in the world have developed special methods, techniques, weapons, and strategies for fighting . Martial Arts is one of the world's most popular martial arts .
 Only a few fighting systems have generated worldwide interest . Compared to Chinese martial arts only a few have generated global interest .
 The fact that Chinese martial arts has evolved into a global brand is due to its special features, says the founder of the organisation .
 Chinese martial arts has evolved into a phenomenon of high cultural complexity based on styles, weapons, techniques, religious notions, religious views, medical concepts, aesthetic ideas, and ways of selfcultivation .
 Martial arts could be used for civil self defense, military combat, competitive sport, mass sport, health care, spirituality, and as an individual way of fife . As a result, martial arts could also be used in military combat and competitive sport .
 According to Ming and Qing dynasties sources, the increasing complexity of Chinese martial arts began with the quantitative increase of styles, techniques, and information . Sources say the increase in styles and techniques began with increasing information .
 The modernization process that had been occurring in China since the nineteenth century came a corollary and at times overpowering process of Westernization . With the modernization process, China's modernization process was accompanied by Westernization.
 Martial arts were used as a way of asserting China’s own cultural tradition . As a result, martial arts have been used to assert China's own unique cultural traditions . Martial arts are now being used in China to assert its own culture .
 Martial arts also served to strengthen China’s confidence in itself as a nation, in which the integration of traditional practices such as martial arts played a vital role . Martial arts helped strengthen China's confidence in its ability to be a strong nation .
 In the past the practice of martial arts was not the privilege of special groups in Chinese society . Martial arts is not the only way of practicing martial arts in China's society .
 Tenants, craftsmen, merchants, and monks, as well as soldiers, soldiers, members of the nobility, and scholars, practiced martial arts .
 Despite the fact that Chinese society was patriarchal, one can also find numerous examples of female fighters skilled in different forms of martial arts . One of the most famous female fighters in Chinese history is female .
 The military practice of martial arts differed from other forms practiced by monks, artists, and scholars . Martial arts was practiced in medieval times of the ages .
 Ming general Qi Jiguang described martial arts as the way for the soldier to defend his life, to kill enemies, and to establish his merit . In his military handbook Lianbing shiji (Practical Experience in Troop Training), the famous Ming general describes martial arts
 In order to comply with military needs martial arts were reduced to basic techniques that were efficient and easy to learn . Martial arts are reduced to simple and easy-to-learn techniques that can be efficient .
 Although Chinese martial arts provided an extensive repertoire of weapons, only a few were used in the military . Only a few of the weapons were used by the Chinese military .
 "They had to be powerful in order to be able to penetrate shields and armor," says Drexler . They had to have a powerful enough to penetrate shield and armor .
 Despite many differences to other forms of martial arts outside the military realm, there was a continuous exchange between “civil” and “military” forms of . martial arts . Despite differences, there were many differences between ‘civil’ and ‘military’ forms
 Iron flail, a rustic weapon, was also used by the military . For example, the iron flail was used to fight the Romans .
 The sword was a military weapon in ancient China but later replaced by the more effective saber . In the reverse case, the sword was replaced by a saber in ancient times .
 Scholars and artists favored the sword because it was difficult to wield and had symbolic power . However, scholars and artists preferred the sword as it was hard to wield .
 Martial arts were an important part of the military examination first established in 702 . Martial arts are an important component of the examination of martial arts .
 The candidates had to prove their skills in riding, archery, and the mastery of different weapons . According to various levels, the candidates were tested for various levels of skills in various weapons .
 The training of the traditional weapon remained part of the military examination until its abolition in 1901 . Oddly enough, even though modem firearms were introduced to China, the training was not abolished .
 Boxer Rebellion; Ming Dynasty; New Army; Qing Dynasty; Song Dynasty; Tang Dynasty . Ming Dynasty: New Army . Qing Dynasty: Qing Dynasty . Song Dynasty: Song Dynasty .
 The McMahon Line is a disputed border line between the People's Republic of China and India . Many border conflicts occurred and the Sino-Indian Border War broke out in 1962 .
 McMahon Line, the eastern SinoIndian border, was based on a 1914 BritishTibetan agreement . The McMahon Line is based on the 1914 British agreement with Tibet .
 British foreign secretary Henry McMahon attended the Simla International Conference in northern India to support the sovereignty of Tibet . During October 13, 1913, through July 3, 1914, the conference was held in India's northern India .
 Representatives from British India, the Republic of China, and local authorities from Tibet attended the conference . The conference was held in 1911 in Tibet .
 As a result, Secretary McMahon drew a line along the eastern boundary between China/Tibet and India . The line was drawn along the border between China and Tibet .
 The conference produced a treaty including the McMahon Line . The treaty made Secretary McMahon well known .
 When the PRC government refused to accept the McMahon Line in 1950, the Indian government began to deploy troops along the disputed border and establish border outposts . The Indian government has deployed troops along disputed border .
 From early 1951 on, Indian troops took advantage of the fact that the People’s Liberation Army had not yet reached and consolidated all parts of its borders, and advanced north, occupying the eastern section of the border area, but not crossing the McMahon Line .
 In 1953, Indian troops pushed forward from their position, called the “line of actual control,” to the McMahon Line . The McMahon Line is now known as “McMara’s Line”
 In 1959, the central government of the PRC accused the Buddhist spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, of organizing a separatist movement in Tibet . The Dalai Lama was accused by the government of being a separatist leader .
 On August 25, a small group of Indian troops crossed into the Longju area north of the McMahon Line and exchanged fire with a Chinese border patrol . The incident occurred on August 25 near the border .
 On October 21, there was another small-scale incident along the border of the western sector at Kongka Pass . The incident occurred on October 21 .
 Zhou Enlai suggested a ‘mutual withdrawal’ along the border to 12. miles behind the McMahon line . Zhou said China’s premier suggested a 12.5-mile withdrawal .
 Nehru turned to the Soviet Union for more economic aid and military support . Nehru also turned to them for economic and military aid .
 PLA’s Tibet regiments wiped out 43 strongpoints on the Indian side of the McMahon Line . By the 28th.28th. 28th . The PLA's Tibet forces wiped out .
 Indian troops, ill prepared and poorly supplied, fell back under the PLA assaults . The Indian troops were attacked by the PLA in the early 2000s .
 Nehru reinforced the border areas with an additional 30,000 men in November . Nehru has requested military aid from the West, including the United States .
 In early November, Indian troops launched their own counteroffensive along the eastern borders . The Indian troops have been deployed in the region since 2009 .
 The troops in the east encircled the Indian troops and cut their supply lines by November 17 . The Indian troops were encirrounded by the troops in east .
 The next day, the eastern troops launched an all-out attack on the Indian troops . The Indian troops were attacked by eastern troops .
 By the 21st, the PLA eliminated Indian presence along the eastern borders . The PLA eliminated the Indian presence on the eastern border .
 From 1972 to 1981, there were negotiations over the disputed borders between China and India, but no agreement on the McMahon Line has been reached . No agreement has been made on the disputed border between India and China .
 A Study in Relations between Indian, Chinese and Tibet, 1904-1914. 2 vols. A Study of Relations between India, China and Tibet . 1904-14. A study in Relations Between India, Tibet and China. 1904-2014. 2 . vols .
 In 1942, following two tours of duty in the U.S. Pacific and Asiatic fleets, he was promoted again to commander and captain . He was dispatched to Chongqing, Sichuan Province, as United States naval observer .
 Dai’s disputes with the British Special Operations Executive had also led him to seek support from U.S. agencies in reforming Chinese intelligence and counterespionage operations .
 The Dai-Miles relationship stands as emblem of a ‘turf war’ for information and geopolitical position that arose between Britain and the United States, as well as between competing U.S. military branches, within Pacific War-era East Asia .
 The relationship was originally set up under the chief of naval operations . It was intended to provide U.S. assistance to China in the areas of naval mine warfare, radio intelligence, weather reporting, information, and sabotage .
 Dai supposedly possessed extensive knowledge concerning the Japanese military and occupied areas of China . Dai's knowledge was deemed indispensible for winning the war . The U.S. Navy and Washington hoped to capitalize on Dai's extensive knowledge .
 Donovan’s OSS is working on the Dai-Miles project . As additional agencies, like Donovan's OSS, pressed to take advantage of project .
 After September 19, 1942, Miles was made Chief of OSS for the Far East . Miles established a functional partnership between the U.S. Navy and OSS intelligence operations in Chongqing .
 Relations between Miles and Dai were frequently troubled by the changing nature of U.S. activities in China . Despite this auspicious beginning to China, China's relations with the United States in China were often troubled .
 Dai was to be given full authority over joint operations in the areas of secret intelligence and special operations . Miles was SACO’s deputy director and second in command, though both shared veto power .
 Donovan’s OSS continued to operate as a de facto independent entity with respect to the agreement . OSS secured the support of China-BurmaIndia Theater commander General Joseph W Stilwell and, later, the Fourteenth Air Force under Lieutenant General Claire Lee Chennault
 Donovan’s ultimate goal was to run secret OSS projects within China unbeknownst to those involved in the SACO enterprise . While OSS influence within China grew, relations between OSS and Dai Li worsened, in part because of Donovan's ultimate goal .
 Miles, who supported a cooperative and equal venture spearheaded by the United States Navy, thrust himself into the politics of the growing OSS-Dai dispute in 1945 . Miles: "In January 1945, Miles was in the forefront of the U.S. Navy's effort to co-
 Miles was commander of Naval Group China (the U.S. Navy’s intelligence agency in Chongqing) by war's end . He was appointed rear admiral in 1945 and promoted to vice admiral upon retirement in 1958 .
 Originally the Chinese military did not have ranks in order to maintain its tradition of equality among the soldiers and commanders during and after the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949 .
 China’s alliance with the Soviet Union and North Korea pulled the country into a war in Korea that bolstered PLA modernization in accordance with the Russian military model . China's alliance with North Korea led the country to a war that bolstered its modernization .
 Marshal Peng Dehuai (P’eng Tehuai) reorganized the PLA into a Soviet structure and system of military ranks in 1955 . In 1955, Marshal Peng dehuai was the vice chairman of the Central Military Commission and defense minister .
 Mao Zedong approved the reforms and awarded for the first time in PLA history the rank of marshal to 10 commanders in September 1955 . Despite some political opposition, the reforms were approved by the Chinese Communist Party .
 Mao removed Peng Peng in 1959 for allegedly having proSoviet political positions . Mao's ranking system survived after he was removed from Mao's regime in 1959 .
 Lin blamed military ranks for having changed the PLA tradition of equality among soldiers and officers . Lin blamed the military rank for changing the military's tradition of equal treatment . Lin blames the change on the military ranks . Lin: "It's a good thing that the PLA has done so much to
 Lin’s military doctrine was abandoned after he and his family were killed in their plane crash in September 1971 . His top commanders were purged in the early 1970s, and his ranking and promotion system remained absent until 1988 .
 Deng Xiaoping (Deng Hsiao-ping) replaced Hua Guofeng as chairman of the CMC and chief of the PLA General Staff . In June 1981, he launched large-scale military reforms in China . He was replaced by Hua Guoofeng, chief of
 He downsized the PLA forces by 1 million troops in 1985-1987 and focused on technological improvements . He also focused on the technological improvements in China .
 By the late 1980s, the PLA reduced its size to about 3 million and reintroduced the ranking system . The ranking system was reintroduced in the late 1990s .
 In July 1988, the Second Plenary of the Seventh National People's Congress passed the new military ranking system . The new ranking system includes three levels with 11 ranks, including three levels .
 In 1994, the Seventh Plenary of the Eighth National People’s Congress modified the system to three levels with 10 ranks . The system was modified in 1994 and has since been updated .
 This effort at comprehensive reform and modernization appears to be cutting across every facet of PLA activity, particularly organizational structures and personnel appointments . This effort appears to cut across all aspects of the PLA's organizational structures .
 Jiang paid close attention to personnel policy and promoted more than 50 officers to the rank of full general . Jiang personally reviewed files down to the level of division commander .
 Jiang also emphasized regulation and standardization of PLA ranking and promotion . During this decade, Jiang emphasized regulation .
 The CMC has established a series of more uniform and standardized procedures for officer promotion evaluations . CMC established a more uniform, standardized procedures .
 According to the Regulations on Appointments and Removals of Military Officers on Active Service, an officer should be evaluated by superior officers, peer reviews, and unit party committees . An officer is an officer who has served in the U.S.
 The selection and promotion processes of noncommissioned officers are more regularized and merit-based . The selection process is now more regular and more meritarily based .
 Noncommissioned officers are selected through an application process, followed by a “grassroots unit” recommendation . According to new regulations formed in 1999 and 2001, new regulations were created in 1999 .
 A military committee evaluates the application and recommendation, and following approval, the candidate receives an examination . Following approval, a candidate receives examination .
 Six grades exist within the non-commissioned officer corps, with increases in pay and benefits accompanying promotions . Increases in pay, benefits accompany promotions .
 The PLA General Staff Department is responsible for managing noncommissioned officers in all military units . It is also responsible for the management of noncomissioned officers .
 As the PLA transitions from a laborintensive to an expertise-intensive force, the officer corps, NCO corps, and enlisted troops will be challenged . The PLA will have to overcome the intellectual leap involved in transforming the military into one founded on quality, starting with the current officers’
 Allen, Kenneth, Dean Cheng, David Finkelstein, and Maryanne Kivlehan. References Allen and Cheng are cited in this article .
 Militia system began to appear in China around the sixth century . Militia system first appeared in China in the early sixteenth century .
 Tang dynasty (618907) continued this system and made it part of the tax services required of all healthy peasants . The Tang dynasty continued to make it mandatory for healthy peasants to pay taxes .
 In times of peace, the militia's primary responsibility was to work in production . The militia’s primary responsibility is to produce .
 Militia units mobilized to carry urgent, labor-intensive production tasks, such as planting and harvesting crops during the growing season, and farmland maintenance during winter times . Militia units were mobilized from time to time to carry out tasks such as well-digging, stonework for terraced fields
 Militiamen and militiawomen also guarded factories, warehouses, mines, bridges, and railways . Militiawomen also insured the safety of their own worksites .
 Militia units would conduct conventional and guerrilla operations in coordination with and support of the regular forces . In times of war, militia units would carry out operations in support of regular forces in the country . Militia units were used to provide support for regular forces during wartime .
 Militia units would construct obstacles and fortifications, collect intelligence, direct the PLA units, vacate the wounded to the rear and ship ammunition and supplies forward . Militia units also would provide antiaircraft defense for cities and provide security for rear areas and lines of communication .
 Although organized along military lines, the ordinary militia essentially was no more than a massive labor force . The ordinary militia was organized as a labor force, not a military .
 The ordinary militia included men and women aged 18 to 35 who met the criteria for military service . It included those aged 18-35 who had the criteria to meet the criteria .
 In a strictly military sense, they would be of limited value in a time of war . But they would not be as valuable in a war, they say .
 Basic militia often received military training from several days to about two weeks yearly . Unlike ordinary militia, basic militia often got military training between several days and two weeks .
 The armed basic militia was created as the elite of the militia . Based on the basic militia, the armed basic militias were created as an elite militia .
 These armed militia units were the hard core of militia and normally received several weeks’ training each year . The hard core militia units would receive several weeks of training a year . These armed militias were hard core units .
 The degree of PLA control over the militia and the militia’s role changed during the past 70 years . PLA control of the militia has changed during that time .
 After 1949, the Communists consolidated control over the country and gradually used the militia to maintain order . The militia helped the PLA with the defense of borders and coast during the Great Leap Forward in the late 1950s .
 After Mao Zedong’s death in 1976, the Gang of Four attempted to build up an urban militia as an alternative to the PLA . Their plan failed because the moderate military leaders deposed them .
 Militia played an important role in its logistical support of the PLA in the Sino-Vietnamese Border War in 1979 . Militia played a key role in logistical support for the PLA during the war in China .
 In the 1980s the Chinese leaders improved the militia’s military capabilities by reducing its size and its economic tasks . The militia's military capabilities were reduced to a fraction of the size of the militia .
 By 1986, militia training bases had been established in over half the counties and cities . Militia training bases were established in more than half of the counties, cities and counties .
 In 1987, the militia was controlled by the PLA at the military district level and by people’s armed forces departments . The militia devolved to civilian control at the county and city levels as part of the reduction of forces .
 The Chinese militia has become a smaller force than it was in the 1960s . The militia has also become smaller than it has been in the past .
 In the second decade of the twenty-first century, there are 4 million reserve militia and 6 million regular militia in China . There are 4million reserve militias and 6million regular militia .
 Ming Dynasty ruled China from 1368 to 1644 after the Yuan dynasty under the Mongols . Ming dynasty ruled China between 1368 and 1644 . China was ruled by the Ming dynasty after 1368 .
 A group called the Red Turbans attacked the Mongols in the mid-1300s . It began a peasant rebellion that ultimately overthrew the Yuan dynasty . The Mongols, or Yuan dynasty, were overthrown in the 13th century .
 Zhu Yuanzhang was the first emperor of the newly established Ming dynasty . He was a former Buddhist novice who led a rebellion against the Qing dynasty . Zhu was the leader of that rebellion .
 Zhu began his ascent to power by establishing himself as a military leader . He held his forces together by ties of loyalty extending from him through his individual commanders and so on to each soldier .
 Zhu battled the other two major regimes in the Yangzi River area and its tributaries on both land and water, with his final victory realized in October 1367 . Zhu died in 1367, the last of his reign in China .
 Zhu turned his attention to the Yuan in November 1367 with the subsequent shift of warfare from the rivers and valleys of south China to the plains of north China and the steppe and deserts of Mongolia . The Ming dynasty faced the demands of a completely new style of warfare .
 Zhu established the capital of the new dynasty at Nanjing (Nanking) in January 1368 . Zhu, called the Hongwu emperor, established the city of Nanjing in China in 1368.
 Emperor was a ruthless emperor who strove to reestablish Chinese traditions in the wake of Mongol rule . Despite his early Buddhist training, he was ruthless emperor .
 He also set about reestablishing China’s sovereignty over its neighbors . He set about to reestablish the sovereignty over China's neighbors .
 Chinese court was receiving tribute from Okinawa, Borneo, Malay Peninsula, Java, and the Indian coast in 10 years . It set up trade contacts with those countries plus Japan and the Near East .
 The Ming military was used mainly to protect the borders and enforce the will of the emperor on their subjects . The Ming army was mainly used to protect China's borders .
 The Hongwu emperor persecuted the remaining Mongols in China and forced them to marry Chinese people rather than their own . He persecuted them and forced the Mongols to marry other Chinese people .
 He would not allow purely foreign groups to exist and create trouble from within, he said . He said he would not let purely foreign . groups .
 Arts and culture once again began to flourish, financed by the income from the far-flung Chinese traders . Art and culture flourished after total control of China was established .
 The famous Ming porcelains were developed in this era, and the construction of palaces in Nanjing and later Beijing reflected the Ming desire to reassert Chinese culture .
 Science and technology had few advances, but literature and philosophy experienced a renaissance . Literature and philosophy had a renaissance in the early years of the century .
 This included the dissemination of military control to a multitude of commissions in the hopes that each group of officials would keep the others in check . Each commission was meant to be kept in check by the military .
 This splintering of power meant that military initiative had to come directly from the top and reflected the desires of the monarch in control of the country . Military initiative must come from top and reflect the wishes of the king .
 As a result, the political system became truncated at the top, the dynasty’s monarchs came to rely more on personal advisors than on the civil administrators . The political system was truncated, and the dynasty's monarchs relied on personal advisers .
 Yongle emperor extended the empire's strength to include a powerful navy . The Yongle Emperor maintained China’s military position and extended its navy .
 Zheng He led seven expeditions that reached as far as Persia, Arabia, and eastern Africa . Between 1405 and 1433, the admiral Zheng He was a eunuch of Muslim descent . His expeditions were led by seven eunuchs .
 The fleet grew to 62 ships and as many as 28,000 men, and it was a feared organization throughout the China Sea and the Indian Ocean .
 Captains demonstrated organizational and navigational skills not matched until the arrival of the Portuguese in the 1500s . The captains demonstrated organizational skills that were not matched for centuries .
 The growing power of the Jurchen and Manchu tribes in the northeast threatened those frontiers . peasant uprisings in the northwest kept the army busy in that sector .
 A Japanese invasion of Korea in the 1590s brought Chinese armies into Manchuria, where they were weakened in a victorious war . A victorious war forced a Japanese withdrawal forced a withdrawal from Korea .
 The Manchus now had the impetus to conquer Korea, and with their rear protected, make war against the Ming . The Ming had already made war with the Manchuans .
 Ming could no longer afford to pay for the war because the peasant taxpayers were in revolt, so Ming power slipped . However, the Ming could not afford the war and the peasant revolt led to the fall of power .
 The deepening depression in the region led to increasing numbers of bandit uprisings . This neglect bred a lack of faith in the government, and the deepening depression led to the rise of the bandit .
 By 1643, Li Zicheng had decided to take advantage of the situation and attempt to overthrow the Ming government itself . Li attempted to overthrow China's government in 1643 .
 He assigned himself a new rank of generalissimo and reorganized his followers to prepare to march on Beijing .
 The last Ming emperor, Chongzhen, rang the bell to summon his ministers for their advice on how to deal with the situation, but none of the ministers responded . Chongzhen was the last emperor to call his ministers to ask their advice .
 Chongzhen walked to the imperial garden and hung himself from a tree . Chongzhen then walked to an imperial garden to hang himself from the tree .
 Eunuchs; Great Wall; Korea; China; Manchuria . Manchus; Mongols; Manchinus; Qing Dynasty; Yuan Dynasty; Zhu Yuanzhang . Eunuch: Great Wall .
 Davis, Paul K. Encyclopedia of Invasions and Conquests from Ancient Times to the Present . Davis, . Paul K Encyclopedia of Inaugural Invasions .
 The Mongols were a nomadic people of Altaic stock who first appear in Chinese texts of the eleventh century . In the thirteenth century they came to rule an empire embracing most of Asia .
 For several decades after the 1230s, they were Latin Christendom’s most formidable eastern neighbor . The 1260s saw the Roman Empire as one of the most formidable neighbors in Europe .
 Genghis Khan began the conquest of north China, which was then ruled by the Jin dynasty; reduced the seminomadic Qara-Khitan Empire in central Asia . In the course of a sevenyear campaign to the west accomplished the destruction of the Muslim empire of Khwar
 In Latin Europe, the term was corrupted to Tartars, reinforcing the West’s association of the Mongols with the hell of classical mythology . The Mongols were crushed by Genghis Khan in 1202 .
 By the time they reached Europe, the majority of the Mongols’ nomadic troops were of Turkic stock . In any case, by the . time they . reached Europe , by the time . they reached . Europe, most of the . Mongols' nomadic . troops
 At both administrative and ideological level, the Mongol Empire represented a significant advance on earlier steppe confederacies . At both the administrative and the ideological level of the Empire, it was significant .
 Mongols under the leadership of Batu, grandson of Genghis Khan, conquered much of Kievan Rus during 1238-1241 . Batu led the Mongolian Mongols to conquer much of the region during this time .
 The Mongols had access to long-established notions of imperial rule . It was probably also through the Uighurs, and other Turks whom they incorporated into their war machine, .
 Tenggeri had conferred on them rulership of the entire world, but we cannot be sure . The world is now in a state of its own .
 It may postdate the flight of certain of their nomadic enemies into sedentary territories; conceivably, it belongs to the era of Genghis Khan’s successor . It is believed to have been found in the region of China .
 Various reasons have been put forward to explain the phenomenal pace of the Mongol conquests . The Mongolian conquests are thought to have occurred at a rapid rate .
 "What particularly distinguished them from their enemies was their cohesiveness," says the author of the book . "They were very united in their fight for their country," she says .
 Genghis Khan had eliminated the ruling elites of those peoples who resisted him, and divided them up into new military units under trusted officers . Even tribes that cooperated, and were therefore permitted to remain intact, were entrusted to new commanders from different tribal backgrounds .
 Genghis Khan's own creation, the imperial guard, numbering 10,000 men, was his own creation . The imperial guard was drawn from a wide range of peoples, and served as the nursery of an officer class that owed allegiance to Khan .
 Mongols’ precursors had to overcome centrifugal effects of old clan and tribal affiliations, forging a more homogeneous structure than had been available to the Mongols . In this fashion the conqueror surmounted the centrifugal effect of the old clan . The Mongols'
 This cohesiveness contrasted sharply with the disunity of many of their opponents . This is because they are united against each other, they say. This contrasts sharply with their opponents' disunity .
 During the early stages of the war in northern China, the conquerors benefited from the assistance of several elements that resented Jin rule and saw the Mongols as a means of deliverance . The Mongols were defeated by Jin in the early years of the conflict .
 Genghis Khan’s generals won the support of the Muslims, who had been persecuted by the last Qara-Khitan sovereign, and thereby undermined the shah of Khwarazm to portray his own struggle with the Muslims as a holy war .
 Territorial expansion continued under Genghis Khan’s immediate successors, with the title of qaghan , reigned from their principal base at Karakorum .
 Batu’s campaigns mark the foundation of the Mongol power known as the Golden Horde in the southern Russian steppe . Batu was the first Mongol leader to establish the Golden Haul .
 The Mongol Empire extended from the Siberian forests to the western Punjab and from the Yellow Sea to the eastern Mediterranean coast . By 1260, the Mongol Empire had extended from Siberia to the west Punjab .
 Mongke’s death was followed by a civil war in Mongolia between his brothers Kublai and Arigh Boke . Members of the imperial dynasty took opposing sides in the conflict .
 In the west, Hulegu favored Kublai, while the ruler of the Golden Horde, Batu’s brother Berke, supported Arigh Boke . In the east, the leader of the Red Horde, the king of the West, favored Argh Boke
 First reports of the attack on the Khwarazmian Empire, reaching Egypt in 1221, prompted the commanders of the Fifth Crusade to identify the newcomers with the long-awaited forces of the great Eastern king Prester John . News of the defeat of the Cumans and their Russian
 Batu and three separate armies entered Hungary in 1241 . Two divisions protected his flank by ravaging Poland, where they crushed Duke Henry II of Silesia and his allies near Liegnitz . They then passed through Moravia into Hungary .
 King Bela IV was overwhelmed at Mohi near the Sajo River on April 11 . He fled toward the Adriatic coast while the Mongols devastated his kingdom east of the Danube .
 In January 1242, they crossed the frozen river and harassed the western provinces . They then retired into the steppes north of the Black Sea . The 1242-year-old died in 1242 .
 Khwarazmian horsemen, displaced from northern Iraq, moved south and sacked Jerusalem in August 1244 . Joined forces with the Egyptian sultan and crushed the Franks and their Muslim allies at La Forbie in October .
 The Mongol attacks of the 1240s threw into relief the disharmony and unpreparedness of the West . The Mongol menace had perhaps not been taken sufficiently seriously by the West, where the threat was perhaps not taken seriously .
 A crusade mustered in Germany in 1241 dissolved before it could make contact with the Mongols . Pope Gregory IX and the emperor Frederick II were unwilling to sink their differences in order to cooperate with the invaders . The Mongols were defeated by the Pope and Frederick II .
 Not until the pontificate of Innocent IV did the Curia endeavor to negotiate with the enemy . The Curia negotiated with the enemies of the Roman Catholic Church .
 Innocent dispatched three separate embassies with letters protesting attacks on Christian nations and urging the Mongols to accept the Christian faith . Innocent dispatched the letters to the Near East and the Russian steppes .
 The reports submitted by these friars in 1247 furnished the papacy with its first full dossier of information on the enemy . They are among our most important Western sources, particularly that of Franciscan John of Plano Carpini, who visited the court of the great khan
 The Vatican has been accused of spying on the pope . But the Vatican says the Vatican was not involved in the plot to spy on the Pope .
 At this time, the Mongols had no allies, only subjects, or enemies awaiting annihilation . The Mongols were not allies, but subjects or enemies, awaiting annihilation.
 King Bela IV of Hungary instigated the construction of stone castles on his eastern frontiers . He entered into marriage alliances with several of his neighbors, including a Cuman chief whose daughter married his son and heir Stephen .
 In 1259, Berke’s forces attacked Poland, sacking Sandomir and Krakow, but the splintering of the empire during 1261-1262 prevented the Mongols from following up this campaign .
 The Golden Horde remained content with exacting tribute and military assistance from the Russian princes and adjudging their succession disputes .
 The khans were in any event probably more interested in operations south of the Caucasus at the expense of the Il-Khans than in either Russia or Hungary and Poland .
 The Golden Horde remained a hostile power on the frontiers of Latin Christendom . Nevertheless, the Golden Horde was a powerful force in the region .
 In the Baltic region, the Mongols tended to act through their Russian satellites and the pagan Lithuanians, who paid them tribute intermittently, against external enemies such as the Teutonic Order .
 The Golden Horde threatened for a time to draw into its orbit further nonLatin polities that might otherwise have succumbed to Latin pressure . Further south the Golden Horde also threatened to draw in Bulgaria and the Byzantine Empire .
 Mongol influence extended deep into the Balkans during the heyday of Noghai, a member of the dynasty who was virtually coruler in the western regions of the Pontic steppe . During the heydays of the Noghai dynasty, Noghai ruled the region of the Balkans .
 Noghai’s amicable relations with Byzantium did not outlast him, and in the early fourteenth century the khans launched a series of invasions of Thrace . The khans of Noghai and Noghai invaded Thrace in 14th century .
 As late as 1341, when Andronicus III Palaeologus bought off a Mongol attack, the Golden Horde may still have constituted a greater menace than did the nascent Ottoman polity . The Golden Horde was still a greater threat than the nascent Ottomans .
 Although there were no further campaigns on the scale of those from 1241 to 1242 or 1259, there were frequent raids and also substantial attacks on both countries .
 The extinction of the client Russian princes of Galicia and Volhynia in 1323 provoked fresh tensions . The new ruler, the Polish prince Boleslaw of Mazovia, maintained payment of tribute . A Polish prince maintained the tribute .
 Mongols reacted sharply to the occupation of Galicia by Casimir III of Poland with a series of attacks . During the middle decades of the fourteenth century the khan appears to have recruited Lithuanian assistance against him .
 Polish appeals to successive popes elicited little or no military aid, but did at least secure the crusading grant rather more readily than did the simultaneous pleas of the Hungarian crown . The Polish crown was granted the grant rather readily than those of the Hungarians .
 Around 1360. however, the Golden Horde, already badly hit by the Black Death, succumbed to a prolonged phase of internecine conflict . The attacks of Timur in the 1390s dealt its commercial centers a severe blow .
 When Hulegu entered Syria early in 1260, King Hetum I of Cilicia, who had been subject to the Mongols since 1246, joined forces with him . He induced his son-in-law Bohemond VI of Antioch to become tributary to
 Hulegu left in March for Azerbaijan with the bulk of his army, leaving his general Kitbuqa, at the head of a rump force, to receive the surrender of Damascus and to confront the Kingdom of Jerusalem .
 The Mongols sacked Sidon in August 1260 in reprisal for a Frankish raid on the interior . The government at Acre rejected demands for submission, and the Mongols attacked Sidon .
 When the Mamluk sultan Quuz advanced against the Mongols, the Franks gave the Egyptian army safeconduct and furnished it with provisions . The Egyptian army was given safes by the Franks .
 The Egyptian defeat of Kitbuqa at Ayn Jalut relieved the kingdom of the Mongol threat . Quuz was murdered soon after, and the new Mamluk sultan, Baybars I, embarked on the piecemeal reduction of the Latin states .
 Hulegu’s withdrawal from Syria in 1260 has been ascribed to the fortuitous demise of Mongke in the Far East . Like the sudden retreat from Hungary in 1242, which has usually been linked with the death of Great Khan Ogadai .
 Both the Hungarian and Syrian campaigns were abandoned on logistical grounds, given the inadequacy of the available pasturage for the Mongols’ vast numbers of horses and livestock . It is at least as likely as as likely that both the Hungarians and Syrians were abandoned .
 Il-Khans’ efforts, from 1262 onward, were to secure Western military collaboration against Mamluks . The same circumstance perhaps underlay the Il-Khan’s efforts to . secure Western collaboration against the Mamluk . The Ithar-Khan
 Il-Khans were forced to seek external allies if they were to prosecute the dynasty’s traditional mission of expansion . Menaced by the Golden Horde and other hostile kinsmen to their rear, they sought external allies . Without access to the resources of the unitary Mongol Empire,
 In Palestine they proposed to recruit the assistance of Frankish troops, who were more accustomed to the terrain and the summer heat . Just as in China, where ecological problems obliged the nomadic Mongols to rely on Chinese infantry in large numbers .
 The Il-Khans corresponded with successive popes and the kings of France and England . Sometimes also with those of Aragon and Sicily, sometimes also with Aragon .
 Mongol ambassadors were frequently expatriate Italians who had entered the Il-Khans’ service . On occasion, the ambassadors were Nestorian Christians like the monk Rabban Sawma, who visited Naples, Rome, and Paris .
 In the event, these exchanges bore no fruit, despite the fact that the Mamluks posed a growing threat to the Latin states and eliminated them in 1291 . In 1291, 1291 they were eliminated from the Latin States .
 Armenian prince Hetum strongly advocated Latin-Mongol collaboration . He saw it as offering his native country the best hope of avoiding a Mamluk conquest . In 1307 at the behest of Pope Clement V, he wrote a treatise .
 On crusade in 1271, prior to his accession, Edward of England tried unsuccessfully to coordinate his activities with the forces of the Il-Khan Abaqa . Otherwise, the few instances of military cooperation involved the Franks of Outremer and Cyprus . Other instances of cooperation involved
 Hospitalers from Margat may have reinforced Abaqa’s army when it invaded northern Syria in 1281 . Some Hospitalers may have helped the Mamluks in their invasion of northern Syria . King Henry II of Cyprus and Jerusalem and the Templars tried to anticipate his return
 Ghazan’s later, and less impressive, Syrian campaigns, in 1301 and 1303, did without Frankish assistance altogether . Ghazans’ campaigns in Syria were largely unsuccessful .
 Ghazan and his brother and successor, Oljeitu , the last Il-Khan to invade Syria, were both Muslim converts . Ghazans were both Muslims . They were both brothers and sons .
 The union of much of Asia under a single government facilitated longdistance commerce . The Mongol sovereigns themselves, however, actively fostered it .
 Western merchants traveled east in quest of high-value, low-bulk commodities such as silk, spices, pepper, and precious stones . Western merchants already active in the eastern Mediterranean traveled east .
 Venetian presence in Persian city of Tabriz by 1263 . Genoese had bases at Caffa (modern-day Feodosiya, Ukraine) in Crimea and Tana on the Sea of Azov .
 Marco Polo and his father and uncle were in China from around 1275 . Polo’s book suggests that all three were in Kublai's service . We do not know what extent they were engaged in commerce on their own account .
 The heyday of the Western mercantile presence in the Far East was short-lived, from 1300 to 1350 . Two Fatin tombstones in the city of Yang-chou (dated 1342 and 1344) have survived in the form of two .
 The Black Death probably dealt a severe blow to Fatin residents in China and central Asia . Further west the Mamluks seized Ayas (mod. Ayas) further west, while further west they took control of Ayas .
 Cilicia was one of the termini of the trans-Asiatic routes . In Persia the turbulence that followed the collapse of the Il-Khanid dynasty made conditions for trade less propitious .
 The Mongol Empire and the khanates that superseded it were characterized by religious pluralism . Certain taboos in Mongol customary law fell particularly heavily on the adherents of one or another faith .
 For Christians in lands that had formerly been subject to Islamic rule, the new regime represented amelioration in their condition . Western missionaries too were now able to preach uninhibitedly .
 The earliest known Latin missionary in Mongol Asia was the Franciscan William of Rubruck . The lack of an adequate interpreter and the fact that he was mistaken for King Louis IX of France caused him difficulty .
 By the 1280s, Franciscans and Dominicans were established in the territories of the Golden Horde and the IIKhanid dynasty . By the 12th century, they had been established in some of the world's most important territories .
 The Franciscan John of Montecorvino was the first Western missionary to enter China in about 1294 . He was first to arrive in China in 1294.
 Pope Clement V placed him at the head of a new archdiocese of Khanbaligh with jurisdiction over all Mongol dominions . He sent out friars to act as his suffragans .
 Pope John XXII withdrew Persia and India from Khanbaligh’s authority in 1318, creating a second archiepiscopal see at Takht-i Sulayman, one of the Il-Khan's residences . The papal diocese of Takhti Sul
 The Latin missionary effort flourished for a few decades, though in China the friars seem to have made no impact on the indigenous Han population . conversions for the most part involved Nestorians and other eastern Christians, like the Orthodox Alans, transported from their home in the Caucasus .
 Reports of high-ranking conversions were often grounded in misapprehensions about Mongol rulers’ attitude toward religious matters . Reports of conversions, designed in part to secure reinforcements, were often also grounded in .
 With the definitive conversion to Islam of the Il-Khanid dynasty, the khans of the Golden Horde and the Chaghadayid khans , Christian proselytism grew increasingly hazardous . Several friars were martyred from the 1320s through the 1340s
 The route to China seems to have been abandoned, and when the Jesuits entered China in 1583, the earlier missions had fallen completely into oblivion . The Jesuits left China in 1683, and the mission was abandoned .
 Genghis Khan; Kublai Khan; Ming Dynasty; Mongols, Cavalry of; Song Dynasty; Song, Fortified Cities; Song-Mongol War; Xiongnu; Yuan Dynasty . Song, Song Fortified City, Song-Fortified Cities, Song
 Mongols were the most powerful army in the world in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries . The Mongol army occupied nearly all of continental Asia, the Middle East, and parts of Eastern Europe .
 The cavalry of the Mongols was the major part of their army, made up of soldiers trained to fight on horseback . The Mongols were known for their horse-mounted soldiers .
 Of every 10 Mongol troopers, 6 were light cavalry horse archers and 4 were more heavily armored and armed lancers . The Mongolian army was one of the world's most powerful .
 Their light cavalry was able to accomplish tactics and maneuvers that would have been unworkable for heavier units . The U.S. Army's light cavalry were able to achieve tactics and maneuver maneuvers .
 Heavier cavalry with lances was used for close fighting after the archers had brought the enemy into panic . Heavy cavalry was used in the battle .
 "They did not need a supply line but hunted and plundered as they advanced," says historian . "They didn't need to need supply lines but did need to be able to hunt and plunder themselves," he says .
 If the men failed to find food, they could temporarily open the jugular vein of their horses’ necks and drink the blood for survival . The men drank the blood of horses' necks and drank it for survival if they were not found food .
 The Mongolian cavalry often astonished their enemies, who had assumed that the Mongolians would come weeks or even months later, instead of days . The Mongolians surprised their enemies by arriving in days rather than days .
 The Mongolian army was able to travel at a fast pace for days without bringing to a halt or exhausting the horses . Each Mongol warrior normally kept three or four horses and shifted horses from time to time .
 Mongolian horses were comparatively small and would fail in short-distance races with bigger and stronger horses . Mongols carried lighter armors so they could still outrun most enemy cavalry in fighting .
 Mongols were able to travel over a long distance rapidly . This advantage allowed the Mongols to travel quickly and efficiently .
 Mongolian horses were well protected and equipped, being coated with lamellar armor . The Mongolian horse was protected by the armor of its horses .
 Horse armor was divided into five pieces to safeguard every part of the horse . The armor was designed to protect the horse's body and protect its armor .
 The piece to protect the forehead had a specially crafted plate that was fixed on each side of the horse’s neck . The piece was designed to protect a horse's forehead .
 All horses had stirrups, a flat-bottomed metal ring hanging from a strap on each side of a horse’s saddle to provide support for a rider . The ring was hung from each strap to provide a support for the rider's foot. The ring is a flat
 The stirrups also helped Mongol archers turn their upper body and shoot in all directions . The stirrup helped them turn their bodies and shoot all directions in Mongolian style .
 Mongol soldiers were able to calculate the loosing of an arrow to the moment when a fast-running horse would have all four feet off the ground . The skill was a skill that would guarantee a stable, well-aimed shot . Mongol soldiers used the skill to calculate how fast a
 Mongol warriors performed horsemanship, archery, and unit tactics, such as formations and rotations . Mongol warriors also performed unit tactics such as formation and formation .
 Mongols used huge hunting excursions organized annually on the steppe . The Mongols were trained to hunt for their food in order to be successful .
 Mongols would make a great circle and drive all manner of animals to the center of the circle . Mongols made the circle and would drive animals around the center .
 This way of learning dynamic maneuvers was highly useful on a battlefield, contributing to their success . The way to learn dynamic maneuvers is highly useful in a battlefield .
 The Mongolian cavalry archer’s bow was the finest in the world for accuracy, force, and reach in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries . The Mongols archer's bow was among the world's finest for accuracy .
 It was made of composite materials—wood, horn, and sinew . It would be fired from any direction from horseback . The composite weapon would be made of wood, sinew and horn .
 Quivers that could hold up to 60 arrows were tied to the backs of the cavalrymen . The cavalrymen were tied with the quivers they could carry .
 Mongols were so competent with the bows that they could shoot birds on the wings . The Mongols used to be able to shoot birds from the wings of their bows . They were able to kill birds with their bows and arrows .
 Mongol warriors generally carried scimitars (a sword with a curved blade that broadens out as it nears the point) as well . Mongol warriors also carried a scimitar (also known as a sword with curved blade) as also .
 Mongolian swords were easier to use on horseback and more powerful for slashing attacks than for stabbing and thrusting attacks . The swords were used in Mongolian war times .
 They were able to live off the land and in extreme situations off their animals, which would make them far less dependent on the traditional logistical apparatus of agrarian armies . They would have been far more dependent on their animals than armies .
 Their most common travel food was dried and ground meat, which was so light that it could be easily transported and cooked . The most common food they used was dried meat and dried meat .
 Most of the Mongols’ mounts were mares, they could live on their horses’ milk . The Mongols could also live on milk from their horses' milk . Since most of the Mongolian horses were mare mares .
 Soldiers could survive a month by drinking mare's milk combined with mare’s blood . The soldiers, together with their families, could . survive a whole month by combining the milk and mare blood .
 With such mobility, Mongols were able to successfully scout, collect intelligence about routes, and search for terrain good for battle tactics of the Mongols . Mongols would have been able to use such mobility to scout and scout .
 The Mongols used psychological warfare successfully in many of their battles, especially in terms of spreading terror and fear to towns and cities .
 The Mongolians let prisoners and civilians ride their horses before the skirmish because each Mongol soldier had more than one horse . For example, they would let prisoners ride their own horses .
 The numbers of soldiers were increased, which helped scare their enemies . Thus, the numbers of their soldiers increased . The numbers were increased .
 Mongols also used ‘human shields’ of a crowd of local residents or soldiers surrendered from previous battles . The Mongols used “human shield’s” of people or soldiers surrendering from previous battle .
 They drove them forward in battles or used them to breach city walls in sieges, which helped protect the warriors . The warriors used them in battle battles or breached city walls . They also used them as weapons to drive them forward or breach the walls .
 Mongol rulers also appropriated peasants’ horses for military purposes . Mongol rulers used horses to carry out their military operations .
 During the Yuan dynasty, many Chinese peasants in the north, after losing their land, became serfs to the Mongols . Many Chinese peasants lost their land and were forced to become serfs . The Mongols took over the region of China during the Yuan Dynasty .
 Genghis Khan; Kublai Khan; Mongols; Song Dynasty; Song, Fortified Cities; Song-Mongol War; Yue Fei; Yuan Dynasty . Song, Song Fortified City, Song-Fortified Cities, Song, Mongolian War; . Song-
 The nationwide movement included military intervention, economic aid, political campaigns, and diplomatic efforts made by the People’s Republic of China for North Vietnam .
 The military assistance of the Chinese People's Liberation Army to Vietnam had maintained Beijing’s brooding influence in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia .
 China supported North Vietnam through four major channels in 1964-1973 . China supported the North Vietnam during the period of 1964-73 .
 The first channel was public statements and political propaganda of the Chinese government through mass media . The second channel was the first channel of the government's political propaganda .
 On January 13, 1965, the Chinese government issued a statement condemning the U.S. plot to involve South Korean troops in its aggressive war in South Vietnam . The Chinese government condemned the plot .
 On June 18, 1965, the PRC Foreign Ministry issued a statement condemning the United States government for ordering U.S. troops into direct participation in combat operations in South Vietnam . The statement was made in response to a statement by the Foreign Ministry .
 China maintained that upon receiving the call of the Vietnamese people, China would promptly send volunteers to Vietnam to fight shoulder to shoulder with the Vietnamese armed forces and people until the U.S. aggressors were driven out of Vietnam . It maintained that .
 During the second week of August 1964, the government organized 20 million people to have public parades, a mass rally, and public meetings to send the signal .
 The Third National People’s Congress adopted a resolution supporting the appeal of the Vietnamese National Assembly . The resolution was adopted by the third National People's Congress in Vietnam .
 China declared that China would continue to do everything in its power to give resolute and unreserved support to the Vietnamese people .
 On July 22, 1966, PRC president Liu Shaoqi issued a statement expressing China's firm support for Ho’s appeal to the people of the whole country . Liu: “China is standing by its support for the appeal .
 It declared that the Chinese people were prepared to undertake the greatest national sacrifice in supporting the Vietnamese people in their war of resistance against the United States . It declared .
 The friendship and unity between the two countries are the most reliable guarantee of defeating the U.S. aggressors, the statement concluded .
 The third channel consisted of diplomatic efforts including messages through third parties and Sino-American Ambassadorial Talks in Warsaw .
 The fourth channel, and the most effective one, was the military intervention in the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was the most successful one of the four channels in the world .
 Military operations in Vietnam were partially initiated to draw attention from Washington . Coupled with the political campaigns and diplomatic efforts, the military operations was partially initiated .
 It was the use of armed forces to demonstrate Beijing’s determination and assessment to a restrain on Washington. ‘Beijing’�s use of military force to demonstrate its determination to restrain Washington. It was also a show of confidence in the U.S. military,
 The Chinese troops included surfaceto-air missiles, antiaircraft artillery, railroad, engineering, mine-sweeping, and logistic units . The Chinese forces included anti-air missile missiles and ant-plane artillery .
 Chinese forces in North Vietnam operated ant-aircraft guns, built and repaired roads, bridges, and railroads; and assembled factories . The Chinese forces operated antiaircraft guns and built roads and bridges, built factories .
 Forces between 1965 and 1968 totaled 23 divisions, including 95 regiments comprised of 320,000 troops . These forces between 1965-1968 totaled 23 . divisions, . including 95 . regiments .
 In July 1970, the PLA withdrew all of its antiaircraft artillery troops from Vietnam . The PLA withdrew from Vietnam in July 1970 .
 When the last Chinese officer withdrew from Vietnam in August 1973, 1,100 Chinese soldiers had lost their lives and 4,200 had been wounded .
 Following the CMC orders, the PLA General Staff organized three forces of the Chinese Volunteer Forces in late April .
 The ‘Chinese People’s Volunteer Engineering Force’ had six divisions, including railway engineering, combat engineering, and communication divisions . Among the others were the "Chinese People's Volunteer Engineering force’
 The Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Divisions of the CPVEF were all comprised of road construction engineering troops, including 16 regiments with 80,000 men . The Fourth and Fifth Divisions were all made up of men .
 The combat engineering volunteer force had two divisions at that time, the Second and Third Divisions . The combat engineer volunteer force was formed from the volunteer army .
 At 8:30 P.M. on June 9, 1965, the first wave of the Chinese troops entered Vietnam, the vanguard troops of the Second Division . The Chinese troops were part of the 2nd Division of the Vietnam War .
 They were combat engineering regiments, wearing not PLA uniforms but blue worker uniforms, no Chinese badges, no Red Star cap insignia, using no PLA rankings or Chinese names during their mission . They were not PLA troops, but were combat engineers .
 The Chinese People’s Volunteer Engineering Force was simply the same the Chinese regular troops assigned to Vietnam . Despite its name change, the force was the same as regular Chinese troops assigned .
 Beijing hoped to convince the world that the CPVEF was organized by Chinese volunteers, not the Chinese government itself . Beijing hopes to avoid open war with the U.S. and South Vietnamese government .
 The Hanoi-Youyiguan Line almost doubled its annual transport capacity, an increase from 1 million tons to 2. million tons . The line has almost doubled the capacity of transport capacity in Vietnam .
 From 1965 to 1974, China had transported 630,000 tons of military aid into Vietnam for the Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries . From 1965-1974, China has transported more than 650,000 tonnes of military equipment .
 The Sixty-third Division entered Vietnam from Guangxi Province to protect the critical Hanoi-Youyiguan railway lines . The Chinese engineering troops will provide cover for the engineering troops .
 By March 1969, the PL A had sent 16 divisions, including 63 regiments, 150,000 troops, of its antiaircraft artillery force . The PL A also had sent 63 regiments of its anti-aircraft armour force .
 By 1969, Chinese air defense troops had had had 2,153 engagements in North Vietnam . By 1969 China had had more than 2,000 engagements in Vietnam .
 Chinese forces in North Vietnam enabled Ho to send more People's Army of Vietnam troops to the South to fight American ground forces . Ho sent troops to South Vietnam to fight U.S. ground forces in the South .
 Beijing’s strong commitment and continuous support played a role in deterring further U.S. expansion of Vietnam War into the North . China's strong commitment to Vietnam War deterred further American expansion of the Vietnam War .
 Beijing's support may have been short of Hanoi’s expectations, if it had not been provided, the course, and even the outcome, of the Vietnam War might have been different . It is therefore fair to say that, although Beijing’�s support . may
 Beijing increased its military aid to Hanoi with improved transportation and air defense in North Vietnam . With improved air defense and improved transportation, Beijing increased military aid .
 From 1966 to 1973, China provided all the military aid, totaling $1.1 billion . China provided guns, ammunition, tanks, naval vessels, armored vehicles, trucks, airplanes, medicine, medical instruments, and other war materials .
 The Chinese doubled or even tripled their annual military aid through the late 1960s and early 1970s . The aid was doubled or tripled in the late 60s and 70s .
 China provided 80,500 guns in 1964, 141,531 in 1966, 219,899 in 1968, and 219,900 in 1968 . China provided 233,600 guns in 1973, almost three times more than the total of 1964 .
 The heavy artillery guns shipped in totaled 1,205 pieces in 1964, 3,362 in 1966, 7,087 in 1968, and 9,912 in 1973 . Heavy artillery guns were shipped in from 1964 to 1973 .
 artillery pieces had an increase of nine times between 1964 and 1973 . The artillery pieces were increased nine times during that period .
 The artillery shells were 335,000 shells in 1964, 1.06 million in 1966, 2.08 million in 1968, and 2.09 million in 1973 . In 1964, there were 1 million shells in 1966 and 1 million in 1969 .
 China also provided $180 million financial aid to North Vietnam . From 1964 to 1969, China gave North Vietnam $180million in financial aid .
 The perk years of Chinese military and economic aid were from 1971 to 1973, totaling more than $3 billion . However, the perks of the perk years were between 1971 and 1973 .
 From 1965 to 1976, China provided military aid to North Vietnam with about $1.1 billion . China provided arms and ammunition enough to arm 2 million men . China gave North Vietnam $1 billion in military aid .
 During the Vietnam War, China had provided North Vietnam with a total aid of $20 billion . China had given North Vietnam $20 million in aid during the war .
 Chinese support, particularly transportation of their war materials, and Soviet military aid to Vietnam largely guaranteed the success of the North Vietnam’s battle initiatives in South Vietnam .
 Zhou king defeated the Shang army at Muye and took over the capital . Zhou king took control of the Shang capital . Shang army defeated the Zhou king and took control .
 During the late Shang, the dynasty declined because of continuous military expeditions, aristocrat factions and corruption, and hard punishments . The dynasty declined due to continuous military .
 Many bodies of both aristocrats and humble followers were buried with the rulers . Other forms of human sacrifice, usually in multiples of 10 and sometimes hundreds at a time, were also used .
 More and more areas became ruled by vassal or even rival states, and the effective area under Shang control grew fairly small .
 The Shang emperor Zhao Wang also gave power to unscrupulous officials, which caused chaos among the kings of Shang’s subordinary states . Zhao Wang gave the Shang emperor power to unruly officials .
 Zhou, one of the subordinary states in the west, was rising rapidly in terms of economy, military, and population . As the Shang declined, the state of Zhou was becoming a state of the west . Zhou was one of China's subordinated states .
 When the Shang emperor Zhao Wang asked the Zhou to join an eastern campaign, King Wu of the Zhou saw an opportunity to end the Shang dynasty . King Wu saw the Zhou as an opportunity for an end to the dynasty .
 King Wu united other states such as the Shu, Lu, Qiang, and Yong . He called for a rebellion against the Shang, after which he called for the Shang rebellion .
 When Zhou army crossed the Yellow River, many anti-Shang troops joined them along the way . Many anti-Zhou troops joined the Zhou army when they crossed the river .
 Zhou’s troops arrived at Muye, a small town about 30 miles south of Chaoge . On Lebruary 4 the Zhou's troops arrived in Muya .
 The main strength of the Shang army was still far away from the capital on their way back from a southeastern expedition . Since the Zhou army arrived so soon, the main strength had been far from capital . The Zhou army was not expected to arrive so soon .
 Shang emperor Zhao Wang hurried to organize a defense force with 170,000 troops, most of them slave soldiers . Most of the troops were slave soldiers, according to the Shang emperor .
 Zhao Wang hoped that a large number of slave troops would slow down, if not stop, the attack, and buy him some time for the reinforcement . Although their morale was low, Zhao Wang hopes that the morale of the slaves was low enough to stop the attack .
 He thought that the Zhou army would attack the slave troops first on either side as the weakest link . The Zhou army thought that it would attack either side of the border .
 King Wu attacked the Shang's center first, the elite aristocratic troops, with the Zhou’s main strength . King Wu, however, attacked the Zhou's main strength first, but attacked the center first .
 When the Shang elite troops could not hold the line and fell back, most of the slave soldiers dropped their weapons and ran away . Most of the slaves ran away from the camp .
 Some of them turned around and joined the Zhou to fight against the Shang army . Some of the Zhou turned around to join the Zhou .
 Shang emperor realized he could no longer save himself, he committed suicide in his palace . Shang emperor's suicide was suicide after realizing he couldn't save himself .
 It marked the beginning of the armed rebellion of the CCP against the Nationalist government . The CCP was formed from the Communist Party of China .
 CCP Agrarian Revolutionary War (or Lang Revolutionary War) in 1927-1937 . It is also the beginning of the CCP AGRARARARAL Revolutionary War . The war began in 1927 and 1937 .
 To save the CCP-controlled troops in the Nationalist army, the Central Committee planned an uprising in Nanchang, the capital city of Jiangxi . The CCP planned to save the troops .
 Zhou Enlai (1898— 1976) arrived at Nanchang and established a CCP frontal committee . In late July, Zhou enlai established a committee of members of the party . The party has a history of anti-Chinese sentiment .
 Zhou, He Long, Ye Ting, Zhu De and Liu Bocheng worked with the commanders and the CCP members in the GMD Second Group Army around the area, including the Twentieth Army; the Tenth and Twentyfourth Divisions of the Eleventh Army; and the
 On August 1, 1927, Zhou, He, Ye, Zhu, Zhu and Liu launched the Nanchang Uprising against the GMD government . More than 24,000 troops in the Second Army Group joined the revolt .
 Insurgents eliminated more than 3,000 GMD garrison troops and managed to take control of the city . After a fierce battle, the insurgents eliminated over 3,00 GMD troops and took control .
 The committee decided that all the revolting troops keep their former formation, ranks, and order of battle, even though they were under the CCP command .
 He Long, former commander of Twentieth Army, resumed his position as commander of the Second Group Army . Several days later, He Long returned to his post in Second Group .
 As the first Chinese Communist army, the Second Group Army totaled 23,000 men . As the First Chinese Communist Army, it was first Chinese army .
 GMD high command sent a large force to Nanchang against the Second Group Army . The GMD has been in the grip of the Chinese government in China for years .
 He and Zhu moved the rebel army southward from Jiangxi in late August . They attempted to return to Guangdong Province, a former revolutionary base . Zhu and Zhu were captured in August .
 GMD troops in Guangdong advanced north and stopped the rebels’ southern movement with a strong defense . The GMD forces advanced north, however, advancing north and stopping the rebels' southern movement .
 In September, the army engaged in several fierce battles against the GMD garrisons and lost half of their troops by October . In October, half of the army lost half their troops .
 Many of the rebels surrendered, deserted, or returned to the GMD forces . Many of those who did not surrender, deserted or returned .
 Only 2,000 survivors of the Nanchang Uprising moved into Hunan under Zhu as the Twenty-Eighth Regiment . Zhu later joined with Mao’s forces in April 1928 .
 It represented the Communist revolutionary army’s first shot against the GMD and Jiang's government . The revolutionary army's first shot was shot by Jiang's army in the 1980s .
 Zhu and Mao established the Chinese Workers and Peasants Red Army’s Fourth Army on May 4, 1928 . The army was organized into six regiments, for which they had but 2,000 rifles . Zhu: "The Fourth Army's Fourth Army was formed from around 5
 The Red Army protected the Communist base areas and eventually seized state power for the party . It eventually defeated GMD Army on the mainland by defeating the GMD army .
 One of the worst atrocities committed by the Japanese during the Sino-Japanese War of 1937-1945 was the murder of thousands of Chinese civilians in Nanjing .
 In July 1937, outright war began between Japan and China after the Marco Polo Bridge Incident . The Marco Polo bridge incident was the first major incident between the two countries since 1937 .
 The Nationalist troops then fell back, moving inland in a near rout on the Nationalist capital of Nanjing . Nanjing, a symbolic location home to more than 1 million Chinese, is a symbol of Chinese independence .
 Jiang was not prepared to abandon it without a fight, but no defense or evacuation plans had been made . Jiang said he was prepared to defend it but no plans were made to evacuate it .
 After Chinese troops rejected Japanese demands to surrender, on December 9, the Japanese opened a massive assault . The Japanese attacked Chinese troops after Chinese troops refused to surrender .
 Three days later, the Chinese defenders fell back across the Yangzi (Yangtze) River . The following day, the Sixth, Ninth, and 116th Divisions of the Japanese army entered the city .
 During the ensuing six weeks, the Japanese occupiers deliberately instituted a reign of terror, apparently designed to cow China’s population into submission to Japanese invasion . The Japanese occupation of China in the early 1930s was designed to terrorize the population . During this period, the occupiers
 Japanese leaders had expected Jiang to surrender before the end of 1937 . Frustration over Jiang’s refusal to surrender might have been another factor contributing to the reign of terror .
 Japanese forces fired on streets crowded with refugees, wounded soldiers, and civilians . Entering the city on December 13, Japanese forces shot at refugees and soldiers .
 Thousands of refugees were attempting to escape by swimming the river . They were also fired on many thousands of refugees who were trying to escape . Many of the refugees were also attempting to swim the river to escape the violence .
 The occupying forces used machine guns, swords, bayonets, fire, live burial, and poison gas to massacre captured Chinese soldiers and any young men suspected of being such .
 Scattered atrocities and murders, often marked with great brutality, continued throughout the city for six weeks . Heavy looting also occurred throughout the period, as did heavy looting .
 Counts of how many soldiers and civilians died in Nanjing Massacre vary widely . Counts range from 42,000 to 300,000 .
 The Nanjing Massacre shocked the West and generated extensive international sympathy for China . However, this did not necessarily translate into tangible support and assistance .
 It was an early example of the use of organized brutality to cow and terrorize civilian population characteristic of many World War II military occupations . The brutality was an example of a tactic characteristic of a military occupation of many .
 As the twenty-first century began, memories of the Nanjing Massacre remained bitter in China . A major museum commemorating the event exists in Nanjing .
 Japanese officials sought for decades to deny that the episode ever took place, or at least to minimize its scale . It was omitted from official Japanese accounts of the war .
 In the late 1990s, several Japanese journalists and academics who investigated the subject mounted dedicated efforts to bring the event to the attention of the Japanese people . The event was first reported in Japan in the 1990s .
 Anti-Japanese War: Guomindang; Guominang; Manchuria; Jiang Jieshi . Marco Polo Bridge Incident: Marco Polo bridge Incident .
 Qing government was forced to negotiate with the British and signed the accord . Following China’s military defeat in the war, the Qing government finally signed the agreement .
 The treaty was the first of the unequal treaties signed by China with a foreign power . It was also considered the first treaty of unequal treaties with foreign powers .
 British merchants had previously been allowed to trade exclusively with Hong merchants . British merchants could now trade with whoever they pleased, at all ports where they resided .
 Qing government also paid the British 21 million silver dollars for compensation, ceded Hong Kong Island, and agreed to establish a “fair and regular” tariff . Under the settlement, the Qing government ceded the island of Hong Kong .
 The British agreed to withdraw all their troops from Nanjing and the Grand Canal . In return, the emperor of China gave his approval of the treaty .
 The arrangement only contained general and brief articles . It was then followed by the Supplementary Treaty of the Bogue, signed on October 8, 1843, which exempted British citizens from local law in China .
 Treaty of Nanjing created a new framework for China’s foreign relations . It compelled it to be open for foreign trade . Nevertheless, the Treaty was created in order to open China's trade .
 Banner System, Grand Canal; Grand Canal . Hong Kong; Lin Zexu; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Qing . Qing Dynasty . Unequal Treaties .
 More than 83 percent of the area is covered by grass, bushes, and forests . The terrain is good for rice and other grain production . The area is known for rice production .
 The Fen River, one of the major rivers in northwestern China, also crosses through Nanniwan . The Fen river is one of China's major rivers .
 Yan'an became the command center for the Chinese Communist revolution through the Anti-Japanese War in 1937-1945 . Yan’an was the center of the anti-Japanese war in China's anti-Japan campaign .
 During the Anti-Japanese War, Chinese Communist forces continued their pattern of securing the loyalty of the peasants in areas they controlled while engaging in small-scale attacks against the Japanese . During the anti-Japanese war, Chinese Communists continued to engage in small scale attacks .
 In 1941-1942, the Japanese command concentrated 64 percent of its troops in China to launch “mopping-up operations” against the CCP bases behind its line .
 Chinese officers and soldiers devoted themselves to increasing production . To overcome the shortage of food and supplies, they devoted themselves . The Chinese were forced to increase production .
 Japanese strategy to “put the Eighth Route Army to death by stranding and hunger” and by serious economic pressures, says Zhu De . Zhu De was commander in chief of the Eighth . Army . He and his army faced the Japanese strategy .
 CCP-occupied areas had small numbers of people living in a vast area with poor land . At that time, the CCP-occupation areas had a large area of poor land.
 There were only 1. million people in the areas to support the daily necessities of tens of thousands of CCP soldiers, officials, staff, and students .
 Mao Zedong: 'They had almost no oil to cook, no paper to write on, no vegetables to eat, and no shoes and socks to wear' Mao's death was difficult because they had almost nothing to cook .
 Zhu De had experts do surveys of the land, water, and forestry resources in the area . Zhu De has been in charge of the area since 2008 . Zhu had experts conduct surveys of land and water resources .
 Zhu reported to Mao in favor of cultivation of Nanniwan to increase production of grains . Zhu suggested that the 359th Brigade, 120th Division of the Eighth Route Army, should lead this movement to open the wasteland for farming . Zhu: "Nanniwan is the best place to
 In March 1943, the 359th Brigade, led by the brigade commander Wang Zhen, started the new “Mass Production movement” in Nanniwan, also known as the “Nanniwan Experiment’s” The 359th brigade started the ‘Mass
 Several thousand soldiers made this place a source of military farming and an example of the self-supporting efforts by CCP forces . CCP forces are self-supported by a small army .
 By 1944, the 359th Brigade had cultivated 26,100 acres of land, produced 3. million liters of grain, and raised 56. million pigs . The 359th brigade had raised 56 million pigs, and produced 3 million litres of grain .
 During the Mass Production movement, Mao, Zhu, Zhou Enlai , and many other top CCP leaders went to Nanniwan to work on the land, create cloth, raise their own livestock, play a model role in this movement . Mao and Zhu were among those who went to
 The peasants, who became war refugees from other areas in China during the Anti-Japanese War, were encouraged to join the effort and open the wasteland .
 Many peasants moved into the Nanniwan area, grew agricultural products, and settled down with their families . Many peasants grew up in the area, growing agricultural products .
 Nanniwan became the birthplace of the CCP-organized agricultural base, and also developed a ‘Yan’an spirit,” or self-sufficiency . The CCP-organized agricultural base is also known for its self-sufficient agriculture .
 Today, Nanniwan is a major revolutionary tourist site, showcasing the essence of the ‘Yan’an spirit,” which exemplifies reliance on one’s own labor and production . Today, the site is a popular tourist site .
 In September 1989, Jiang Zemin visited Nanniwan and saw the newly explored oil field . Jiang was the president of the People's Republic of China .
 The major tourist sites include Mao’s working room during his trips to Nanniwan, the headquarters of the 359th Brigade, the Nanniwa Cultivation Government office, and a museum of the movement .
 The white paper issued in July 1998 for the first time revealed the overall picture of China’s national defense, ranging from the security environment and defense policy to defense expenditure and arms control .
 The 1998 document states that the guideline for China’s military strategy is the active defense that aims at safeguarding its sovereignty and security as well as its territorial unity . China's military strategy aims to safeguard the nation’�s sovereignty, security and territorial unity, the document
 Second, the PLA would become an army based on quantity rather than on quality, he says . Third, the army would be based on quality rather than quantity, he adds .
 Jiang’s doctrine of fighting ‘local wars under modern high-tech conditions” became the new guideline for the PLA’�s institutional reform under the third generation high command . Jiang”s doctrine became the . new guideline to the PLA's institutional reform . under
 The paper clearly indicates Beijing’s view of the importance assigned to economy compared to military improvement . The paper also indicates Beijing's view of China's view on military improvement as a priority .
 The paper reviews two decades of China’s defense costs, concluding that the expenditure and the proportion of gross domestic product it represents remained much lower than those of other major powers .
 Beijing’s concern that it needs regional stability to maintain economic growth . The statement pays attention to China's peripheral environment, revealing Beijing's concern for regional stability . On issues of regional security, the statement pays .
 Chinese forces would be reduced by a further 500,000 from 1997 to 2000, which would bring the total PLA strength to 2. million . In the end of the document, the document declares China would have reduced its forces .
 The 1998 white paper, though short on specifics about equipment and technology, was the first and most critical step during the process of transparency on Chinese military affairs . It projected a new image of China, one that would indicate a responsible and reasonable nation .
 China, People’s Republic of; Four Modernizations; Jiang Zemin; Nuclear Program; People's Liberation Army . China, China’S. Republic of China; Four modernizations. Jiang Zmin; Nuclear program. China, PPP; PPP: Four Modern
 A plenary session of the Central Committee is held at least once a year by the Politburo of the PolitBuro . The Central Committee holds a plenary meeting of the party's members .
 Soviet advisor Hendricus Sneevliet Maring instructed the CCP to focus its effort on labor movement . Maring was first official representative from the Executive Committee of the Comintern (Communist International Congress in Moscow)
 The congress passed the CCP’s first constitution and set up its prime goal to organize the working class . The congress also passed the first constitution .
 Chen Duxiu was elected the SecretaryGeneral of the CCP Central Committee . He was elected to be the Secretary General of the Party Party Central Committee in China .
 In September, the first group of CCP members joined the GMD, including Mao Mao . Mao is one of the first members to join the group . Mao has been a member of the CCP since 2008 .
 The congress accepted the CCP-GMD coalition against the warlords . It encouraged the CCP members to join the GMD as individuals .
 The meeting established the Central Bureau of the Central Executive Committee . Chen Chen was elected secretary-general of the new Central Bureau .
 Xiang Zhongfa was elected the chairman of the Politburo of the Central Committee . Zhou Enlai was elected as one of the seven members of the party's seven members .
 The CCP convened in Yan’an , Shaanxi Province, its Seventh National Congress on April 23-June 11, 1945 . The CCP convenes in Yan'an .
 CCP became mass party in China during the Anti-Japanese War in 1937-1945 . Eventually, the CCP became a mass party during the anti-Japanese war in China .
 After 22 years of military struggle on the road to power, the CCP had acquired the experience and self-confidence to create a new communist state in the world . The CCP has acquired the . experience and confidence to create the . world .
 Mao was again elected chairman of the Central Committee . Liu Shaoqi, Zhou Enlai, Zhu De, and Chen Yun were vice chairmen . Deng Xiaoping (19041997) was the secretary-general by the 1,026 delegates .
 The entire party with a total of 22 million members engaged in the Cultural Revolution . The party was involved in the cultural revolution .
 PRC president Liu Shaoqi was arrested in 1966, and he and Deng Xiaoping were labeled “traitorous scabs and renegades” at the congress . Liu was arrested at the party congress in 1966; Deng Xiaop was labeled a traitor .
 After Mao died on September 9, 1976, the Third Plenum of the CCP Tenth Central Committee supported Hua Guofeng’s leadership and purge of the Gang of Pour and the Maoists including Jiang Qing . After Mao's death, the third Plenum supported Hua's leadership and
 Hu Yaobang (1915—1989) replaced Hua as chairman of the CCP Central Committee in 1981 . In 1981, Hu was replaced by Hu Yang, who died in 1989 . Hu was a member of the Chinese Communist Party Central Committee .
 Hu became the secretary-general of the party, which had almost 40 million members . Hu is a former member of the Communist Party of China . He is the party's secretary general .
 On October 25-November 1, 1987, the CCP held its Thirteenth National Congress in Beijing . The party was held in China .
 Deng Xiaoping and all other second-generation leaders retired from active positions in the party . Deng was elected as the new leaders as the Politburo Standing Committee members . Deng Xiaop and all of the other second generation leaders retired .
 Jiang forced the old guard to retire from the Politburo by including Deng’s reform philosophy in the party constitution . Jiang made the move after Deng's reform philosophy was included in the constitution of the party .
 Hu Jintao was elected secretary-general of the Central Committee . He is the head of the fourth-generation leadership of the CCP . The party had 66 million members at the time .
 The 2,217 delegates representing 73. million party members supported Hu’s ‘Scientific Development Concept’ and entrenched it in the constitution as an official guiding ideology . Hu's ‘scientific development concept’ has been entrenched in the party’ constitution as a guiding
 According to the Chinese Constitution, the National People's Congress is the main national legislative body . It works with the State Council as the executive body and with the Supreme People’s Court . It procurates as the judicial branch .
 The Standing Committee of the NPC is its permanent office of the government . NPC is a permanent office for the government and the Standing Committee is the government's permanent office .
 The NPC and its Standing Committee exercise the legislative power of the State, says the constitution . The constitution explains that the NPC exercises the legislative powers of the state .
 It is composed of representatives elected from the provinces, autonomous regions, municipalities directly under the central government, and special administrative regions . The People's Liberation Army is China’s armed forces .
 This tiered electoral structure made it impossible for a candidate to become a member of a higher legislative body without party approval . Party approval is required for candidates to become members of higher legislative bodies . This is the first time a candidate has been elected to a higher body without approval from a party
 The NPC exercises many functions and powers, including amending the constitution, electing the president and the vice president of China . It also decides on the choice of the premier and vice premier of the State .
 The NPC also has power to remove the president, vice president, premier, and other state leaders from their offices . The NPC can also remove the presidents, vice presidents and premier from their office .
 The NPC exercised most of its power on a day-to-day basis through the Standing Committee in Beijing . The NPC exercises most of the power through its Standing Committee .
 Due to its overwhelming majority in the Congress, the CCP had total control over the composition of this committee . The CCP had complete control of the composition, the committee was formed .
 Until the late 1980s, the NPC and its Standing Committee played only a symbolic role as a powerless rubber-stamp legislature . The NPC is now a powerful but powerless legislature .
 All the local governments at the provincial, district, county, city, city and town level served as the agents of the central government in Beijing . The local governments served as agents of Beijing .
 On September 20, 1954, the First NPC passed the first formal constitution by secret ballot and promulgated the Chinese Constitution . The Chinese Constitution was promulgated by the NPC in 1953 .
 The 1954 constitution authorized the Standing Committee of the NPC to select, appoint, and dismiss judges, procuratorates, and judicial personnel at the national level . The Standing Committee is authorized to select judges and procurators .
 Second NPC elected Liu Shaoqi as the PRC’s president in April 1959 . Liu was elected as the Second NPC president in March 1959 .
 On December 20, 1963-January 4, 1964, the Third NPC holds and reelects Liu as president and Zhou as premier . Liu was reelected as president of China and Zhou was premier of China . Zhou was elected as premier in December 1964 .
 The Lourth NPC promulgated the second constitution on January 13, 1975 . It was promulgated in 1975 . The second constitution was the first constitution in the country .
 The new constitution minimized or completely eliminated the courts and procurates . It did not retain individual rights such as those of freedom of speech and press . The constitution was eliminated completely .
 The 1975 constitution was replaced with a new one in 1978 . The next generation of CCP leadership took control of the country's constitution .
 The third PRC constitution was promulgated in 1978 . At the Plenary Session of the Fifth NPC on March 5, 1978, the constitution was issued .
 It doubled the number of articles from 30 to 60, and contained a new preamble . The new parliament also doubled the amount of articles it contains .
 On December 4, 1982, the Fifth Plenary Session of the Fifth NPC adopted the new document by secret ballot .
 Many sections of the current document were adapted directly from the 1978 constitution . Some new concepts and articles have been added to the constitution .
 It placed economic development and improvement of people’s living standard as the top priority . The government said it was placing economic development, improvement of living standard .
 On June 6-21, 1983, the Sixth NPC held in Beijing, China, and 2,978 delegates attended the National Congress . The Sixth NPC was held in China .
 Li Xiannian is the PRC president, Peng Zhen chairman of the NPC, Zhao Ziyang premier, and Deng Xiaoping premier, among others . Deng Xiaop is the chairman of China's Central Military Commission . Li will be the first Chinese president to take office in
 On March 25April 13, 1988, the Seventh NPC was held in Beijing, China . 2,978 delegates attended .
 Yang Shangkun as PRC president, Wan Li chairman of the NPC, Li Peng premier, and Deng Xiaoping chairman of Central Military Commission . They elected Yang Shangkus as the PRC leader .
 Jiang Zemin is the PRC president and chairman of the Central Military Commission . Rong Yiren vice president, Qiao Shi chairman of NPC, and Li Peng premier . Li Peng is the premier of China .
 On March 5-19, 1998, the Ninth NPC held in Beijing, China, and 2,979 delegates attended .
 Jiang Zemin reelected as the PRC president and chairman of the Central Military Commission . Hu Jintao vice president, Li Peng chairman of NPC, and Zhu Rongji premier . Zhu Rongsji premier.
 On March 5, 2003, the Tenth NPC was held in Beijing, China . 2,985 delegates attended the National Congress .
 Hu Jintao as the PRC president, Jiang Zemin chairman of the Central Military Commission, Zeng Qinghong vice president, and Wen Jiabao premier . Wu Bangguo chair of the NPC, Wu BangGuo chairman of China's NPC, and Wu Bang
 On March 14, 2004, the Second Session of the Tenth National People’s Congress adopted and published 14 important amendments to the constitution . The amendments were published in March 2004 .
 On March 5-15-15, 2008, the Eleventh NPC was held in Beijing, China . 2,987 delegates attended .
 They reelected Hu Jintao as the PRC president and elected him chairman of the Central Military Commission, Xi Jinping vice president, Jia Qinglin vice president . Wen Jiabao premier. Hu Jintsao reelected as the Chinese president .
 After the 1911 Revolution, Sun Yat-sen’s struggles for democracy, or his “second revolution,” against the warlords failed every time . The 1911 Revolution was the first attempt at democracy in China to overthrow warlords .
 Sun wanted to establish a modern armed force under his and GMD command . Sun wanted the force to be modern armed forces under his command .
 Most Western powers rejected or ignored his idea, but the Soviet Union was willing to help him build a revolutionary army . The Soviet Union helped him build an army in the 1930s .
 In exchange, the Soviet government would help Sun and the GMD with their military establishment and officer training . Sun and GMD would also receive military training from Soviet government . The Soviet government helped Sun with his military establishment, officer training.
 On January 26, 1923, Adolph A Joffe, a top Soviet diplomat, and Sun issued their “Joint Manifesto” to pledge Soviet support for China . The ‘Manifesto’ was signed by Sun and Adolph Joffer, a
 Sun sent his delegation to Russia in August to study Soviet military and political institutions . In August, Sun sent a delegation, led by Jiang Jieshi, to Russia .
 On June 16, 1924, the Whampoa Military Academy was founded with the assistance of the Soviet Union . Jiang Jieshi was the commandant of the academy .
 Sun and Jiang began to build a military center in Guangzhou with the sources including GMD and CCP members, college students, and warlord officers and soldiers who had revolted .
 Qing dynasty’s New Army had been trained by German officers and adopted the German military system . The Qing dynasty's New Army adopted the system .
 After the 1911 Revolution, many German instructors stayed in China, training the warlord troops and helping them get new arms from European countries . Many German instructors remained in China after the revolution .
 The German instructors favored a large infantry army with a welleducated officer corps . The German army was dominated by large infantry with well-educated officer officers .
 The better-trained units could be used as cadres or instructors to train other units in order to prepare a large army for war in a short time .
 They also paid special attention to artillery firepower, telegraph communication, and railway transportation .
 After Germany lost World War I in 1918, the German military influence declined due to the end of the official exchanges . After the war, German influence in the military declined .
 Jiang and his office corps still carried on some of the German doctrine through the 1930s . Jiang's office corps continued to carry on some German doctrine .
 By 1937, the Nationalist army had 10 German-trained infantry divisions . The Nationalists had 10 divisions trained by the Germans .
 Japan became the center for the Chinese Nationalist Republican movement before the 1911 Revolution . Japan was the center of the movement in China .
 Japan's attempt to obtain German and Russian colonial and territorial occupations in east and northeast China threatened China’s sovereignty and independence . After WWI, however, Japan tried to get German and . Russian colonial . and German colonial . occupations in . east and . northeast China .
 Nationwide anti-Japanese movements arose in the 1910s and 1920s, making the adoption of the Japanese military system impossible . Anti-Japan movements made it impossible to adopt the military system in Japan .
 Soviet Union offered not only military training, but also financial aid and political consultation . The Soviet Union also offered financial aid, political consultation.
 The Soviet system was accepted in 1924 at the Whampoa Military Academy as a model to establish the new national army .
 The Russian model put political instruction at the center by emphasizing political control . The model is based on the Russian model of political instruction .
 China’s acceptance of Soviet financial aid left the academy no choice but to accept the Soviet Red Army advisors and their military curriculum . China's acceptance of financial aid forced the academy to accept Soviet advisors .
 Jiang became the first superintendent of the Whampoa Military Academy in 1924 . Sun sent Jiang and a military delegation to Moscow in 1924 to study the Soviet military system for four months .
 In 1925, over 1,000 Russian military advisors in China trained GMD-CCP officer corps . In 1925-1925, 1,200 Russians in China were involved in training the Chinese military .
 Blykher (or Blucher) worked closely with both the GMD and the CCP at Whampoa . He was one of the first five Soviet marshals .
 By 1927, a total of 10,000 cadets had graduated in six classes from the academy . The academy was founded in 1903 .
 Many of them later became the leading commanders of Jiang’s military hierarchy . Many of the leaders of Jiang's military hierarchy later became commanders .
 On July 1, 1925, three-and-a-half months after Sun died in Beijing, the Nationalist government formally came into existence in Guangzhou . Jiang Jieshi was the leader of the Guangzhou government .
 Wang Jingwei was elected as chairman and Borodin as senior advisor in the Nationalist government in July . Wang was elected chairman of the party in July after Borodins was appointed senior advisor .
 Jiang organized all the military units under the National Government into the National Revolutionary Army with Jiang as its commander in chief . Jiang organized the army in 1925 . Jiang was one of the first Chinese leaders of the revolution in China .
 The student soldiers of the Whampoa Military Academy became the First Army . Students of the academy became the first army .
 A GMD party representative/political commissar and a political department established at army, divisional, and regimental levels following the Soviet model . The GMD is a party representative and political commissary .
 Some CCP members appointed as party representatives, responsible for political work in the various units . CCP members were appointed as representatives of the party .
 In 1926, the National Revolutionary Army formed three more armies, the Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Armies . The army was formed in 1926, and formed in 1927 .
 The CCP controlled the Fourth Army’s Independent Regiment, 2,100 men under the command of Ye Ting . The party controlled the 4th Army's Independent Regiment under the control of the CCP .
 Commander General Jiang Jieshi issued a “Declaration on the Northern Expedition” and launched the punitive expedition against the warlords . Wu Peifu and Sun Chuanfang were two of the five major warlords in China .
 Jiang renamed the NRA the Northern Expeditionary Army . It had eight infantry armies, approximately 100,000 men . The NRA was renamed the Northern exotic Army .
 The Northern Expeditionary Army quickly took Changsha, the capital city of Hunan, and Yuezhou, and destroyed Wu Peifu’s main forces in Hunan . The Northern expeditionary army quickly took .
 In less than six months, the NEA overthrew the two most powerful warlords . Wu Peifu and Sun Chuanfang were overthrew in less than 6 months .
 The others either surrendered or joined Jiang’s forces, which increased from 8 armies, 100,000 men in 1926 to 40 armies, 700,000 in 1927 . The other half of the men were either surrendering or joining Jiang's forces .
 The Nationalist territory expanded from the southwestern coast to the Yangzi valley along the eastern coast, covering half of China . The territory covered half of the country .
 In mid-December, the GMD National government and the Central Executive Committee moved from Guangzhou to Wuhan, central China . The GMD is based in Guangzhou, China .
 Jiang and the right-wing government in Shanghai began to purge CCP members in order to contain the increasing Soviet influence and left-wing activities in the GMD party .
 CCP membership declined rapidly from 60,000 to 10,000 in October 1927 . The CCP membership dropped rapidly between April and October 1927.
 At the time of the completion of the Northern Expedition, the National Revolutionary Army had 2.2.2 million men in uniform . The Northern Expedition was completed in 18 months .
 Jiang began to demobilize and reorganize the National Revolutionary Army into the National Army of the ROC, or the Nationalist army . Jiang began the demobilization and reorganizing the army in 1928 .
 By January 1929, his implementation of military professionalism was completed with 65 divisions of the Nationalist army . By January 29, he had 65 divisions .
 Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kai-shek) organized all military units under the Nationalist government into the National Revolutionary Army (NRA, Guomin Gemingjun) with Jiang as its commander in chief . Jiang was the leader of the GMD .
 Commander General Jiang launched the Northern Expedition against the warlords in China on July 1, 1926 . Commander Jiang was the first Chinese commander to launch the expedition .
 He renamed the NRA the Northern Expeditionary Army . It had eight infantry armies, approximately 100,000 men . The NRA was renamed the Northern Army .
 The main battlefields of Jiang’s Northern Expedition were Hunan and Hubei Provinces . Hunan was the main battlefield of Jiang's Northern Expedition .
 The Northern Expeditionary Army had 2. million men in uniform when it was completed . When the Northern Expedition was completed, 2 million men were in uniform .
 Jiang began to demobilize the NEA and reorganized it into the Nationalist army, or the National Army of the Republic of China . The NEA was demobilized in July 28, 1928 .
 Jiang became the generalissimo of the Nationalist army, which was the armed forces of the ROC, including army, navy, and air force . Jiang was also the president of China's Nationalist government . He was the first Chinese to become a leader of the Chinese Communist Party
 The Nationalist army won the victory in their fifth encirclement campaign . The victory was the result of a successful battle against the Nationalists .
 In 1937-1945, the Nationalist army was put on the most crucial task ever to defend the country against the Japanese invasion . In 1937, the army was tasked with defending the country from the invasion of Japan .
 On July 7, 1937, the Japanese Imperial Army attacked the GMD troops at the Marco Polo Bridge . The bridge was located southwest of Beijing, China .
 This event, known as the ‘Lugouqiao Incident,’ marked the beginning of Japan’s all-out aggression against China . This event marked the start of China's War of Resistance against Japan . The ‘War of Resistance’ against Japan is
 Jiang and the high command of the Nationalist army deployed nearly 700,000 troops to defend the NanjingShanghai region . Jiang's high command deployed 700,500 troops to protect the city from the rising tide of violence .
 Jiang lost 1 million troops of the Nationalist army while eliminating 250,730 Japanese soldiers . From July 1937 to November 1938, Jiang lost more than 1 million of his troops .
 Jiang removed the seat of his government from Nanjing to Chongqing (Chungking), Sichuan Province, in 1939 . Nationalist army withdrew to China’s southwest and northwest to conserve some of their troops .
 CCP officers and soldiers devoted themselves to increase production like that of the Nanniwan Experiment . To overcome the shortage of food and supplies, the CCP officers .
 Jiang and his GMD army received direct America’s aid and military training . In the wake of the Allied forces’ campaign against the fascists and militarism across the globe, Jiang received direct U.S. aid .
 At that time, at least 40 Chinese divisions had been equipped with European or Americanmade weapons and trained by American or Soviet advisors . At the time, China had been trained by Soviet or American or American advisors .
 The price in Chinese lives for resisting Japanese aggression is very high, says CNN.com's John Defterios . He says the price in China's fight against Japanese aggression was very high .
 The total of military deaths of the Nationalist army was 3.23 million men, and the Communist forces were 600,000 men . The Communist forces died in the same period .
 China was able to tie down 1. million Japanese troops who might have been employed elsewhere in the world . But China also managed to tie up 1.million Japanese troops in China .
 Jiang found himself far away from the country’s economic and population centers and facing an unprecedented challenge from Mao . After Japan's sudden surrender, Jiang faced a challenge from the Maoist .
 U.S. president Harry Truman dispatched General George Marshall as his envoy to China in December for further mediation . General Marshall was the secretary of state, secretary-of-state, in December .
 Jiang and Mao signed the cease-fire agreement in Chongqing, China . They made no political compromises and refused to cooperate with each other . Mao and Jiang signed no political compromise .
 Marshall announced the failure of his mission in January 1947 . In June 1946, full-scale civil war broke out in China between the GMD and CCR Marshall .
 Jiang launched an all-out offensive campaign against Mao’s ‘liberated regions’ with a major attack in central China and other offensive campaigns from south to north . The first phase of the war began on June 26, 1946, when Jiang launched a major offensive .
 The Central Committee transferred 110,000 troops with 20,000 party cadres to the northeast, Manchuria, for the first time in its history, to transform its military from regional level to a national level in 1947 .
 The CCP offensive campaign started in the north and then swept into the south . Soon after, the CCP offensive began to sweep into the north .
 Mao successfully saved most of his troops and stayed in their “liberated areas” during Jiang’s all-out offensive campaign . Mao successfully stayed in the ‘liberated’ areas during the campaign .
 Jiang changed from broad assaults to attacking key targets . In the second phase from March 1947 to August 1948, Jiang attacked key targets in China . Jiang changed his tactics from broad attacks to attacking targets .
 Between June and September 1947, the CCP armed forces launched some offensive operations . The main battlefields had by this time moved to the GMD-controlled areas .
 In the spring of 1949, the People's Liberation Army had a total of 17 army groups, including 58 infantry armies, numbering 4 million men . The CCP’s armed forces, or the People’S Liberation Army, now have 4 million people .
 The PLA ordered 1 million troops to cross the Yangzi River on April 21 . The PLA then ordered a million troops cross the river . The move was ordered by the PLA .
 Jiang and the Nationalist army retreated to Taiwan with 800,000 troops . Two days later, Nanjing, the capital of the ROC, fell, and Nanjing fell . Nanjing was Nanjing's capital, and Jiang's army retreated .
 The PLA pressed on in its drive into northwest, southwest, and central China . The PLA continued its drive in the region .
 On October 1, 1949, Mao proclaimed the founding of the People’s Republic of China after the PLA took over the mainland . Mao declared the Chinese Republic in 1949 . The PLA took control of the mainland from 1949 to 1950 .
 Jiang Jieshi removed the seat of his government to Taiwan in 1949 . On December 8, 1949, his government was removed from Taiwan .
 Jiang prepared for the final showdown with Mao in the last battle of the Chinese Civil War . At Taipei, the new capital city of the ROC, Jiang was preparing for the battle with Mao .
 Truman announced that the United States Seventh Fleet would be deployed in the Taiwan Strait to “neutralize” the area . Mao showed extra caution from this point on, and launched no major attack on Taiwan after 1950 .
 In 19541955, the PLA attacked several small offshore islands along the Zhejiang coast . In 1954, the Chinese army attacked several smaller offshore islands . In 1955, the military claimed control of the islands .
 Truman’s order of 1950 became the turning point in the U.S. Taiwan policy . It had a strong impact on the future of the Chinese Nationalist army . The order was a turning point for the United States Taiwan policy in 1950 .
 Truman approved the Defense Department’s request for a financial package of $67. million as military aid to Taiwan and Thailand, $50 million of which was for Taiwan .
 On May 1, the United States “Military Advisory Assistant Group’s” was established in Taiwan . The U.S. military advisory assistant group was established .
 U.S. advisors became actively involved in improving the effectiveness of GMD forces . They reorganized Jiang’s troops into 31 infantry divisions .
 In August, General William Chase, leading advisor of the American group in Taiwan, reported to Washington that he and his advisory group planned to aid and train a total of 600,000 Chinese Nationalist troops .
 The mission of the ROC armed forces has been the defense of Taiwan and other ROC-held islands . Following the lifting of martial law in 1988, the mission has been to protect Taiwan .
 China and Russia share a land border over 4,150 miles long . Nerchinsk and Kiakhta, Treaties of China and Russian share a . land border . Russia and China share a border over . 4,000 miles long.
 The Treaty of Nerchinsk was signed between the Qing dynasty and the Russian government on August 27, 1689 . The treaty was the first treaty between the two disputing nations .
 Russia had established forts at Albazin and KamarskaiArstrog, and in consequence the Chinese believed this was an invasion of their territory . The Chinese attacked both the forts, demolishing them, and the Russians destroyed them . Russia believed the Chinese were invading their territory
 Through the treaty, the Russians released the areas north of the Amur River and the area east of the mouth of the Argun River . But Russia held onto the area between the Argan River and Lake Baikal .
 The treaty also called for reciprocity and the right to travel between the two nations with passports . The treaty was signed by the U.S. and Canada .
 The main purpose of the treaty was to restrict Russia from moving into Manchuria . The treaty was designed to stop Russia moving into the region . It was also intended to stop the flow of Russian troops to Manchia .
 On October 21,1727, the Treaty of Kiakhta, or the “Treaty of the Frontier,” was signed by China’s Qing dynasty and Russian government . The treaty was signed in 1727 .
 This opened up frontier trade and also regulated the settlement of jurisdictional disputes in the process . The settlement of these disputes was also regulated by the British government .
 A Russian embassy was established in Beijing, as was a program to send four youths and two adults to study the Chinese language, and four priests to practice to pursue their religious studies at any one time . A program was also set up in Beijing to send youths, two adults and two priests
 An amendment to the Treaty of Kiakhta came in 1768, further regulating frontier trading and criminal boundaries . An amendment was added to the treaty in 1769, further regulated frontier trading .
 The treaty was amended in 1792 to regulate commerce on the border . It was amended again in 1791 to regulate trade between the two countries .
 Treaties of Nerchinsk and Kiakhta ultimately did not open up China at all . Treaties were merely a step in recognizing the nations as two separate Eastern and Western powers .
 A Western-style army established by the Qing government in the late nineteenth century . New Army established by Qing government established in late 19th century .
 The New Army was organized in a Western pattern, equipped with European weapons, and trained by German or British instructors . It was different from the traditional Manchu banner military system .
 The army failed to defend Beijing against the Eight Foreign Armies’ invasion of China during the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 . The army, however, did not defend Beijing during the Qing dynasty .
 Many of its officers and soldiers joined the anti-Qing movement, the Chinese Revolution of 1911, which eventually ended the Qing Empire . Many of the soldiers and officers joined the movement, many of them later joined the opposition .
 In 1894, China lost its war with Japan, and thereby lost its central position in Asia . China's loss of control of Asia was the result of its defeat in the war .
 In April 1894, the dynasty began to organize, equip, and train a new infantry unit . Xiaozhan is a small town about 20 miles south of Tianjin , northern Hebei Province .
 Yuan Shikai (1859— 1916) took over the training programs in November 1895 . In November 1895, he took control of the training program .
 Governor Zhang Zhidong began to train his Self-Strengthening Army in central Hubei Province in early 1895 . In the meantime, Governor Zhang began training his self-strengthening army .
 The Hubei Army had 13 battalions which were organized along European patterns and trained by a team of 35 German officers . The army was organized in Europe and trained in Europe .
 Yuan's New Army totaled 14,000 men, including 16 infantry battalions, 2 artillery battalions and 2 cavalry battalions . Yuan’s New Army was created in 1899 . Yuan died of his injuries in 1915 .
 8 foreign powers landed 2,000 allied forces at Dagu on June 10, 1900, to fight against the Chinese Boxers and protect Western missionaries . Eight foreign powers were involved in the Boxer Rebellion, which ended in 1900 .
 In early August, most of his troops were eliminated by the allied forces, which occupied Beijing on August 14 . Most of his forces were eliminated in early August .
 The foreign invasion of 1900 and continued Chinese military failure shocked the Qing government . The Qing government was shocked by the failure of the Chinese military .
 Qing government established the ‘Central Training Headquarters’ in Beijing in 1903 . In 1903, the Qing government set up the “Central Training . Headquarters” in Beijing .
 In November 1906, the Department of Army was established to command all the units of the New Army, totaling 200,000 men . It was established in November 1906 to command the units that were part of the Army .
 Yuan had the best army of all, consisting of six infantry divisions, totaling 80,000 troops . Yuan's army consisted of 6 infantry divisions . Yuan was the best of all .
 Yuan also created five officer training schools and military academies in Baoding and Tianjin . Yuan created five academies and created five military schools .
 Military education and formal training was promoted by both European instructors and new technology in the New Army . The New Army was formed from the British Army in 1966 .
 Qing Empire sent more than 1,000 officers to study military practices overseas in 1908 . In 1908, the Qing Empire was sending officers to China to learn military practices .
 The Manchu rulers refused to carry on the reform into military institutions and organization besides buying Western weapons and hiring European instructors . Nevertheless, the New Army did not save the empire because of the Manchu .
 Sun Yat-sen organized the anti-Qing Tongmenghui (or T’ung-meng Hui, the United League) in Japan in 1905 . Many patriotic young Chinese officers joined Sun’s secret society .
 They spread revolutionary ideas from Japan to China by establishing many branches in 17 of the 24 provinces . They spread their revolutionary ideas and organization across China .
 Sun Yat-sen and other revolutionaries negotiated with Yuan in an attempt to avoid civil war . Yuan was offered the presidency of the new republic . Yuan died at the hands of the revolutionaries at the end of the war .
 Marshal Yuan was elected by the provisional government the president of the Republic of China on February 14 . Marshal Yuan is the current leader of the country .
 Yuan reorganized the New Army into the Chinese Revolutionary Army in 1913 . Yuan's New Army was reorganized into a revolutionary army .
 Chinese Revolution of 1911; Eight Foreign Armies’ Invasion of China; Manchus; Qing Dynasty . Qing Dynasty; Qing dynasty; SelfStrengthening Movement; Sino-Japanese War; Sun Yat-sen; Yuan Shikai .
 Ye Ting commanded the New Fourth Army, and Chen Yi was vice political commissar . Chen Yi is the vice-commissar of the Chinese Communist Party of China's Fifth Party Party .
 Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung) conducted a guerrilla campaign in the mountains behind the Japanese lines . As Mao did in Jinggangshan, they conducted guerrilla campaign .
 The units of the New Fourth Army marched to the enemyoccupied territories, where they carried out guerrilla operations and established military and political bases . The units carried out guerillas and established bases .
 The New Fourth Army moved north and south of the Yangzi (Yangtze) River and established bases in southern Jiangsu Province and also north of the river .
 Dongjiang and Qiongya bases were established in Guangdong Province . Further to the south, the Dongjiang, Qionya and Dongjiang bases in Guangzhou Province .
 In each of the bases, the CCP established a government, reduced the peasants’ rents and interest, returned land to poor peasants, and armed the masses . The CCP established the government in each of these bases, reducing the peasants' rents, interest and returning land .
 During these years, many peasants as well as urban residents joined the CCP troops . The CCP troops were active during the early years of the Communist Party .
 In 1939, the New Fourth Army followed the CCP’s strategy and expanded into the areas between Nanjing and Shanghai . In 1939 the Chinese army expanded into areas between Shanghai and Nanjing .
 In order to establish a grassroots united front behind the Japanese lines, the CCP modified their land reform policy, supporting small landlords and wealthy peasants, and cooperating with Jiang’s troops in guerrilla warfare, in a more nationalistic policy .
 The CCP developed its underground network in schools in Japanese-occupied cities . Many college students joined the CCP rather than GMD because of the network .
 CCP underground mobilization and recruitment became accessible for many students who wanted to take part in the ongoing war against Japan . The CCP underground mobilized and recruited many students to join the war effort .
 Some of the artists, writers, and actors also joined the CCP movements through their underground network . CCP movements are based in the United States .
 Mao's wife, Jiang Qing, traveled from Shanghai to Yan’an during the war . Mao’s wife was one of the actors who traveled all the way to Yan'an .
 On January 6-13, 1940, the New Fourth Army was reportedly attacked by the Nationalist army in Jiangsu, China . The New Fourth army reportedly was attacked by Nationalist troops .
 Chen Yi was ordered by the CCP Central Committee to reestablish the New Fourth Army Command and served as its acting commander . After the incident, Chen Yi served as the acting commander of the New Army Command .
 Under his command, the New Fourth Army increased from four divisions to seven in 1945 .
 In 1944-1945, southern ‘liberated areas’ under CCP control launched partial counteroffensives and won important victories against Japan . In 1944/1945, the southern “liberated area’s” under . control launched . partial counteroffsives against Japan
 The Anti-Japanese United Front was established between the two parties in 1937 . The anti-Japanese united front was established in 1937 in order to counterbalance the Japanese government .
 CCP New Fourth Army had enlarged its area of operations in the Yangzi (Yangtze) River delta, including the areas south of the river . CCP New Army enlarged area of operation in Yangzi River delta to include areas south .
 GMD generals feared that the Communists would try to politicize the peasants as the Eighth Route Army had done in north China . GMD officers feared that Communists would politicize peasants as they did in China .
 GMD commands sought to force the New Fourth Army and also part of the CCP Eighth Route Army, driven by the Japanese south of the Yangzi River, back north of the river . The GMD command also sought to make the force of the Chinese army and the CCP's Eighth Route
 GMD officials issued a directive on December 9, 1940, demanding that the Communists withdraw their forces north of the Yangzi River by December 31, 1940 .
 They attempted to win mass support to remain south of the river . Indeed, they attempted to stay south of that river .
 On January 4, 1941, seven Nationalist divisions surrounded and attacked the headquarters force of some 9,000 New Fourth Army troops near Maolin .
 During heavy fighting from January 7-13, 1941, Nationalist forces killed about 3,000 New Fourth Army troops and captured the remainder of the remainder . During the battle, about 4,000 troops were killed and captured .
 On January 17, 1941, the government of Jiang Jieshi dissolved the New Fourth Army and closed CCP military liaison offices in many GMDheld cities . The government closed many of the military liaisons in many cities .
 Although this incident dealt a serious blow to the Communist effort in central China, it was also an advantage to the revolutionary cause . The incident was also a victory for the revolutionary movement .
 Despite brutal Japanese pacification campaigns in the region between 1941 and 1945, the New Fourth Army survived into the postwar period when it profited from its long familiarity with the region .
 Under the new command, the New Fourth Army increased from four divisions to seven divisions in 1945 .
 The New Fourth Army Incident provided the Communists with a powerful propaganda tool by which they could present themselves as martyred patriots . Also, the Communists also used the incident as a propaganda tool . The incident was a major propaganda tool for the Communists .
 Mao Zedong proclaimed that key elements in Chongqing wanted to substitute civil war for the War of Resistance against Japan . Mao's government wanted civil war to replace civil war with war of resistance against Japan, Zedong said .
 No single event during the entire Anti-Japanese War did more to elicit sympathy for the CCP and establish its patriotic credentials both at home and abroad than the New Fourth Army Incident of January 1941 .
 The Nian Rebellion began in 1851 and lasted until 1868 . It was one in a series of uprisings that rocked the Qing dynasty to its foundations . Nian rebellion was one of a series that rocked Qing dynasty .
 Although ultimately suppressed, the rebellion contributed to the ongoing process of an increased militarization of Chinese society and the burgeoning power of the provinces . The rebellion was ultimately suppressed .
 Groups known by the name “Nian,” a term that possibly refers to a small group of peasant outlaws, were active in the border areas of Shandong , Flenan , Anhui , and Jiangsu Provinces .
 Those groups had little in the way of unifying ideology, goals, or organization . Some were salt smugglers, while others were associated with the White Lotus or Triad secret societies .
 Most were merely rootless men, some of whom were unable to marry and settle down due to the gender imbalance that resulted from the widespread practice of female infanticide . Some of the men were merely rootedless men .
 The ranks of the Nian swelled in the early 1850s when a series of floods, culminating in the devastating 1855 flood of the Yellow River, increased poverty in the region .
 Tens of thousands of Nian created secure bases and rode their horses across the region to plunder, pillage, and extort protection money from the local populace . Proclaiming Zhang to be Lord of the Alliance and, more ominously for the Qing government, Great Han Prince with the
 The military implications of the Nian Rebellion were severe for the Qing government . The Nian rebellion was the largest uprising in China's history of the Qing dynasty .
 Unlike past uprisings by the Nian and other bands, Zhang imposed on them a “banner system” of organization . Various Nian families and factions would be grouped under a colored flag representing their clan .
 Each banner was a loose, rudimentary formation that suited the nomadic raiders perfectly . The banner was yellow, blue, white, red, and black . It was used to conduct raids across the length of northwestern China .
 Zhang personally defeated several large imperial forces sent to oppose him . The 50,000 Nian were splendid horsemen and ferocious fighters, Zhang said . Zhang was able to defeat imperial forces .
 The mobile guerrilla techniques of the Nian were a tremendous challenge to the traditional armies of the Qing dynasty . The mobile, guerrilla techniques were a challenge to traditional armies .
 Qing government appointed Mongol general Senggelinqin to destroy Nian in 1860 . Nian activities obstructed efforts to suppress the larger Taiping Rebellion to the south .
 He was successful in trapping and killing Zhang in 1863 . Leading a joint Mongol-Manchu cavalry force, he was successful .
 The Nian continued their resistance and refined their tactics . However, appointing new leaders, the Nian continue their resistance .
 The Qing appointed the hero of the Taiping campaign, Zeng Guofan, to put down the Nian . The Qing then appointed Zeng to put them down . The Nian was defeated by the Qing .
 Zeng's strategy of surrounding the Nian with a series of bases was moderately successful but suffered from local opposition and a lack of troops . Zeng’s strategy was successful but was hampered by local opposition .
 Zeng eventually acceded to his protege, Li Hongzhang, whose larger Huai Army was better suited to suppress the Nian . Zeng's successor was Li's successor, the leader of the Huai army .
 Li and his forces chased rebels across northern China and eventually triumphed in a war of attrition . Li's forces chased the rebels across the country and won the war by defeating them .
 Li’s well-paid, well-trained troops destroyed the main Nian forces by 1868 . Using modem rifles and gunboats, Li used modem rifles, gunboats to defeat the Nian .
 Li was one of the most prominent and powerful officials of the Qing dynasty . Li would subsequently rise to become one of China's most prominent officials . Over the next three decades, Li would rise to be a powerful official .
 Although suppressed, the Nian Rebellion effected significant change in late Qing China . The Nian rebellion effected significant changes in the late Qing era .
 The activities of the Nian rebels and the attempts of local towns and villages to increase their security increased the general level of militarization of China . China has been militarized since the start of the year .
 Qing’s reliance on Zeng and Li to suppress the rebels was an indication of how power was shifting away from the center to the provinces . The Qing relied heavily on Li and Zeng in suppressing the rebels .
 Banner System; Guerrilla Warfare; Han Dynasty; Manchu; Mongols; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Small Sword Society; Taiping Rebellion . Taiping . Rebellion; White Lotus Rebellion; Zeng Guofan. Banner System . Han Dynasty: Manchu,
 Nie Rongzhen is one of the top Chinese Communist leaders and military commanders . He was one of China's top military commanders and Communist Party leaders .
 Nie joined the CCP in 1922 and was sent to the Soviet Union to study the military and defense industry in 1924-1925 . Born in Jiangjin County, Sichuan Province, in 1899, Nie was born in 1899 .
 He became a deputy director of the Red Army’s Political Department in the late 1920s . He was political commissar of its First Army Group in the Long March of 1934-1935 .
 During the Anti-Japanese War (1937— 1945), Nie served as commander and political commissar of the North China Military Region . Nie was commander of the anti-Japanese war during the Chinese Civil War .
 Nie protected CCP headquarters by defeating the Nationalist attacks . He personally saved Mao’s life once in an air raid . Nie became one of Mao's closest working colleagues and trusted generals .
 He ran the General Staff because Zhou Enlai (Chou En-lai) was preoccupied as the PRC’s premier and foreign minister . He ran it because Zhou was preoccupying as the Foreign Minister and Prime Minister .
 After the Korean War broke out in June, Nie paid special attention to the intelligence work . Nie was a major intelligence officer at the time .
 Nie utilized every possible means to obtain timely information on all aspects of the front . Nie used to use the term "Nie" to refer to the front.
 During the Korean War, as Mao’s senior aide in Beijing, Nie shared the responsibility of war preparation, training, and mobilization . Nie was Mao's senior aide at the time of the war .
 Mao asked Nie and the General Staff to focus on the CPVF, Chinese Army, in early October . Mao made the decision to send the Chinese People’s Volunteer Force (CPVF) to the Korean War . Mao and Nie were ordered to concentrate on the
 Nie took part in high command decision making, planned major operations, and shared the responsibility of mobilization, transportation, rotation, and logistics . Meeting Mao on a daily basis, Nie met with him daily .
 From 1951 to 1953, Nie faced big problems in the logistics of the CPVF which consumed an unprecedented amount of war materiel . Nie was forced to take over a huge amount of wartime materiel from 1951-1953 .
 During the first two offensives, the CPVF only met 25 percent of the food needs of its front-line troops . The first two of the off-ensues were held by the CPF only .
 In January 1951, Nie went to Manchuria, chaired the meetings, visited the logistics depots, and solved some of the problems . Nie's visit to China in January 1951 helped solve the problems of the Korean peninsula .
 Nie and the General Staff made a purchase plan to buy weapons and equipment from the Soviet Union to arm 60 Chinese infantry divisions to meet wartime demand . Nie made the purchase plan in March . The plan was approved by Nie for 60 divisions .
 The Soviet Union delivered arms and equipment for 10 divisions in 1951, 16 divisions in 1952, and 40 divisions in 1953 . After the negotiations, the Soviets delivered weapons and equipment to the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets also shared technology for the production of rifles, machine guns, and artillery pieces, improving the CPVF supplies in the war . The Soviets shared technology with the Soviets to improve their supplies during the war.
 More than 6 million tons of supplies were shipped into Korea during the war . More than six million tons were shipped in during the Korean War .
 Between 1950 and 1953, China’s military spending represented 41 percent, 43 percent, 33 percent, and 34 percent of its total government annual budget . China's military spending represents 41 percent .
 After 1954, Nie was one of the party’s top 11 leaders as a member of the Standing Committee of the CCP Politburo . Nie is one of China's top 11 party leaders after 1954 .
 Nie then headed China’s nuclear and missile programs as director of the National Commission of Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense from 1958 to 1967 . In 1958, when the Chinese leadership decided to build their own atomic bombs, Nie headed the country's nuclear program .
 He served as chairman of the National Defense Science and Technology Committee . Then he served as director of the CCP Central Committee’s Science Commission . He was also chairman of National Defense science and technology Committee .
 CCP combined the Eighth Route Army with provincial military forces to assemble conventional forces into standing field armies that were supported by militia and guerrilla elements . Abandoning designations that the CCP adopted after joining the GMD forces during the United Front, the CCP high-commandeers combined conventional forces with provincial
 In May 1948, the Shanxi-Chahar-Hebei and Shanxi Military Districts merged to become the North China Military District . The North China military district was formed in May 1948 .
 Nie Rongzhen served as commander and Bo Yibo was the political commissar . Nie was the commander of the Chinese army . Bo was also the political commissar of the Chinese government .
 North China Military District never officially organized a standing field army, but its forces were unofficially known as the North China Field Army . Unlike other military districts, the district's forces were known as "North China Field"
 In the fall of 1948, the Military District consisted of three armies, two independent columns, and seven subdistricts . The district was composed mainly of militia, irregulars, and other support personnel .
 The First Army was commanded by Xu Xiangqian, the Second Army by Yang Dezhi, and the Third Army . The First and Second armies were led by Yang Chengwu . The Third and Fourth armies were commanded by Yang Xiangqi .
 The North China Field Army’s main action of note was during the BeipingTianjin Campaign . The Chinese Field Army was involved in the Chinese Civil War in China .
 Lirst Army was besieging Yan Xishan’s army in Taiyuan, the capital city of Shanxi Province, when Fu Zuoyi was forced to stay in place . During this time, the Lirst army scaled back its operations to confuse Fu .
 After the Communist victory in Pingjin, Xu Xiangqian captured Taiyuan in the spring of 1949, thus clearing the final GMD army from the north China plain . The Chinese Communist Party captured the city in 1949 .
 After these victories, the three armies were redesignated the Eighteenth, Nineteenth and Twentieth Armies respectively, and their formal association with north China was eliminated .
 The Eighteenth and Nineteenth Army Groups moved to northwest China, while the Twentieth Army Group remained in the capital region to guard Beijing .
 In January 1949, the CMC established four field armies, including the First Field Army in the northwest, the Second in central China, the Third in eastern China, and the Fourth (disi yezhanjun) in the northeast .
 Each field army had two to four army groups, and each army group had two- to four armies . Each army group was divided into two armies, with each army having two armies .
 To continue the CCP victory of the Chinese Civil War in northwest China, the CMC reinforced more armies into the First Field Army . The CMC will continue to win the Chinese civil war .
 The Eighteenth Army Group under the command of Zhou Shidi, including the Sixtieth, Sixty-First, and SixtySecond Armies, joined the First Field Army in 1949 .
 The Nineteenth Army Group under the command of Yang Dezhi, including the Sixty-Third, SixtyFourth, and S60-Fifth Armies, joined the First Field Army during that summer .
 By this time, the total number of the First Field Army had reached 344,000 troops . By the end of the Second World War, the army had been at an all-time high level .
 Liu Yu’s usurping of the Eastern Jin dynasty and the establishment of the Southern Song in 420, ended with Sui's overturning Southern Chen in 589 . The Southern Song was established by Liu Yu in 420 and ended by Sui in the 589th century .
 After the Southern Song dynasty (420479), there were three successive dynasties in south China; the Qi dynasty , Liang dynasty , and Chen dynasty are known as Southern dynasts . The Qi dynasty, Liang dynasty and Chen Dynasty are all called Southern .
 Emperor Wu Liu Song was a general of the Eastern Jin dynasty that deposed his emperor and established the Southern Song dynasty . He was one of the generals who deposed him and established his dynasty .
 Shao was later deemed unfit to lead and deposed, with his younger brother Wen taking control in 424 .
 Emperor Wen’s reign was marked by increasing prosperity, though that prosperity was shaken when he began to attack the Northern Wei dynasty . Emperor Wen began the reign of Emperor Wen in the early years of his reign .
 Song dynasty was left in a weakened position after his inability to conquer his rival . Song was unable to defeat his rival, leaving the Song dynasty weakened .
 Lasting for only 23 years, the dynasty was plagued with severe infighting . The dynasty was also plagued by infighting and infighting in the 1980s .
 Rebellions ensued and the Qi dynasty was overthrown, replaced by the Southern Liang dynasty . The Liang dynasty was eventually overthrown by the Qi .
 Many of his officials became corrupt, and several rebellions were brought against him . However, many of them became corrupt and many rebellions against him were fought against .
 Chen Baxian eventually defeated the Liang dynasty and established the Chen dynasty . The Liang dynasty was established in China . The Chen dynasty was defeated by Liang and established by Chen .
 After years of infighting, the economy of the nation was badly damaged, and local separatists fought constantly with Chen . The economy of China is badly damaged .
 Sui dynasty from the north occupied the Chen capital of Jiankang, putting an end to the regime and ending the division of China . In 589, the Sui dynast dynasty occupied the city, ending the reign of the Chen dynasty .
 Emperor Xiaowen was son of a Chinese mother and Xianbei father . Emperor wanted to increase Chinese cultural influence . He initiated a program to increase cultural influence in China .
 During the late period of Northern Wei, the government experienced severe corruption . Northern Wei was known for its corruption policies .
 After several uprisings, the dynasty was split into Eastern Wei and Western Wei . The dynasty was later split into Western Wei and Eastern Wei .
 The Sui dynasty conquered Southern Chen, reuniting the north and south in 589 . Sui and Southern Chen were conquered by the Sui Dynasty .
 Fei River, Battle of; Sui Dynasty; Tang Dynasty . Tang Gaozong, Emperor; Three Kingdoms; Zhou Dynasty . Sui . Dynasty . Three Kingdoms . Zhou Dynasty.
 The Northern Expedition was a military campaign led by the National Revolutionary Army under Jiang Jieshi . The campaign lasted from 1926 to 1928 . Jiang was the leader of the Chinese revolutionary movement .
 Jiang’s National Revolution Army numbered over 100,000 and were better trained than their warlord counterparts . Jiang's army was better trained and better equipped than those of his warlords counterparts .
 Railroad workers recruited to disrupt transportation services in enemy-held territory . Railroad workers were also recruited to destabilize transportation services .
 Many peasants were utilized as porters to carry the vast amounts of supplies that would be needed for the expedition . Many peasants used to carry large amounts of food and supplies .
 Several warlord commanders began feuding amongst each other, and one Hunan commander began to express sympathy for the Northern Expedition . The Northern Expedition was the first of its kind .
 Jiang Jieshi decided that the time was ripe to begin the attack . This commander agreed to integrate his troops into the Guomindang army, and Jiang decided to attack .
 The mobilization order was given on July 1, 1926, and the Nationalist troops began to head out . The mobilization began in 1926 .
 By the end of August, Nationalist forces seized many bridgeheads that guarded the approaches to Wuhan, and more warlord forces began joining Jiang’s army .
 On the approach to Wuchang, the warlord who controlled the city put up strong resistance . The warlord's son was killed by a bomb blast in the city in August 2011 .
 Attempting to hold out against the Nationalists, the warlord instituted severe punishment of those deemed sympathetic to the enemy .
 After rounding up the suspects, he began beheading them and displayed the severed heads in the surrounding lake cities of Jiujiang and Nanchang in Jiangxi Province .
 After a siege, the populace was on the brink of starvation . After a prolonged siege, however, the siege was over and out of control .
 The warlord finally relented on October 10 and allowed Nationalist troops to take the city . Nationalist forces finally took control of the city on October 11 .
 By late 1926, GMD and Communist forces consolidated control over Wuhan . GMD began to turn their attention toward Jiangxi, Jiangxi .
 The successes of the Northern Expedition led to diplomatic recognition of the Guomindang government . The British sent a minister to China to hold talks with Nationalist foreign minister .
 Nationalist forces next began to turn their attention toward Shanghai, and at the beginning of 1927, arguments broke out among the various commanders on how to approach the city . The city was occupied by the Chinese nationalists in 1927 .
 Labor unions, who were hostile to the local warlord, made strong headway in Shanghai during this time .
 In February 1927, these labor unions organized a general strike to support the Nationalist forces, but were put down by warlord forces . Warlord forces beheaded the leaders and put the end their meetings .
 Many Shanghai city leaders met in secret with Jiang Jieshi and offered him their support . This produced a backlash, with many city leaders meeting with him and offering him support .
 On March 21,1927, workers once again launched a strike and also began an armed insurrection against their warlord . Workers once again started an armed revolt against the warlord.
 Jiang consolidated the national government of the Republic of China in April 1927 . In April 1927, Jiang carried out a purge of Communists from his Nationalist forces . Jiang was the leader of the Nationalist Party in China .
 Jiang was forced to surrender control over his posts in Wuhan, China . This, coupled with other hostilities with leaders, forced him to surrender his posts .
 After a series of political maneuvers, he was proclaimed commander in chief in January 1928 . He was later declared commander in charge of the Philippines .
 Fighting intensified in March of that year in an effort to wrest control of Beijing from its warlord ruler . Fighting intensified on the outskirts of Beijing in an attempt to oust the ruler .
 Warlord leader Zhang Zuolin made his way out of the city, and the Nationalist forces successfully occupied Beijing . Deciding to flee, the warlord leader made his own escape .
 By the end of 1928, the Warlord Period came to an end, and the GMD brought an era of stability to China .
 A research and development program of the People’s Republic of China created in the mid-1950s to use atomic bombs as strategic weapons system .
 Washington's threat of using atomic weapons against Chinese troops in North Korea and northeast China was of immediate concern to Beijing in 1952-1953 . Washington’s threat to use atomic weapons on Chinese troops against North Korean troops in N. Korea and . northeast China .
 With no strategic weapons, China had to depend on ‘nuclear protection” from the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union had developed atomic weapons in the late 1940s . China had had to rely on "nuclear protection"
 After Stalin, Soviet Cold War policy changed by calling for a relaxation of international tensions and peaceful coexistence between the “communist camp” and the free world . The Soviet policy changed after Stalin .
 During the 1954—1955 Taiwan Strait crisis, Moscow complained about the aggressive Chinese actions . Moscow expressed its unwillingness to use atomic weapons in case the United States retaliated over the PLA’s invasion .
 The PRC could be bullied or even invaded by any Western power equipped with an atomic bomb . It could be used to bully or even invade any major Western power with a bomb .
 A great country like China needed its own nuclear weapons to demonstrate its abilities, achievements, and prosperity, says the Chinese president . A great nation like China needs its own nukes to show its abilities and prosperity .
 Chinese leaders believed that their country was vulnerable to blackmail or blackmail and concluded that it needed its own bomb . Thus, the Chinese leaders .
 Mao called an enlarged meeting of the CCP Central Secretariat to discuss starting China’s nuclear weapons program in early January 1955 . Mao called the enlarged meeting in January 1955 to discuss the start of the nuclear program .
 Zhou Enlai held an ‘unusual seminar’ in his office that included leading scientists . Zhou held the “unusual” seminar in China’s capital, Beijing, on Friday .
 Zhou invited them to brief Mao and other top leaders the next day . Zhou invited the group to brief him and Mao the next morning . Zhou was Zhou's first president of the Communist Party of China .
 Mao stated that it was definitely time for the party and government to work seriously on this matter . Mao also said that it is definitely time to get serious about the issue . Mao said that the government and the party should work seriously about this issue .
 In the spring of 1955, China’s nuclear program began to “acquire content and direction,” and the most important organizational decisions followed that summer . In the summer of that summer, China's nuclear program became the focus of most important decisions .
 In July, the Politburo appointed three of its members, Chen Yun , Marshal Nie Rongzhen (1899— 1992), and Bo Yibo, as national leaders for nuclear research and development .
 In 1955, this ThreeMember Group established a new ministry under the State Council, the Second Ministry of Machine Building and the Fifth Academy . The ministry was set up in 1955 .
 The Second Ministry was in charge of atomic and hydrogen bomb development . The Fifth Academy was responsible for missile and space technology . The Second and Fifth Ministry were responsible for nuclear and missile technology .
 As China’s NASA, the Fifth Academy later changed to the Seventh Ministries of Machine Building in the 1960s and the Space and Navigation Ministry in the 1980s . The Fifth Academy was China's Fifth Academy .
 On November 4, 1955, the Three-Member Group drafted China’s first plan for its nuclear program . Proposal for the Atomic Energy Cause was drafted by China's Three-member Group .
 The Three-Member Group also formed the Third Bureau, Bureau of Architecture and Technology, and other officers in the central government .
 China’s budget for research and technology rose from about US$15 million in 1955 to US$100 million in 1956 . China spent US$150 million in 1950s on research, technology research .
 In 1956, he worked with the China Academy of Science to establish the Nuclear Research Institute in charge of theoretical analysis, scientific experiments, research design, and solving problems sent in by the industrial ministries .
 The PLA sent military representatives to the CAS research institutes, labs, and manufacturing facilities for security, inspection, and quality control .
 The Soviets agreed to discuss their technology and material assistance to China’s nuclear weapons program in the fall of 1956 . After a long wait, the Soviets finally agreed to talk about their assistance to the Chinese program .
 In August, Nie approached Soviet representatives in Beijing and asked for missile technology training . The Soviets agreed to train some Chinese officials for executive management for a future Chinese nuclear research institute .
 Fifty Chinese accepted for administrative training for a year in Russia in Russia . Fifty Chinese were accepted for the training for the year .
 On August 17, the two governments signed an agreement that the Soviets would aid the Chinese in building their nuclear industries and research facilities . The deal was signed by the Soviets and the Chinese government .
 On December 19, the Soviets agreed to assist China’s independent management of its uranium surveys . The Soviets agreed on December 19 to help China manage its own uranium surveys.
 The Chinese marshal requested more Soviet aid in nuclear and missile technology . The request was denied by the Soviet Union in the 1980s . China requested Soviet aid from the Soviets to help develop nuclear technology .
 On July 20, Nie received word that the Soviet government was willing to negotiate with the Chinese government in Moscow . Nie says he received word in July that the Soviets were willing to meet with China in Moscow.
 In September, Nie led a delegation to Moscow, including Senior Generals Chen Geng and Song Renqiong, and attended 35 days of meetings . Nie was invited to Moscow for 35 days in September to attend meetings .
 On October 15, the Chinese and Soviets signed the “New Defense Technical Accord” for Soviet aid in nuclear research, missile development, and aviation technology . The accord was signed by China and the Soviet Union for nuclear research .
 The Soviet Union supplied China with a prototype atomic bomb and sold industrial equipment for the processing and enrichment of uranium . Thereafter, the Soviet Union provided China with an atomic bomb .
 Chinese nuclear scientists studied and worked at the Soviet labs . Meanwhile, Chinese scientists worked for the Soviets at the same time .
 Soviet aid and Sino-Soviet cooperation were substantial for China to start its nuclear and missile programs . China's nuclear program was largely funded by the Soviet Union .
 China sent its science and technology delegation, headed by CAS president Guo Moruo, to Moscow in December 1957 . In December 1957, China sent a delegation to Moscow, headed for the first time .
 The Chinese delegation signed an agreement for more science and technology aid . The deal was signed by the Chinese delegation .
 From 1957 to 1959, the Soviets provided the Chinese with atomic testing data, missile designs and samples, and other research information . The Soviets gave the Chinese the information, including atomic test data .
 In December 1957, a Soviet-made P-2 surface-to-surface shortrange missile arrived in Beijing . The missile was the first to arrive in China in December 1957 .
 In early 1958, Russian nuclear and missile experts began to arrive in Beijing, China . The Fifth Academy began to copy the Soviet model .
 As part of the 1950s military reform, the Soviet Union greatly influenced China’s nuclear and missile weapons program from its inception . The Soviets refused to offer data on their nuclear-powered submarines .
 China completed its first nuclear reactor near Beijing in 1958 . In 1958, with Soviet help, China completed the first reactor in the country .
 Defense Ministry sent 40,000 engineering troops to northwest China to construct a nuclear testing ground . In January 1958, China's Defense Ministry built a nuclear test ground .
 The CMC decided on Lop Nur, an area of nearly 100,000 square miles, as the nuclear testing ground . The CMP decided on the area, which is nearly 100-square miles, to be a test ground .
 By the late 1950s, China’s nuclear, missile, and space programs were fully under way . China's nuclear and missile programs were under way in the 1950s .
 In June 1959, the Soviet Union met at Geneva with the United States and Britain on partially banning the use of nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union and the U.S. agreed to partially ban nuclear weapons in June 1959 .
 On July 16, the Soviet government informed the Chinese government that it would withdraw all of its nuclear scientists and experts from China . The move was announced on July 16 . The Soviet government said it would pull all its nuclear experts and experts .
 By August 13, 1960, all of the 12,000 Soviet experts left China with their blueprints and designs . All of the blueprints were left behind by the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets also stopped shipments of the equipment and materials that the Chinese nuclear program desperately needed . The Soviets stopped shipments to China in the 1980s .
 The end of the Soviet aid in technology and materials almost scuttled China’s four-year-old nuclear and missile programs . China has been dogged by problems since the end of Soviet aid .
 The Central Committee agreed that China should continue its nuclear research and development without interruption due to the Soviet withdrawal . The Central Party agreed to continue its research without interruption .
 The meeting named the new proposal “Project 596,” which symbolized the time, June 1959, when the Soviets withdrew all technology and personnel from the Soviet Union . The proposal was named Project 596 after the Soviet withdrawal of all technology .
 China had its first successful nuclear test on October 16, 1964, with an estimated yield of over 22 kilotons of TNT . The test was about twice the power of the Hiroshima bomb .
 The direct expenses up to that date (from 1955 to 1964) were estimated at $1 billion for nuclear bomb research, development, manufacturing, and testing . The direct cost of the nuclear bomb program was estimated to be $1billion .
 Through the decade, the annual cost of the nuclear R&D was $100 million a year, about 5 percent of China’s annual defense budget . The nuclear program is about 5 per cent of China's annual defense spending .
 After the third nuclear test on May 9, 1966, China began to test rockets carrying warheads . China began testing rockets with warheads after the first nuclear test .
 The first carrier rocket (delivery system) was successfully tested on June 29 . The launch of the rocket was the first of its kind to be carried out .
 Nie supervised both tests and stayed at the testing range for three months . Nie was the first person to supervise both tests .
 On September 23, 1969, China conducted its first underground nuclear test . The test took place in China's first underground test in September 1969 . China conducted the first nuclear test in 1969 .
 First group of operational nuclear warheads and missiles delivered to the Second Artillery Corps . In that year, the first group of warheads and missile missiles were delivered . First operational warheads were delivered to Second Army in 1945 .
 Thereafter, the Chinese military possessed nuclear and strategic weapons . The Chinese military now possesses nuclear, strategic and nuclear weapons .
 By the 1970s, China had become an independent nuclear weapons producer . The country continued to develop and build more advanced strategic weapons .
 The genesis of the Open Door Policy can be traced back to the mid-nineteenth century . It gained renewed interest at the turn of the twentieth century and is most associated with U.S. secretary of state John Hay .
 The British first conceptualized and enunciated an open door policy in the aftermath of the First Opium War . The policy was created in the wake of the conflict over trading rights .
 In a series of treaties negotiated between the British government and Chinese officials, both sides agreed—in principle at least—that China should be open to trade . Both sides agreed in principle that China should not promulgate policies antithetical to that goal .
 Great Britain was determined to keep the fabled China market open to Western interests . This era was the commencement of Western imperial interests in China, and Great Britain wanted to keep it open .
 European leaders tacitly recognized the principle of the open door when they concluded that no African colonial power should erect trade barriers in the Congo . During the 1885 Berlin Conference, European leaders agreed to open the door .
 The conference did little to suppress the mad dash for African colonies, but it did institute measures to prevent great-power economic rivalry in the region .
 The American enunciation of the Open Door policy came chiefly as a result of the Spanish-American War and the annexation of the Philippines and Guam, which for the first time made the United States an East Asian colonial power .
 William McKinley (1843— 1901) administration embraced the Open Door Policy . McKinley's administration was led by the "Open Door" policy .
 American policy makers feared that a China divided into competing spheres of influence would be disastrous for U.S. territorial and colonial interests in the Far East . First, as imperial competition and economic rivalry in China heated up, American policy .
 Many U.S. policy makers viewed the opening of markets in China as key to American economic prosperity . But the power of the China market in this era was greatly exaggerated, he says .
 The U.S. did not have the ability to effectively project its military power in Asia at the turn of the century . The United States had a credible naval deterrent in the Western Hemisphere .
 The Open Door Policy was seen as a substitute for U.S. military hegemony in China . The policy is seen as an alternative to the United States military hegemony .
 The thrust of his dispatches was a plea that all nations have equal access to trade and commerce in China . The thrust was to urge all nations to be able to trade with China .
 The British, who had already applied the Open Door Policy in their own affairs, affirmed their commitment to the policy in China .
 The five other nations, however, were studiously noncommittal to the proposal . The five nations are studiously notcommittal .
 The unrest alarmed nations that had significant interests in China, especially since the moribund Qing dynasty was all but powerless to stop the rebellion .
 The unrest seemed poised to spur even more imperial rivalry in China as the Japanese and European nations threatened to tighten their grip on the country . The unrest is poised to spark even more Imperial rivalry in the country, according to reports .
 Hay sent another letter to the six nations in July 1900 . Hay sent a letter to each other in response to the letter . Hay's letter was the first to send a letter back to the world's six nations .
 In it he implored all nations involved to respect China’s territorial integrity and to keep trade there open and unfettered .
 U.S. received generally supportive—although still vague— replies to Hay’s initiative . This time, the United States got generally supportive responses to Hay's initiative .
 McKinley administration seized on this apparent success and declared that all of the involved powers had agreed—in principle— to maintaining an open door in China . Be that as it may, it may .
 Most of the major imperial powers continued to erect miniature empires in China . As it turned out, this was mere rhetorical window dressing .
 The idea of an American commitment to a free and open China fed the perception that the Americans had a special relationship with the Chinese . Interestingly enough, the idea of a U.S. commitment to an open China for many years fed the .
 McKinley’s successor, Theodore Roosevelt, invoked it in 1902 upon Russian usurpations in Manchuria . The Open Door Policy was something of an illusion, but was invoked by Roosevelt .
 After the 1904-1905 RussoJapanese War, U.S. officials promised mutual cooperation in Manchuria . American and Japanese officials promised cooperation in the region .
 In 1909, the United States sponsored a multinational financing consortium through which all loans to Chinese railroads would be processed . The U.S. sponsored the Open Door Policy in 1909, when it was introduced to China .
 By 1917, U.S. commitment to free trade in China had been called into question by Japan's policies . The 1917 LansingIshii Agreement was in which the United States recognized Japanese spheres of influence in China .
 By the mid-1920s, the concept of an open door in China was mere fantasy, and by 1931, it was a dead issue when Japan seized Manchuria and annexed it .
 In the aftermath of World War II, the principles of the Open Door Policy gained new life on a global scale . Western democracies championed free trade as a result .
 Western policy makers engaged in a number of institutional mechanisms to foster free and unfettered trade . Believing that economic autarky and spheres of influence had helped ignite World War II, Western policy made policy mechanisms .
 The idea was to prevent economic rivalry from driving a wedge between nations, which would thereby lessen the likelihood of war . It was designed to stop economic rivalry driving nations to war .
 Policy makers recognized that major trading partners were much less likely to go to war with a nation with which they enjoyed significant trade . Policy makers also said that major trade partners were less likely likely to be at risk of going to war .
 Most believed that free trade would help generate general prosperity among all nations . Free trade would serve to stabilize national economies in times of economic uncertainty, most believed .
 Opium War, First Military conflict between China and Britain over trade and opium trafficking during the first half of the nineteenth century . Opium war was first military conflict between Britain and China over trade .
 The Qing Dynasty was defeated and signed the Treaty of Nanjing , which opened China to British trade . The treaty was signed in Nanjing, which opened the door to Chinese trade .
 The First Opium War was the most significant single event in the history of modem China . The war was the first opium war between China and China .
 In the eighteenth century, the Qing leadership limited contact with the West to trade, with no diplomatic relationship . In the 18th century, there were no diplomatic relations between China and the West .
 Guangzhou is the only city open to all Western trade . Foreign trade had to go through the ‘Cohong’ (government agency) at Guangzhou . Guangzhou had to be inspected by the government agency .
 China maintained a surplus by exporting tea and silk through the port of Guangzhou . Westerners had to pay hard currency for the Chinese goods .
 British merchants suffered a deficit in China trade during the First Opium War . The war started because the British were intent on smuggling opium into China, despite that country's ban on opium .
 London sent government officials to Guangzhou in 1834 to oversee the British commercial activities and improve its China trade . After the collapse of the British East India Company’s trade monopoly in East Asia in the 1820s, London sent officials in Guangzhou .
 The Qing’s Manchu rulers’ closeddoor policy made China more passive on the whole . The Qing's closed doors policy made the country more passive and more passive .
 Tension began when Chinese local officials refused to communicate with the British superintendent of trade in China or accept the British suggestion for negotiating a trade agreement .
 British officials looked for cooperative opportunities between the two governments . The Cohong stopped British trade between China and the United States .
 When the Cohong system no longer controlled trade, British and Chinese merchants began to smuggle and trade outside of Guangzhou . The Cohong trading system was abolished when it was no longer under control .
 Another major reason for tension between Britain and China was the opium trade . The opium trade was a major source of tension between the two countries .
 A British opium trade began in the eighteenth century when opium smoking became popular in Britain . Opium smoking was a popular form of smoking in the early 1800s .
 The annual smuggled opium from India to China, estimated at 1,000 chests in 1790, increased to 4,500 chests in 1821 and totaled 40,000 in 1838 . The annual smuggling of opium to China from India increased to 40,500 .
 The opium addiction corrupted politicians, undermined military morale, and caused many social and health problems . The addiction has corrupted politicians and undermined the military morale .
 Millions of dollars in silver was shipped out of China in the opium trade . The opium trade resulted in millions of dollars of silver being shipped out .
 By the middle of the 1820s, the balance of trade was reversed and China had a trade deficit . By the mid-1820s the balance had been reversed and the trade deficit was down .
 This subsequent loss of revenue led to inflation and endangered domestic trade . The loss of trade led to an increase in inflation and a loss of tax revenue .
 Qing emperors took steps to ban opium smoking and trade by issuing imperial orders repeatedly in the early 1800s . In response to the opium smoking ban, the emperors issued imperial orders to ban the trade .
 Western suppliers, Chinese dealers, and opium users ignored Beijing’s prohibition . But the local officials did not enforce imperial orders . Western suppliers and dealers ignored Beijing's prohibition .
 Emperor Daoguang (reigned 1821-1850) decided to adopt a tougher policy to suppress the opium trade . He maintained the traditional tribute system of foreign relations .
 The emperor appointed Governor Lin Zexu as a special commissioner to stop the trade . The emperor also appointed a special official in China to stop it .
 Commissioner Lin Zexu launched an aggressive campaign against opium smoking and smuggling in Guangzhou in 1839 . The campaign was launched against opium and smuggling .
 Within a couple of weeks, many of the Chinese dealers and addicts were jailed, and some of them were executed . Some of the addicts and dealers were executed.
 Western merchants ignored Lin’s order to hand over their opium holdings . The Western merchants, however, did not comply with the order . Lin ordered the opium seizures to be returned to China .
 Western merchants spent six weeks in detention until Charles Elliot promised to compensate them . The British government promised the merchants that the British government would compensate their loss .
 The British merchants delivered 21,306 chests of opium stocks by May 18 . Lin released the foreigners after they delivered the opium stocks .
 The entire British community moved to Macao on May 24 and waited there for British action . The British community is waiting in Macao for the British government to act .
 Lin publicly destroyed all the British opium at Humen, a waterfront town outside Guangzhou, in June . In June, Lin publicly burned all the opium in Humen .
 In August, he ordered the expulsion of all British residents from Macao . Macao has been ruled by the Chinese government since 2003 .
 Commissioner Lin banned all British trade in China on December 6 . After a series of skirmishes between the Chinese and British, the ban was lifted .
 Lin became a major Chinese hero in this first effort to resist Western aggression . Lin became an important figure in China's struggle to resist its own rule of law . Lin was a major hero for his efforts to resist the West .
 Britain declared war on China on January 31, 1840 . To protect its merchants and expand its trading rights to the Chinese market, the British government declared war . The British government expanded trading rights in China .
 In June, British troops arrived at Guangzhou and noticed that Commissioner Lin and his garrison were well prepared for defense .
 On June 30, Elliot ordered his troops to sail north along the coast and bombard the Qing army’s positions at Xiamen, Fujian Province . Elliot's troops were sent to attack the Chinese army's positions in Fujian province .
 On July 6, the British attacked Dinghai , Zhejiang province and took over the city . The British took over Dinghai in Dinghai .
 Lin Zexu was relieved of his duties and ordered to be investigated and punished . He was found guilty of sexual misconduct in a sexual assault on a woman in 2012 .
 The emperor asked the British army to return to Guangzhou and sent Qishan , a leading capitulationist, to negotiate peace with the British . The emperor then asked the army to leave Guangzhou .
 In November 1840, the British troops concentrated around Guangzhou area .
 The British attacked Humen with 1,461 men on January 7, 1841 . To gain a better position in the peace negotiation, the British attacked the city .
 With the military victory, the British demanded that Qishan sign the draft Convention of Chuanbi in January, whereby China ceded Hong Kong to Britain and opened Guangzhou as a trading port . With the British victory, they demanded that China sign a draft Convention .
 Qing government declared war on Britain on January 27 . Qing government considered cession of territories and payment of indemnities as an insult to imperial authority .
 At that moment, the emperor commanded a diversified army of nearly one million men, including the Manchu banner forces, regional armies, local militias, and a small naval force . At that time, China's Emperor was at the center of his empire .
 The British attacked Guangzhou on May 24 with 2,754 troops against the Qing garrison of 49,000 men . Guangzhou was Guangzhou, China, in 1911 .
 The British took over the high points of the city that evening . The Qing generals raised white flags and surrendered the next day .
 The British government was unhappy with its terms, which it believed were too lenient toward the Chinese . Upon receiving the draft Convention of Chuanbi, the British government believed the terms were too harsh .
 Henry Pottinger, who had replaced Elliot in August, commanded 26 warships and 3,500 men, to carry on the fighting . Instead of ratifying the treaty, the U.S. ordered a new commander to carry out the fight .
 Later that year, China also lost Zhenhai and Ningbo, Zhejiang province . China also also lost Ningbo and Zhenai and Zhenghai provinces .
 In June 1842, the British attacked Wusong at the mouth of the Yangzi River, and then captured Shanghai . The British captured Shanghai in 1842 . The city was captured by the British .
 British warships appeared on the Yangzi River outside of Nanjing, China, in August .
 Qing government sent an imperial commissioner to a British warship to sign the SinoBritish Treaty on August 29, 1842 . The treaty was signed by Qing government in Qing China .
 The Qing government signed two more documents supplementary to the Treaty of Nanjing . The next year, the Qing government also signed two documents .
 Chinese tariffs on British goods be limited to 5 percent . British be given the right to rent land and build houses in the five trading ports .
 The provision paved the way for the so-called concessions in the trading port cities . The latter provision was part of the agreement between the EU and the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 The British acquired the right of consular jurisdiction and most favored-nation treatment .
 In 1844, the U.S. and France signed the SinoAmerican Treaty of Wangxia and Sino-French Treaty of Huangpu respectively . The treaty was signed by the United States and France .
 The United States and France acquired all the privileges provided in the Treaty of Nanjing and its supplementary documents except the war indemnities . Through these two treaties, the U.S. and France gained all the rights provided in Nanjing .
 The Americans gained the privileges of sending warships to Chinese ports for protection of U.S. commerce . The Americans also gained the special privileges of building churches and hospitals in the five port cities .
 French had succeeded in convincing the Chinese government to lift the ban against missionary activities on the part of Roman Catholics . From then on, Roman Catholics could propagate their faith as they wished .
 The First Opium War of 1839-1842 had a long-term traumatic effect on China . China's foreign relations changed the nature of its foreign relations for the worse .
 Qing fought the British in the war with outdated weapons and no cohesive plan or military structure . The Qing had no cohesive military structure or a cohesive military plan .
 Chinese military exposed to the world as limited in its ability to protect its borders and defend its people . The Chinese military was exposed to be exposed as limited to protect itself from the world .
 After the war, China was open to Western influence and imperialist exploitation . China is now open to the Western influence of imperialism .
 The treaties meant that China had lost its rights as a sovereign nation . The treaties mean that China lost its right to be a sovereign country .
 The inflow of foreign goods into China without restriction caused the slow but sure disintegration of the native economy . China's economy has been hit hard by the influx .
 Thereafter, step by step, China was transformed from an isolated traditional society into a semicolonial country . China was turned into an isolated, isolated society . China is now an isolated country .
 Qing Empire was gradually losing the central position and powerful status established by the Han Dynasty . The great Qing Empire gradually losing its position and power .
 After the First Opium War, the Manchu rulers retreated further into tradition . They continued to reject Western ideas after the war .
 The once dominant power was fractured between Qing elites and the Han population . The Han population became stronger in the late nineteenth century . Qing elites were stronger than Han population, which became stronger .
 The weakening of the Manchu rulers would lead to a series of conflicts both internal and external throughout the century . The weakened of the rulers would have led to a number of conflicts .
 China would later experience wars with Britain and France (the Second Opium War of 1856-1857), Japan , and eight different Western powers (Boxer Rebellion of 1900) that would end the Chinese tributary system .
 The Taiping Rebellion of 1850-1864 and the Republican Revolution of 1911 ended the Qing Dynasty in 1911 . Domestic troubles went hand in hand with foreign wars .
 Banner System; Boxer Rebellion; Chinese Revolution of 1911; Eight Foreign Armies’ Invasion of China; Hong Kong; Lin Zexu; Manchus; Nanjing, Treaty of; Qing Dynasty; Sino-French War; Taiping Rebellion; Tianjin, Treaty
 Peng Dehuai was commander of the Chinese People’s Volunteer Force during the Korean War of 1950-1953 . He was a general and commander of Chinese People's Volunteer Force . He died in 1953 .
 Peng Dehuai was born in Xiangtan county, Flunan province, on October 24, 1898 . He ran away from home as a child and supported himself by means of manual labor . He was the first Chinese leader to be born in China .
 In 1919 he joined the army of the warlords and in 1920 became a lieutenant . In 1920 he was a lieutenant in the British Army .
 Fie was involved in an assassination attempt of Fu Liangzao, governor of Hunan, and was arrested . Fie then tried to kill the governor of the Hunan province of Hunang . He was arrested and charged with attempted murder .
 Peng joined the Guomindang (GMD, or Kuomintang, KMT; the Chinese Nationalist) army with the rank of major . In 1926, Peng took part in the Northern Expedition .
 Peng was deputy commander of the Eighth Route Army under Zhu De in April 1937 during the AntiJapanese War of 1937-1945 . Peng was appointed deputy commander in the anti-Japanese war of 1937/1944 .
 Peng’s record as a military commander up until the end of the Chinese Civil War (19461949) was spotty . Peng was a top military commander in China during the 1950s and 1960s .
 Of 29 battles he personally directed until 1949, he had 15 victories and 14 defeats . He personally directed 15 of 29 battles in his career .
 He was less successful fighting offensively, but he was an effective tactician and campaigner . He was also effective tactically and politically in the 1980s .
 Peng did not build a group of loyal supporters during the Chinese Civil War . During the Chinese civil war, Peng didn't build a loyal group of supporters . Peng is known for his anti-Chinese sentiment in China .
 He commanded the Eighth Route Army from 1937 to 1946, but had no troops under his direct command . He had no direct command of troops under him .
 At the time of the outbreak of the Korean War, Peng was in northwest China consolidating CCP control . Peng was the leader of the Chinese Communist Party when the war began .
 During the war he retained his posts as the deputy commander in chief of the People’s Liberation Army and commander of the First Field Army . He was also the deputy .
 Peng commanded Chinese forces intervening in Korea from October 1950 to September 5, 1954 . Peng commanded forces in Korea between October 1950 and September 1954 . He commanded Chinese troops in Korea for more than two decades .
 He arrived in northeast China on September 4, 1950, to lead the intervention forces . He arrived on the scene in China in September 1950, leading the intervention force .
 Mao agreed with this plan, and on October 13, the Central Military Commission formally sanctioned sending Chinese troops into Korea . Mao agreed to send troops into the Korean Peninsula .
 Peng’s forces began crossing the Yalu River on October 19 . On October 25 the CPVF had its first exchange of fire with UN/ U.S. forces .
 Zhou provided detailed guidance of all logistics operations and daily operations . Zhou also provided guidance for all of the logistics operations .
 October 25 to November 1, 1950; . midNovember 1950 to December 12, 1950 . and December 30, 1950, to January 11, 1951 . October 25, 1950 to . November 1 to November 10, 1950. December 30 to . 1950, December 10, 1951, December 30
 Mao Zedong's only son, Mao Anying, died during a U.S. air attack on Peng’s headquarters in 1950 . Mao's son was a Russian-language interpreter for Peng .
 Peng, who had been entrusted to protect Anying, blamed himself for his death . Peng had been tasked with protecting Anying and blamed himself . Peng was killed in China's Tianjin province in 2008 .
 Li Tianyu was forced to evacuate Seoul on March 14, 1951 . During the Fourth Offensive Campaign, January 25 to March 1951, the Chinese offensive broke down south and southeast of Seoul .
 On April 22, Peng launched the Fifth Campaign with the aim of retaking Seoul . United States forces under Lieutenant General James A Van Fleet broke the Chinese offensive .
 Peng launched a series of offensives against Old Baldy and Pork Chop Hill in 1953 . Peng launched an offensive against the Chinese capital in May and July 1953 .
 On July 11, 1953, Chinese and North Korean forces launched a massive five-corps offensive against the Republic of Korea Army Corps. The offensive was launched by Chinese and N. Korean forces .
 The United States Third Division counterattacked, ending major Communist forces’ hostilities for the remainder of the war . The U.S. Third Division eventually defeated the Communist forces in the battle .
 On July 27, 1953, Peng signed the Armistice Agreement worked out at Panmunjom . Peng signed a peace treaty with North Korea in 1953 .
 Kim Il-sung awarded him the National Flag Order of Merit, First Class, on July 31, 1953 . He was awarded the title “Hero of the Korean Democratic People’s Republic” in July 1953 .
 Peng left North Korea on August 11, 1953, returning to a hero’s welcome in Tiananmen Square in Beijing . Peng returned to China in August 1953, arriving in Beijing in 1953 .
 Peng viewed the Korean War more as a strategic than an operational success, Peng said . Peng said he viewed the war as more than a strategic rather than operational success . The Korean War ended in a stalemate .
 Peng: "Tactically the war revealed to the PLA’s leaders just how weak their forces were and just how thin the line that separated success from failure"
 The Korean War experience convinced Peng that the PLA needed to modernize its forces for conventional warfare . Peng said the PLA needs to modernise its forces to combat conventional warfare.
 He placed priority on military training over politics . He stressed the importance of modern equipment, professionalism, and new technology to support modem warfare .
 Following Korea, Peng turned to the Soviet Union to provide a model for modernization and professionalism . Peng's government turned to Soviet Union for modernization, professionalism .
 Mao ordered that Peng receive no medical care when he fell seriously ill in 1974 . Mao ordered Peng to have no medical treatment when he was seriously ill .
 During the Cold War, the People’s Liberation Army in China was the largest standing army in the world . The People's Liberation Army was the world's largest standing standing army .
 In 1929, the Chinese Workers’ and Peasants’ Red Army, the predecessor of the PLA, numbered 300,000 . The Chinese Workers' and Peasant's Red Army was the predecessor to the current PLA .
 It was reduced to a mere 25,000 by the mid-1930s following its defeat in the last of five Encirclement Campaigns by the Guomindang forces .
 The PLA’s active troop strength stood at 4. million in 1982 and 3 million in 1992 . After growing to more than 1. million by 1945 after World War II and the Anti-Japanese War of 1937-1945 and 5. million at the founding of the People’
 In the external sphere, Chinese forces fought in the Korean War, skirmished over offshore islands with the Republic of China during the 1950s, waged the 1962 Sino-Indian War, clashed with Russia in the 1969 SinoSoviet border dispute, and saw battle in the 1979 Sino
 It also oversaw infrastructure development in farflung areas of China . It also restored order during the chaotic periods of the Cultural Revolution and the 1989 Tiananmen Square Incident .
 PLA forces found recourse in the latter in certain wars after 1949 . While the former was employed extensively during the period prior to 1949, the latter was employed in certain battles after 1949.
 The “early war, major war and all-out nuclear war” slogan of the 1960s gave way to “peace and development” by the end of the Cold War . The Soviets withdrew nearly 50 divisions from China’s northeastern border with the Soviet Union as
 CPVF was in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from October 1950 until October 1958 . The CPVf was in North Korea from 1950 until 1958 .
 In the fighting in Korea, the PLA encountered the most powerful and technologically advanced military in the world . The Chinese army encountered the world's most powerful military, the Chinese government says .
 PLA achieved limited limited military objectives such as driving back Indian forces from its borders in 1962 and punishing Vietnam in 1979 . Other wars were less successful, although the PLA achieved certain limited objectives .
 Four large general departments oversaw staffing, logistics, and political duties . Four large groups oversaw staffing and logistics, including political staff .
 PLA controlled a vast military-industrial complex of machine-building industries, ordnance and aircraft factories, and shipyards . The PLA controlled the vast military industrial complex .
 The Central Military Commission of the CCP is at the top of the PLA’s organization . A similar and parallel nonparty structure was established at the state level in the 1980s .
 China was divided into military regions (which were reduced from 13 to 11 to the current 7 beginning in 1985), 29 provincial military districts (one for each of China’s 29 provinces), one independent military district, and three garrisons . China was reduced to seven military regions beginning
 Field armies were transformed into 21 army groups on the Western concept of military organization . The modernization drive began in the mid-1980s .
 Eight demobilization campaigns of soldiers and officers in the Cold War period brought down the PLA’s troop numbers significantly . The PLA's troop numbers were significantly reduced in the 1950s .
 During the Cold War, China amassed formidable military capabilities in ground, naval, air, and strategic weapons . Most of the military assets lagged behind newer Western technologies by end of Cold War . China amassed a formidable military force during Cold War but lags behind Western technologies .
 Many PLA weapons were captured from Nationalist forces, who had been supplied by the United States and other Western nations . Initially, many PLA weapons had been captured from Chinese forces .
 The February 1950 Treaty of Friendship and Alliance with the Soviet Union ensured a constant flow of military equipment . It was considered to be advanced given the low technology levels of PLA forces at the time .
 This ended, as did military technology transfers, with the Sino-Soviet split of 1959-1960 . Military technology transfers ended in 1960s .
 The PRC produced an array of military equipment, including tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery, aircraft, engines, submarines, destroyers, frigates, and fastattack craft .
 Much of the Chinese Army’s equipment was supplied by the Soviets up to 1960 . The Soviets supplied much of the army's equipment up until 1960 .
 Numbers of army personnel continued to increase for much of the Cold War . Numbers of soldiers in the U.S. continued to rise in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In 1991, at the end of the Cold War, the Chinese Army had perhaps 2. million men in 84 infantry divisions and 10 armored divisions . At that time, there were perhaps 2 million men .
 In addition to conventional deterrence, the PLA pursued nuclear deterrence . The PLA pursued conventional and nuclear deterrence, including nuclear weapons .
 In 1964, China exploded its first nuclear weapon, the PRC was one of five countries with long-range missile capabilities . The PRC is now one of the world's largest nuclear powers .
 1991 Persian Gulf War showed glaring technological deficiencies of many PLA weapons systems . Iraqi military equipment was easily destroyed by coalition forces in the Gulf War .
 Troop enhancements, modernization drives, and equipment acquisitions meant increasing budgetary outlays, which stood at an estimated 2. billion yuan in 1950 and had increased to about 39 billion yuan (US $7.56 billion) by 1991 . Troop enhancement, modernization drive and equipment acquisition meant increasing
 The first three decades of the Cold War were turbulent ones for the PRC defense forces .
 The PLA saw the construction of a U.S.-led military alliance system in East Asia as distinct threats . The 1954 mutual defense pact with the ROC was a distinct threat to the PLA .
 Chinese window-shopping in Western arms markets largely came to naught . This eased after 1971 with the normalization of Sino-U.S. relations .
 Institutional linkages and mutual visits among Chinese and Western militaries increased in the 1980s . Increased prospects for arms sales under several programs .
 1989 Tiananmen Square events brought to an end any significant flow of military technology or hardware from Western nations from China . The 1989 events brought an end to the flow of hardware and technology from Western countries .
 China sent arms abroad both to assist in wars of national liberation, often in opposition to one of the two superpowers, or as straight commercial/political transactions . China's arms have been sent abroad to assist with national liberation .
 The Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV, North Vietnam) was a major recipient of Chinese weaponry during both the Indochina War of 1946-1954 and the Vietnam War of 1963-1975 .
 Other groups receiving Chinese arms included the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia, the Pathet Lao in Laos, and the mujahideen in Afghanistan . Other groups also receiving arms from China included the Taliban in Afghanistan and the Pathen Lao .
 Iraq, Iran, Egypt, Pakistan, and Burma also purchased Chinese arms, sometimes in defiance of international nonproproliferation controls .
 The U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency Handbook of China’s Army, Navy and Air Force . The Handbook is based on the Handbook of the Chinese military .
 The term “people’s war,” a military-political strategy, refers to the Maoist military doctrine . See China, People's Republic of People's War, or People's People's Revolution .
 The people’s war doctrine suggested that a tiny force of a few dozen soldiers should avoid strategically decisive battles with a powerful army because it would be easily suppressed in an all-out confrontation with the GMD government .
 The people’s war doctrine included a three-stage strategy of protracted warfare, with carefully chosen battles that could realistically be won . The people's war doctrine was based on the three stages of a protracted war .
 In stage one, a revolutionary force would conduct the people’s war in remote areas with mountainous or otherwise difficult terrain where the enemy was weak . The revolutionary forces would conduct their people's war in mountainous or difficult terrain .
 The revolutionary force needed to establish a local stronghold, known as a revolutionary base area . It was established by the revolutionary force in the early 1950s .
 The revolutionary force would then establish more revolutionary base areas and spread their influence through the surrounding countryside, where it would become the governing power . The revolution would gain popular support through such programs as land reform .
 Eventually, in stage three, the revolutionary movement would have enough strength to encircle and capture small cities, then larger ones, until finally it overthrew the central government in the entire country . The revolutionary movement eventually encirched and captured small cities and captured larger ones .
 Mao summed up the experiences gained by the Chinese Communists in the counterencirclement campaigns against Nationalist forces in the early 1930s and in the months following the outbreak of war with Japan in July 1937 . Mao's writings were published by Mao's Communist Party Party Party of China .
 In his three books, Mao tried to promote the principles of the people’s war against Japanese imperialism during the Anti-Japanese War of 1937-1945 . Mao's three books were published by Mao in China .
 Mao claimed the Chinese workers and peasants would be mobilized and armed in defense of the state . Mao claimed that although the Chinese Communists’ armies and militia were small in number, poorly equipped, and not well trained, they would hold the key to victory in a prolonged war against a technologically
 The doctrine of the people's war has been the cornerstone of the Chinese Communists’ strategy for the defense of China’s frontiers . After defeating the GMD forces during the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949 and founded the Peoples’ Republic of China in 1949,
 The basic concept behind the people’s war was to maintain the support of the Chinese population and draw the powerful, well-equipped enemy deep into the interior . The Chinese would bleed them dry through a mix of mobile and guerrilla warfare .
 Lin claimed that men, especially men armed with Mao’s thought, not weaponry, was the decisive factor in combat against imperialism in China . Lin claimed men were armed only with Mao's thought not weaponry .
 Its central operational principle was to lure the enemy deep into their territory, trading space for time . Its central operation principle was the lure of the enemy, trading time for time.
 A combination of regular forces and militia would wage a campaign of mobile and guerrilla warfare to annihilate the enemy . According to this principle, enemy forces would gradually be worn down and weakened .
 The militia was expanded in number and received more military training so as to wage a people’s war in the event of foreign invasions, such as from the Soviet Union or United States. As a result, the Chinese militia has been expanded .
 By early summer 1977, the long-festering debate over China’s defensive strategy started again . The debate over the country's defensive strategy began again in 1977 .
 In August 1978, Xu Xiangqian (Hsu Hsiang-ch’ian) in an article asserted that China not only needed the people’s war but also a military modernization in China's national defense and military strategy in the future . China's defense minister Xu
 After the Sino-Vietnamese Border War in 1979, Chinese military modernizers claimed that times had changed and that strategy had to be changed accordingly . After the 1979 border war in China, China's military modernized its strategy was changed .
 If the Chinese treated and executed a modem war in their old way as they did in the 1930s and 1940s, they would be met with a serious defeat . Furthermore, if the Chinese treat and execute a modem . war in . their old . way as well as the . 1930
 The Chinese government made a great effort to promote significant military modernizations while developing the governing principles of the people’s war under modern conditions . China has made significant efforts to modernize its military and develop its own military .
 In 1981, Deng Xiaoping became the chairman of the Central Military Commission of the CCP . In 1982, he became the chief of the PLA General Staff . In 1981 he was the head of the military council of the Chinese Communist Party .
 He believed that a new world war was not inevitable and nuclear war no longer seemed imminent . He said that he believed that the threat was not imminent and that nuclear war was no longer imminent .
 His remarks outlined a major change in China’s strategic thinking and worldview . The remarks were outlined by President Xi Jinping .
 Peace and development are the two leading trends in international affairs, says the Chinese military chief . Peace is peace and development, he says, are the leading trends for international affairs .
 The PLA needed to contemplate a new and different international environment and must participate in China’s ongoing reforms . The PLA must also participate in the ongoing reforms, he says. The PLA needs to contemplate an international environment, he said .
 Deng explained his new strategic thoughts to the high-ranking commanders in 1985 . Deng: "In 1985, Deng explained the new strategic thinking to the highest ranking commanders" Deng: 'I'm not sure what I think about the future of the country'
 Chinese armed forces should expect a ‘local war’ or a “limited war” in the future, rather than a total war, or a nuclear war . First, the Chinese armed force should expect local war or a "limited war" rather than total war .
 The next local war or limited war needed a professional army with modern technology . Second, the next local . war needed to be a professional . army . The next . local war . needed a . professional army .
 This was another strategic transition from Mao's people’s war doctrine to a new ‘people’ war under modern conditions’ doctrine . This was a transition to a “people's war under . modern . conditions” doctrine .
 The mid-1980s reform followed Deng’s new doctrine of fighting “limited, local war” and emphasized the development and employment of new technology and improvement in PLA weaponry . The reforms were followed by the creation of the PLA in the 1980s . Deng's new doctrine
 Deng downsized the PLA forces by 1 million troops over the next two years . Deng says the PLA will downsize its forces by a million troops . Deng also downsized China's military force by a further 1 million .
 Theoretically, the money saved from the troop reduction would be available for upgrading defense technology . The money saved would be used to upgrade defense technology, experts say .
 Mao Zedong wrote a treatise entitled On Protracted War in 1938 to analyze the basic characteristics of both sides of the Anti-Japanese War of 1937-1945 . As the first generation of the CCP leadership, he wrote the treatise .
 Mao instructed the high command of the Communist armed forces to organize extensive peasant militias through the CCP network, now a mass party . Mao instructed high command the Eighth Route Army and New Fourth Army to organize peasant militias .
 Transforming illiterate peasants into capable soldiers is part of China's military tradition . The illiterate peasant soldiers are trained to be able to fight for their country .
 After Mao’s death in 1976 and on his third return, Deng Xiaoping launched an unprecedented reform in 1978 and opened China to the outside world in order to bring the four modernizations, including the defense modernization, to the country .
 He became chairman of the Central Military Commission of the CCP in 1981 . He became chief of the PLA General Staff in 1982 . He was also chief of China's top military staff .
 The PLA viewed Deng’s economic reforms as favorable and necessary for military restructuring . During the 1978-1988 reforms, the PLA viewed the reforms as necessary and necessary .
 A growing national economy needed a strong national defense, says President Obama . A strong national economy can support and contribute to a strong military, he says . Obama says a strong economy can also support a strong defense .
 From May 23 to June 6, 1985, the CMC held a landmark conference that became the starting point of Deng’s 1980s military reform . The CMC was the first to hold the conference in China's first major military conference .
 The mid-1970s was not aimed at fighting a foreign invasion or a world war, but instead at downsizing its troops and command system . Like in the mid-1980s, the Chinese government targeted the problems within the PLA through downsizing troops .
 Deng, then chairman of the CMC, argued that a new world war was not inevitable and a nuclear war no longer seemed imminent . Deng: In order to reduce the PLA, Deng argued that the PLA should be reduced to a fraction of the size of the PLA .
 He told the Chinese military that peace and development were the two leading trends in international affairs . Peace and development are the two top trends in the world, he said .
 Deng proved market economy and new technology worked in China and that Chinese people needed a better material life . Deng proved that new technology and market economy works in China . Deng showed that market economy worked and people needed better material lives .
 His reform succeeded at the high cost of losing political control by the party, decentralizing the government, increasing stratification and inequalities in the society, and declining status of the military .
 The PLA believed that they had sacrificed for Deng’s reform more than what they had gained from it in 1978-1995, especially during the Tiananmen Square event of 1989 . The PLA believes that they sacrificed more for Deng's reform than for their own sake .
 The nationwide prodemocracy demonstration in the summer of 1989 and the military suppression of the student-led movement were major setbacks to China’s reform movement . The military suppression was a major setback to China's reform movement.
 With their loyalty and patience, the military waited for their turn as Deng promised . Deng promised that the military would be able to take over the country .
 Jiang Zemin is the third generation of the Chinese Communist leadership . After Deng Xiaoping, they were expecting a change in military reform by Jiang . They were expecting change in the military .
 Jiang launched another round of military reforms known as the Two Transformations in the mid-1990s . Deng's people’s war under modem conditions was replaced by the 'Two Transformations' Jiang launched the reforms in the late 1990s as part of a bid to replace Deng�
 Allen, Kenneth W. Allen, Dean B Cheng, David M Finkelstein, and Maryanne Kevlehan. The author of the book, "Kevlehan," is published in New York .
 This event, known as the Marco Polo Bridge Incident, or the “Lugouqiao Incident,” marked the beginning of Japan’s all-out aggression against China . This event marked the start of China's War of Resistance against Japan and of China’
 The CCP Red Army, then located in the northwest and numbering 46,000 men, became the Eighth Route Army of the Nationalist army in August 1937, with Zhu De as commander, Peng Dehuai as deputy commander, and Ye Jianying as chief of staff . Zhu De was
 All three divisions crossed the Yellow River eastward until they reached north China . After establishment of the Eighth Route Army, all three divisions were in China .
 In August 1937, most units of the 115th Division moved into the mountainous areas in north China .
 As Mao Zedong did in Jinggangshan in the 1920s, they conducted a guerrilla campaign in the mountains behind the Japanese lines . The campaign was conducted behind the lines of Japan .
 Japanese forces advanced along the Beiping (Peking) or Beijing-Suiyuan railway into Inner Mongolia in September 1937 . In September 1937, Japanese forces moved into the region .
 Japanese Fifth Division under the command of Itagaki Seishiro moved out from Beiping and advanced westward on Huaili, Chahar .
 Lin Biao’s 115th Division was in place at Pingxingguan, Shanxi, on September 24 to ambush the Japanese army . By the time they reached the Shanxi provincial border, they had already reached the border .
 Around 10:00 A.M. on September 25, the Japanese supply troops of the Twenty-First Regiment, Fifth Division, traveled along the road into the ambush set by Lin’s 115th Division .
 Japanese column included 70 horse-drawn vehicles filled with clothes, food, and ammunition . The Japanese column was filled with clothing, ammunition, and clothing .
 Another supply column of Japanese troops, including 80 trucks, also entered into the ambush set by the 115th at Pingxingguan . In the meantime, another supply column also entered the ambush .
 Lin ordered his troops to attack the two columns of mainly transportation and supply units from the hill . The two columns were mainly transportation, supply units .
 In a few hours, the 115th Division almost annihilated the trapped Japanese troops along the road . In the days before the Japanese troops were trapped in the road, Japanese soldiers were trapped by the Japanese .
 A relief force consisting of the Third Battalion of the Twenty-First Regiment was stopped by Chinese troops . The relief force consisted of a relief force .
 Lin Biao’s troops killed 3,000 Japanese soldiers at the Battle of Pingxingguan . The battle took place at the end of the Second World War in China .
 The victory brought the Chinese 80 trucks loaded with supplies, ammunition, and weapons . The victory brings 80 trucks with supplies and ammunition .
 This was the first CCP military victory over the Japanese forces in the Anti-Japanese War . The CCP won the war by defeating Japanese forces .
 The battle gave the Chinese Communists a major boost in morale and credence to the Communists in the eyes of the Chinese people . The battle was the first of its kind in China .
 Qian Xuesen was one of the founding members of the missile and space programs of the People's Republic of China in the 1950s-1980s . He also made a contribution to the missile program in the United States in the 1940s and early 1950s .
 He received his college degree in mechanical engineering, with an emphasis on railroad administration . He received an emphasis in railroad administration.
 He took an internship position at Nanchang Air Force Base, Jiangxi Province, of the Nationalist, or Guomindang (GMD, or Kuomintang) army .
 He earned a doctorate degree from Caltech in 1939 with a thesis on slender body theory at high speeds . He earned his doctorate degrees in 1939 .
 Qian worked with the U.S. military intercontinental ballistic missile program . Qian was director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, in 1939 . He then served as director of Jet
 After World War II, he served in the U.S. Army as a lieutenant colonel . He was sent to Germany as part of the team that examined captured German V-2 rockets .
 In 1947, he married Jiang Ying, the daughter of General Jiang Baili, one of Jiang Jieshi’s leading military strategists . He is one of China's most prominent military leaders . He was married to Jiang Ying in 1947 .
 His work would inspire the X-20 Dyna-Soar, which would later influence the development of the American Space Shuttle .
 Qian became the first director of the Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Jet Propulsion Center at Caltech in 1949 . Qian is credited with helping develop the first prototype of the space shuttle .
 FBI made allegations that he was a Communist and revoked his security clearance . Qian became a U.S. citizen in 1950 after he was made a citizen .
 It became a major turning point in his life since he found himself unable to pursue his career . He said it was a turning point for him and his family .
 The United States government wavered between deporting him and refusing to allow his departure due to his knowledge . The U.S. government has been weighing whether to deport him .
 He lost his freedom under constant surveillance in a state of house arrest for five years . He was placed under constant surveillance in constant surveillance under house arrest .
 In 1954, the United States negotiated with the Chinese government at the Geneva Conference to release Qian in exchange for the repatriation of 12 American pilots captured by the Chinese army during the Korean War . The U.S. government negotiated with China in 1954 .
 After the SinoUnited States Ambassador Talks reached an agreement at the Geneva Conference, he was released by the U.S. government in 1955 .
 Qian, his wife, and their two American-born children left America for China via Hong Kong on September 17, 1955 . Qian and his wife and two children were born in the U.S.
 Qian submitted a proposal to the CCP Central Committee requesting to establish a ballistic missile program in 1956 . Qian submitted the proposal on February 17, 1956, to the party Central Committee .
 On March 14, Zhou Enlai chaired a CMC meeting that approved Qian’s proposal . The proposal was approved on March 14 at a meeting of the Central Committee and the Central Military Commission .
 Qian helped reverseengineer the Soviet P-2 missile, an improved version of the German V-2 rocket . Qian became director of the Fifth Institute under the Ministry of Defense in February 1957 .
 Qian began to work on the Chinese-made short-range missile Dongfeng01, based on the Soviet P-2 model . In 1960, Qian began working on the China-made missile based on a Soviet model .
 In 1964, the first Chinese-designed medium-range missile, Dongfeng-02, had a successful test, just prior to China’s first successful nuclear weapons test . China's first nuclear test was in 1964, just before its first successful test .
 Qian became vice minister of the Seventh Industrial Ministry in 1965 . He was vice chairman of the State Commission on Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense in 1970 . Qian was chairman of China Association for Science and Technology in 1970, and chairman of a Chinese association for science .
 Qian played a key role in the research, testing, and manufacture of carrier rockets, guided missiles, satellites, and aerospace programs . Qian was chief designer and one of the major leaders in China's aerospace industry .
 Qian made important contributions to China’s state of higher education . Qian was a pioneer in China's higher education system . Qian made significant contributions to higher education in China .
 He established the Institute of Mechanics Engineering in China . He trained Chinese engineers in the techniques he had learned in the United States .
 In 1979, Caltech awarded Qian the “Distinguished Alumni Award,” but he did not make the trip to California for his award ceremony . Qian did not attend the award ceremony in California .
 In the early 1980s, AIAA invited him again to visit the U.S., but he declined the invitation . He declined to return to the United States .
 China Central Television named Qian as one of the 11 most inspiring people in China . Qian was also named one of China's most inspirational people in 2013 .
 The long reign of the Qianlong emperor was a watershed in the history of China . China was easily the most wealthy and populous nation in the world in the late eighteenth century .
 His most impressive accomplishment was the settlement of borders and the incorporation of extensive territories into western China, which brought China to its greatest extent ever .
 Qianlong emperor's growth and prosperity introduced new social pressures . By the final years of his reign, the signs of decline were becoming more obvious .
 The Qianlong emperor was born with the name Hongli on September 25, 1711 . He was born in China in 1711 and his name was Hongli . He is one of the world's most famous Chinese monarchs .
 He was the fourth son of the Yongzheng emperor and the favorite grandson of the previous Kangxi emperor . He was also favorite grandson and favorite son of Kangxi Emperor .
 The Manchus had come out of the north during the seventeenth century to defeat the forces of the Ming dynasty and founded the Qing dynasty, which ruled over the majority of the Chinese population .
 Qianlong emperor was a fourth son . His personal qualities were noted early by his father and grandfather . His education and training was arranged for him .
 During a hunting trip when the future emperor was only eight years old, he demonstrated immense bravery when the horse he was riding was attacked by a bear . The future emperor demonstrated bravery when he was only 8 years old . He demonstrated bravery in the face of a bear attack .
 His father, who had once fought bitterly to defend his own title to the throne, secretly designated the Qianlong emperor as his heir early in his life . Qianlong was born in China .
 By the time he made the formal declaration that the Qianlong emperor would be the heir apparent, his other sons were dead . His other sons also died .
 The long reign of the Qianlong emperor was a watershed in the history of China . China was easily the wealthiest and most populous nation in the world in the late eighteenth century .
 The first 40 years of his reign were a time of great success as the new emperor basked in the achievements of his predecessors and concentrated on expansion abroad and magnificence at home .
 The young emperor had been taught Confucian ethics and Manchu military arts . He had been strictly schooled in the skills deemed necessary to lead the country .
 He was familiar not only with historical emperors but also with the example of his grandfather whom he very much admired . His grandfather was also a great admirer of the Emperor .
 The Qianlong emperor ensured continuity by retaining some of his father’s most important ministers . Qianlong was the first emperor to be emperor in China .
 He gradually altered the practices of his predecessors and transformed the Office of Military Finance into a Grand Council .
 Grand Council abandoned secret communication that had allowed previous emperors to have private “eyes and ears” in the government . As the center for all the government memorials that passed between the emperor and his officials, the Grand Council was the center .
 After the death of his father’s ministers, the Qianlong emperor began to develop his own imperial style . The Qianlong imperial style is known as the one of China's first imperial styles .
 Like his grandfather, he made elaborate tours of the country, which required extensive preparations . He toured the U.S. and Europe in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The tours were splendid affairs that cost a great deal and established a habit of luxury among China’s nobles . The tours of China's elite were splendid .
 Every day he rose at 6:00 A.M. and ate only two meals . He worked steadily at official business in the mornings . He also ate two meals during the day .
 He made a public display of his filial piety by worshipping his ancestors, especially his father and grandfather . He was devoted to his first wife, Xiao Xian, and made public displays of filial piety .
 The Qianlong emperor’s armies brought Tibet under military control in 1751 . The Chinese emperor's armies brought the region under control in Tibet .
 He held religious figures of Tibetan Buddhism in high esteem, however, and arranged many favors for the lama .
 Tibetans’ texts were translated into Manchu and Mongolian . He also saw to it that the Tibetans had texts translated into translation .
 Emperor would later have official documents translated into Turkish, Arabic, and Tibetan scripts . The emperor was always seeking to improve the cosmopolitan nature of his court .
 In 1756 and 1757, Chinese armies under the leadership of the Manchu general Zhaohui swept through Central Asia . The Manchu army swept through the region in 1756-1757 .
 A huge amount of western territory, later known as Xinjian, was incorporated in China . A huge part of western China was incorporated into Xinjin . Xinjin was the first Chinese city to be incorporated into China .
 China has doubled the territorial extent of its borders in recent conquests . The conquests solved certain border troubles but also doubled the size of China's borders .
 Most of the new territories were administered by military governments, which, along with the cost of invasion, was a very expensive undertaking . The cost of the invasion was a huge undertaking .
 By 1759, many other surrounding states—Korea, Nepal, Burma, Thailand, Vietnam, and the Philippines—recognized the dominance of the Chinese .
 Emperor commissioned a replica of the Potola Temple, one of the most sacred buildings in Tibet . The emperor also commissioned many architectural splendors, including a replica .
 Giuseppe Castiglione was the principal architect for the latter project . He was the architect of the two main buildings in Rome and Rome .
 During the Qianlong emperor’s reign, agriculture and the population both grew at a rapid rate . The Qianlong Emperor's reign was one of the most prosperous periods of China's history .
 The introduction of new food sources from the Americas (sweet potatoes, peanuts, sorghum), new varieties of rice seed, and improved irrigation technology allowed for an increased food supply .
 The population expanded rapidly and enjoyed unusual prosperity for a time . The population grew rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s .
 By the late eighteenth century, however, land shortages brought an end to the expansion of the town .
 The need to farm new areas led Chinese and Manchus to try to colonize minority areas that had been conquered earlier . The need for farming led to the need for colonizing minority areas in China .
 Emperor's exploitation was greatly resented and led to a series of uprisings in the emperor’s later years . The exploitation of the emperor led to the emperor's later years of imperial exploitation .
 Those rebellions were put down without difficulty by the imperial armies, but the underlying causes were never addressed . The underlying causes would resurface in the nineteenth century .
 In a similar way, China’s commercial success laid the foundation for future difficulties . China's commercial success has laid the groundwork for future problems, says Mr. Zhang .
 Production of luxury goods and export crops like tea greatly increased during this period, due to the demand in European markets . The production of tea and luxury goods was also increased during the period .
 China is selfsufficient and uninterested in any European trade goods . Yet China was self-sufficient and not interested in any trade goods from the EU . China is now selfsufficient in its own trade goods.
 A British trade mission under George Macartney as the envoy of George III sought to interest the Qianlong emperor in the establishment of trade privileges to British merchants and diplomatic representation in his court .
 The court absorbed British gifts as tribute and sent Macartney away without seriously considering his proposals . Macartney's proposals were rejected by the court .
 Between 1760 and 1780 alone, the net drain of silver from Europe to China had increased from 3 million to 16 million ounces . The net drain from European silver to China was 3 million ounces from 1760 to 1780 .
 The British organized the production of opium in their Indian colonies and introduced the addictive drug into China in order to create a new market for the commodity they could control . It was that unfavorable trade balance that provoked the British to organize the production .
 As those dangers were developing in the Qianlong emperor’s final years, his own attention wandered . The emperor's attention wandered during his final years .
 The emperor's judgment began to fail, and he came under the influence of an attractive young courtier named Heshen . Heshen dominated the emperor’s last years .
 As the emperor granted Heshen further privileges and authority, the latter was able to permanently undermine the foundations of government in China and allow the spread of corruption on a vast scale . Heshen's actions allowed him to destroy the foundation of the Chinese state of government .
 The drain of imperial resources through graft and favoritism was accelerated by the emperor’s foreign adventures, as his armies invaded Nepal and Vietnam in his final years . The drain was also accelerated by his armies invading Vietnam and Nepal .
 In 1795, the Qianlong emperor abdicated the throne because he thought it improper to rule longer than the 61 years of his grandfather’s reign . Qianlong thought it was improper to have ruled longer than his grandfather .
 He dominated the decisions of his son, the Jiajing emperor, until his death on February 7, 1799 . He remained the power behind the throne, however, and dominated his son's decisions .
 Banner System; Confucian-Mancan Paradigm; Manchus, Manchu, Ming Dynasty; Mongols; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Tibet; Tributary System. Banner System .
 Qin Dynasty was the first unified Chinese dynasty, which lasted for 2,000 years in China . Qin Dynasty created a highly centralized imperial institution . Qin was one of China's first unified dynasties .
 Many years of ferocious warfare aimed at expansion and annexation among the seven states . The seven states have been at odds for centuries .
 King of Qin embarked on a dramatic conquest of the ancient China of separate kingdoms . The Qin was the first king of Qin to conquer the ancient kingdom of China .
 Instead of using chariots, his army possessed cavalry, superior iron weapons, and crossbow, all comparatively new developments at the time . Instead of being used chariots he had cavalry, he had superior iron arms and crossbows .
 His attacks on the kingdoms, especially siege battles, became more forceful and merciless . He attacked the kingdoms more forcefully and mercilessly . His attacks became stronger and more forceful .
 The unification of China was followed by the establishment of a highly centralized regime, Qin dynasty . Qin dynasty was the first of its kind in Chinese history .
 This central monarch system, or imperial system, lasted for more than 2,000 years without significant changes . It was the first monarch system to have a central monarch in more than two centuries . The British monarch system was known as the British Empire .
 Qin Emperor wanted to secure his centrality by creating a political authority and critical mass at his capital . Qin wanted to have a huge army in order to . secure his . centrality . Qin Emperor . wanted to create a political . authority and . critical mass .
 A large number of peasants were drafted through a centralized taxation system . The peasants had to be drafted by a central taxation system in order to survive .
 The empire was based on two main social groups, tax-paying peasants and rich landowners . The empire is based on tax-payer peasants and wealthy landowners .
 Qin terminated the separated city-state system and completed a transformation of landownership from dynastic families, relatives, and lords to private owners . Qin ended the separation of city-states and completed the transformation of land ownership .
 The tax-paying peasants and landowners supported the entire empire and imperial system . Tax payers and landowners paid for the entire system .
 He was also required to spend a month every year in local work on roads, canals, palaces, and military duties . Besides, he also spent a month a year working on canals and palaces .
 Qin Shi Huangdi recruited peasants to build the Efang Palace and the Great Wall . Those recruited as soldiers for the defense of the frontier exceeded 2 million . The total number of peasants recruited was 2 million, including peasants .
 Externally, it was built for defense against the ‘northern barbarians,” including the nomadic Xiongnu, Turks, Khitan, Mongols, Xianbei, Jurchen, and Manchu .
 "Internally, it walled the Chinese society and created a political centripetal force toward the emperor," says the Chinese emperor .
 Qin Shi Huangdi did not have difficulty mobilizing large manpower . China’s population reached 54 million by the end of Qin, and at that time, the population of Roman Empire was no more than 46 million .
 In Qin’s draft system, all male peasants were required to register at the age of 21 . All male peasants in Qin's draft system were also required to sign up at 21 .
 Qin Shi Huangdi’s sponsoring of Legalism he influenced the whole future Chinese conception of law . Qin Shi had a huge influence on future Chinese law, influencing the future of law in China .
 The law in imperial China created a hierarchy in its function as a general scale of worthiness and unworthiness, merit and demerit . The law was created by imperial China .
 Before long, the Chinese people began to complain about the Qin’s heavy taxes, drafting system, and hard punishment . The Qin was known for its heavy taxes and drafting system .
 Chen and Wu announced the establishment of a new regime called “Zhangchu’s” of which Chen was the king and Wu the military commander . Chen was also the king of the new regime, Wu the commander .
 It was this kind of violence, spearheaded by peasants whose only weapons were hoes and clubs, that eventually toppled the Qin dynasty . The Qin dynasty was ruled by the Qin, who were led by peasants .
 Great Wall; Han Dynasty; Manchus; Manchius; Mongols; Qin Shi Huangdi, Emperor; Rebellion Led by Chen Sheng; Terra-Cotta Army; Warring States Period; Xiongnu; Zhou Dynasty. Great Wall .
 Half a millennium had to pass before it really began its march toward universal rule around the middle of the fourth century . But half a millennium later, it had begun its march to universal rule .
 Qin had long been regarded as a peripheral state that was less civilized than the states of Lu, Song, and Zheng and less powerful than Jin, Chu, and Qi . The Qin state is now the most populous state in China .
 Qin’s position was significantly improved after Gongsun Yang, a prince of the state of Wei, persuaded Duke Qinqiao to reform . Qin was one of the most powerful men in the Chinese state of the Wei .
 Qin was already the most powerful state and poised to conquer its peers . Qin Shi Huangdi was enthroned at the end of Qin's reign . Qin was the most successful state in China .
 The key strategy of the unification war was to conquer each of the remaining states, the key strategy was conquering each of them .
 Qin Shi Huangdi continued his predecessors’ policy of “befriend the far and attack the near ” by pacifying his ally—the state of Qi on the one hand and attacking states adjacent to Qin such as Han, Wei, and Zhao on the other .
 Qin had to pass through Han territory before it could wage wars against other states in the east . Qin's strategic location was very important for Qin to wage war against the Han . Qin would have to pass Han territory through the Han territory to wage wars .
 Qin fought consecutive wars that had greatly weakened Han and forced them to become Qin’s vassal state . Qin had fought successive wars against Han that had weakened Han . Qin fought the unification war in order to keep Han from becoming Qin's state .
 Unlike Han, Zhao had a strong army and able generals such as Lian Po, Zhao She, and Li Mu . Zhao She and Zhao She were able generals who were able to take command .
 Qin had successfully stirred up disputes and conflicts between Zhao and its neighbor Yan . Qin's war of conquest was one of the most successful wars of Qin's reigns .
 Wang Jian conquered the strategic territory of Yanyu and deprived Zhao’s capital Handan of its natural protection . As a result of the capture, Wang Jian was able to take over the strategically important territory . Wang Jian took over the strategic region from Zhao's capital, Handan
 In the meantime, another Qin army led by general Huan Yi stormed the city of Anyang . The Qin army stormed Anyang, but the city was destroyed .
 Qin’s army was separated from Handan only by the Zhang River and a few towns . After taking Anyang, Qin was separated only by Zhang River . Qin was able to take the city of Anyang and take Handan .
 Zhao's army managed to hold their front line and successfully stalled the advance of the Qin army . Zhao’s army held on to the front line . However, Zhao managed to keep his army on the ground .
 Two years later, Huan Yi’s army launched a major offensive and defeated the Zhao army in Pingyang, southeast of Handan . Two years after the battle, the Chinese army launched an offensive against Zhao army .
 The king of Zhao sent highly talented general Li Mu to replace the general killed by the Qin army . Li Mu was a highly successful general who led the Zhao army .
 Qin bribed Guo Kai, a favorite minister of the king of Zhao, sowing discord between the king and Li Mu, resulting in the latter’s demotion and execution . Qin then bribed his favorite minister to sow discord between him and the king . The latter
 General Zhao Cong substituted for Li Mu and became the new commander of the Zhao army . However, he was quickly defeated and killed by general Wang Jian of Qin of Qin .
 Zhao’s king Qian had no choice but to surrender . Having lost most of its army and best generals, Zhao's king Qian was forced to surrender.
 Jing Ke failed in his mission, and an infuriated Qin Shi Huang decided to invade Yan . Jing Ke was killed in battle with Qin Sh Huang, who was angered by Jing Ke's failure .
 Qin Shi Huangdi had shifted his attention to Wei . However, this time, he was not focused on Qin Shi Shi . Wei was the first Qin to focus his attention on Wei .
 Wei’s military strength had been diminished due to wars with Qin . Like Han, Wei had lost its military strength due to the loss of Qin's strength .
 Long before its final fall, Wei had lost much territory to the Qin, and it was not difficult for Qin to conquer Wei . Wei was not easy to conquer, but it was easy to do .
 Qin established Dang County and Sishui County in the conquered land of Wei . King Jia of Wei was killed by Wang Ben after his surrender . Qin established the counties in conquered land .
 Throughout the Warring States Period, Chu had been one of the most powerful states . Chu was known as a powerful state of Chu during the period of Chu .
 Chu was still a large state whose territory included most of southern China . Despite several defeats by Qin, Chu still had most of its territory in southern China.
 Qin Shi Huangdi asked both generals Li Xin, the young general who had conquered Yan, and Wang Jian, the old famed general, about the number of men each of them needed to conquer Chu . Wang Jian was the old general who conquered Yan and Wang Xin .
 Compared to Wang Jian’s 600,000, Qin Shi Huangdi was more inclined to Li Xin's 200,000 . Wang Jian: "I’m not sure what I’ve done, I have a lot of respect for the people of China"
 Li Xin successfully occupied Pingyu while Meng Tian took Qincheng . Meng Tian captured Qinchen, while Li Xin took Pingyu . Li Xin and Meng Tian were victorious in the battle .
 Li and Meng proceeded deeper into Chu . Assuming that Chu had no capability to defend, they proceeded deeper in Chu . Li and Chu proceeded to attack Chu .
 Xiang Yan of Chu led the main force of the army following the Qin armies and defeated Li Xin . Meanwhile, General Xiang Yan led the Chu forces to defeat Li Xin of Qin .
 Li Xin barely escaped being captured by Xiang Yan . Thanks to Meng’s timely assistance, Li Xin narrowly escaped .
 Qin Shi Huangdi agreed to the request of 600,000 troops, then almost the whole military strength of Qin . The failure of Li Xin prompted Qin to make a personal visit to Wang Jian and agreed to his request . Wang Jian died in the fall of the Second Hundred Years .
 Wang Jian adopted different tactics from Li Xin by strengthening strongholds around the territories such as Pingyu and Shangcai conquered by Qin . Wang Jian took advantage of Qin's victory of Pingyu to strengthen his forces .
 Xiang Yan was cautious and chose not to attack Qin forces directly . Being aware of Qin’s superior force and able general Wang Jian, Wang Jian was cautious .
 Xiang Yan was too timid to fight Qin and pressed Xiang Yan to launch an offensive . But the king of Chu suspected that Xiang Yan had been too timid . Qin was defeated by Qin Qin and Qin died in battle . Xiang Yan died in the Battle of Shangripe .
 When Qin and Chu met and fought, Xiang Yan lost the battle and was killed . Xiang Yan was killed in the battle . Qin was killed by Chu and Chu .
 While Qin was conquering other states, Qi remained neutral . Qi refused to provide assistance to the other states when they were facing destruction by the Qin one after another .
 Qin had bribed Hou Sheng, the prime minister of Qi, to persuade king Jian to submit to the Qin . The truth was that Qin had . Qin had. bribed . Hou . Sheng . asked him to persuade Jian to . submit to . Qin .
 King Jian of Qi thought Qi was relatively safe because it had no common border with Qin . King Jian thought that Qi was safe because there was no border between Qin and Qi . Qi was ruled out of Qi and Qin .
 Qi had no intention of upgrading its army and building military fortifications . The country had no plans to upgrade its army .
 Qin conquered the rest of the states and Qi became the last state that still survived . However, the situation was completely changed after Qin conquered all the other states . Qi was the last remaining state to still survive .
 The next year, Wang Ben suddenly attacked Qi from the north . Wang Ben, to Qi’s surprise, appeared to have attacked Qi . Qi was killed by Wang Ben in the next year .
 Qi could not find an able army to defend the state . Despite its sheer military size and over 70 towns, the state was not able to defend itself .
 Due to a long period of peace and insufficient military preparation, Qi was quickly conquered, and King Jian was captured by Wang Ben . Wang Ben captured King Jian and captured him by Wang .
 Qin starved King Jian to death in the middle of a palm tree and a cypress . No one from Qi was sympathetic toward King Jian’s death . Qin starved him to death .
 Qin Shi Huangdi had for the first time in Chinese history unified China . By this time he had unified China, it had been the first unified China ever .
 After Gongsun Yang’s reform, the Qin army emerged as the most powerful among states . Qin contained many great strategists and talented generals such as Bai Qi, Wang Jian, Wang Ben, and Meng Tian .
 Qin was situated in the west with Xiao Mountain as its natural defense from invasion from the east . Second, Qin was located near Xiao Mountain, which was used as a natural defense . Xiao Mountain was used to protect Qin from invasion .
 Third, having seen centuries of bloody wars among states, most Chinese people had wished to live in peace . Most Chinese people wanted to live a peaceful life in China .
 Qin was easily defeated by Qin and the other six states failed to form an effective alliance . Qin's defeat was the result of the failure of the other states to form a strong alliance .
 Qin Shi Fluangdi sent Weitusui and 500,000 troops to attack states in south China, including Vietnam, in order to protect himself .
 Qin Shi Huangdi decided to build the Great Wall to protect China proper from its northern enemy . The Great Wall took almost 10 years to be completed . The wall was built to protect the country from the northern enemy of China .
 Great Wall; Han Dynasty; Han, Cavalry of; Han Wudi, Emperor; Qin Dynasty; Rebellion Led by Chen Sheng; Terra-Cotta Army . Great Wall: Han, Horsemen of Han, Han, Emperor .
 Qing was the last imperial dynasty in Chinese history under Manchu political control with their banner military system . Qing Dynasty was last dynasty under political control of the Manchu .
 The dynasty was established after the collapse of the Ming dynasty . It was replaced by the Republic of China in 1912 .
 Government corruption went from bad to worse at the end of the Ming . eunuchs and court officials competed with one another for more power and privileges .
 In 1627, northern Shaanxi Province experienced a severe drought, and not one kernel of grain was harvested . Not one kernel was harvested in 1627 .
 As thousands of peasants starved, the survivors began to foment rebellion . The survivors of the survivors fomented rebellion against the government .
 Chongzhen (1628—1644), the last Ming emperor, committed suicide by hanging himself at the Coal Hill behind the Forbidden City . Chongzhen had no place to flee, Chongzhen committed suicide in 1628-1644, having no place for escape .
 In June 1644, Manchu troops entered the Great Wall from the north, defeating the peasant army and establishing the Qing dynasty . The Qing dynasty established in 1644 .
 The Manchu state, which occupied northeast China, has been fighting the Ming army over the territory along the Great Wall for decades . The Ming army has been trying to take control of the area along the wall .
 Qing dynasty's early emperors such as Kangxi and Qianlong regained China’s central position in Asia, which was established by the Han (206 BC220 AD) and Tang dynasties .
 In the 1840 Opium War, Great Britain defeated the Qing army and partially opened China’s market . Great Britain won the war and opened the market in China in 1840 .
 Qing army also failed to take advantage of their superiority in numbers over the British . The Qing army failed to use their superior numbers to defeat the British army .
 China learned the Western forces were prepared to use force to gain trade concessions . China learned from the West that it was prepared to take advantage of force to win trade concessions.
 China fought the Second Opium War against England and France in 1856-1860 . After the First Opium war, China fought against the British and French .
 In the late nineteenth century, frequent peasant rebellions, foreign invasions, and anti-Manchu movements undermined the Qing dynasty’s power . The Qing dynasty was overthrown by peasants and foreign invaders .
 In 1895, China was defeated by Japan and thus lost its central position in Asia . China lost its position in the region after losing its position to Japan .
 By 1906, the New Army consisted of five infantry divisions, totaling 50,000 men . The New Army was one of the largest in the world's history .
 Sun was inaugurated as provisional president of the Republic of China on January 1, 1912, at Nanjing . Sun was the first Chinese president to be elected in 1912 .
 A great breakthrough in Chinese history, it ended 2,000 years of monarchy and built the first Asian republic . A great break in China's history, ending the monarchy was a great breakthrough . China's first Chinese republic was founded in 1903 .
 Banner System; Beiyang Army; Boxer Rebellion; China, Republic of of; Chinese Revolution of 1911; Great Wall; Kangxi, Emperor; Li Hongzhang; Li Zicheng; Manchuria; Ming Dynasty; New Army; Nian Rebellion; Opium
 The unification of China was followed by the establishment of a highly centralized regime, the Qin dynasty . The Qin dynasty was the first of its kind in Chinese history .
 Qin Shi Huangdi (the first emperor of Qin, reigned 221210 BC) concentrated all power in his own hands . He proceeded with the establishment of a large bureaucracy .
 Qin emperor wanted to secure his centrality by creating a political authority at his capital . Qin wanted to . create a political . authority at the capital . The Qin emperor was assassinated in 2010 .
 This required a large army, and a large number of peasants were drafted through a centralized taxation system . The army was created by a centralized tax system .
 He was also required to spend a month every year in local work on roads, canals, palaces, and military duties . He also spent a month a year every year on local work .
 Through his sponsoring of Legalism, the emperor influenced the whole future Chinese conception of law . The emperor's sponsorship of legalism influenced the future of law in China .
 Late arrival for military duties was punishable by death in Qin law . Qin soldiers decided to start a rebellion against the law .
 Peasant peasants used only hoes and clubs as weapons to fight against Qin dynasty . Qin dynasty was eventually toppled by peasants who used hoes as weapons . The Qin dynasty ended in 2011 .
 Great Wall; Han Dynasty; Han, Cavalry of; Han Wudi, Emperor; Qin Shi Huangdi, Emperor, Terra-Cotta Army; Warring States Period. Great Wall .
 In 1927, the CCP began to organize its independent armed force after the end of the CCP-GMD coalition of 1925-1927 . The CCP began organizing its own armed force in 1927 .
 CCP called its army the “Chinese Red Army” after the Soviet Red Army . CCP called it the ‘Chinese Red army’ The CCP called itself the "China Red Army" after the .
 Mao Zedong led the peasants’ Autumn Harvest Uprising in central Hunan Province . He organized the First Division of the Chinese Revolutionary Army of Workers and Peasants .
 About 5,000 men organized into six regiments, for which they had only 2,000 rifles . They established the Fourth Army on May 4, 1928, about 5,00 men .
 Communist troops joined them at Jinggangshan, which became the “cradle’s military revolution against Jiang Jieshi (18871975), president of the Republic of China .
 Mao and Zhu laid some groundwork for the Communist armed force . During this formative period, Zhu and Mao and Mao laid groundwork for Communist armed forces . Zhu was Zhu's first wife, Mao's wife, and Mao's daughter .
 Zhu and Mao developed guerrilla tactics as a new strategy to win battles, Zhu said . Mao and Zhu used guerrilla tactics to win the war in China . Zhu was Mao's first president, Mao's second, and Mao's third . Zhu died at the age of 50 in 1968 .
 Zhu-Mao's Fourth Army of the CRAWP became the Red Army’s Fourth Army in June 1928 . The Red Army became the CrawP's 4th Army in the spring of 1928 .
 In May 1930, the Central Committee secretly held a national representative meeting of the Red Army . The Red Army renamed the Chinese Workers and Peasants Red Army in May 1930 .
 Red Army suffered heavy casualties during its western movement and shrank to 30,000 men in late 1934 . The Red Army was forced to withdraw after heavy casualties .
 On July 7, 1937, the Japanese Army attacked the GMD troops at the Marco Polo Bridge, located southwest of Beijing, China . The bridge was attacked by the Japanese army .
 As part of the agreement, the Red Army became the Eighth Route Army of the National Army in August 1937 . The Eighth Route was the main force in the northwest of Russia .
 Red Army College Principal Chinese Communist institution for military, political, and logistical education . Red Army college was founded in 1949 by the Communist Party of China .
 Education was primarily in the areas of military command, politics, and planning, with additional teams established for officer training, antiaircraft defense, and survey work . Education was focused on military command and politics .
 Many instructional materials were of Soviet origin, translated by former president Liu Bocheng . Ideologically, this meant that instruction emphasized the role of the military in protecting the workers of the world .
 In practice, the Red Army College remained under the direct control of The Jiangxi Soviet Central Bureau . In practice it remained under direct control .
 The creation of the Red Army College was part of a larger military effort to centralize control over guerrilla groups and warlord army units . The college was created in the 1930s . It was also part of an effort to control control of guerrilla groups .
 Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung) organized the First Division of the Chinese Revolutionary Army of Workers and Peasants with 5,000 men in August 1927 . Red Army Recruitment was organized in late August 1927, 1927 . Mao's first division was the First
 On September 29, the badly damaged division reorganized into a single regiment with 1,000 men at Sanwan, Jiangxi Province . The division was reorganized in September .
 Mao survived and successfully established a military base area for the Communist revolution in 1928 lasting until 1934 . Mao, however, survived and . successfully established the military base .
 The surviving regiment of the Red Army established the Jinggangshan base along the Jiangxi-Hunan border . Under Mao’s command, the surviving regiment established the base . The base is located in the eastern part of China .
 The Red Army established the Red Army’s Fourth Army on May 4, about 5,000 men in six regiments, with 2,000 rifles . The army was established by the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 The Fourth Army created a voluntary system based on the ‘Guideline for Military Tasks’ issued by the army in April 1928 .
 The guidelines stated that all the new recruits should be volunteers in order to prevent any risk of professionalizing the Red Army . The army should not pay any man or officer for his service, but would provide for all needs with some pocket cash for its men .
 The Fourth Army initiated land reform in the mountainous area from 1928 to 1930 . To attract peasant volunteers, the Fourth Army started land reform .
 The army usually sent an officer with a couple of men to a village helping the poor peasants by reducing their rents and taxes . The army would usually send a small group of officers to help the poor .
 The army received material and human resources from their base areas . The army provided protection for the local Soviet-style governments to continue their land reform movement .
 Following the Jinggangshan model, other surviving units established their military bases one after another in the rural and border regions of Hunan, Fujian , Jiangsu , and Anhui Provinces .
 Zhu and Mao had created an exemplary military center at Jinggangshan for the Communist revolution at that time . Mao and Zhu and Zhu had created a military center .
 The Shanghai meeting became a turning point in the Red Army’s development, transforming scattered guerrilla operations into a more organized, central operation . The meeting was the first meeting of the Red Red Army in Shanghai .
 Soviet leader Joseph Stalin began to praise Mao’s rural guerrilla warfare during his conversations with the Chinese visitors in Moscow . After May 1930, Stalin began praising Mao's rural guerrilla Warfare .
 Mao's military success made him central to the Chinese Communist revolution . Mao’s military success had made him a central figure in the revolution . His military success led to his rise in power in China .
 Red Guards were mass organizations of Chinese civilians, especially students, during the early years of the Cultural Revolution . The Cultural Revolution was a nationwide political struggle accompanied by extensive purges .
 In 1966, Mao Zedong mobilized the young people by encouraging them to join the “Red Guards” and launched a disastrous, prolonged movement against the leader’s own political rivals . The young people were mobilized by the leader's own political opponents .
 In the summer of 1966, the Cultural Revolution became a nationwide political struggle . China's Cultural Revolution was a nationwide struggle .
 The students organized the Red Guards as the driving force for the movement . The Red Guards were the students who organized the students .
 Mao used the Red Guard youth to publicly attack, or “bomb” , the CCP and PRC hierarchy officials . Mao used this tactic to attack or publicly attack the CCP or PRC .
 From June to August 1966, all high schools and colleges dismissed classes and allowed students to participate in the new revolution . Students were allowed to participate .
 Mao attended a mass meeting celebrating the Cultural Revolution with 1 million of the Red Guards at Tiananmen Square . Mao attended the mass meeting on August 18, 1969, with a million Red Guards .
 Mao met 11 million of the Red Guards from all over the country in the fall of 1966 . It became the first of eight mass rallies at Tiananmen Square, where 11 million Red Guards gathered .
 It was estimated that there were more than 16,000 Red Guard groups in the city of Beijing alone .
 The ‘Cultural Revolution Leading Group’ led a violent spree of home searches, property destruction, free-for-all fights, and even murders . It degenerated into a wild spree of property destruction and property destruction .
 These “bad elements” of society suffered physical and psychological attacks . These ‘bad elements of society’ suffered physical, psychological attacks. These were physical and . psychological attacks, the author says .
 Red Guards had already arrested 22,000 “counterrevolutionaries” in Beijing . In October 1966, an official report recorded that the Red Guards were already in possession of 22,500 ‘counterrevolutionary’s ‘anti-Chinese’ forces .
 In October, Liu Shaoqi, president of the People’s Republic of China, Deng Xiaoping, vice premier; and many high-ranking government officials in the State Council, ministries, and offices of the central government in Beijing were publicly criticized and purged .
 One of the Red Guard groups attacked and looted the Ministry of Public Security six times in the fall . The Red Guard group looted the ministry six times this year .
 Most of the ministers and important government officials were detained by the Red Guards . Some were tortured and killed, some were tortured .
 From the summer to the fall of 1966, the Chinese students moved into the center of domestic politics during the Cultural Revolution . The students were students during the summer and fall of that year .
 In early 1967, the movement had begun to overthrow provincial, county, and metropolitan governments across the country . The movement began to overthrow the government in 1967 .
 The first such power seizure took place in Shanghai, when the Red Guards and Workers Revolutionary General Headquarters joined forces and forced their way into the city hall . The first time such a power seizure was in Shanghai .
 They organized a ‘revolutionary committee’ as the new authority to replace the municipal government and party committee . The committee was formed after the election of President Barack Obama .
 This power seizure was called the “Shanghai Spring” and followed the Red Guards all over the country . The power seizure is called the "Shanzhou Spring" and followed Red Guards everywhere in China .
 Since the summer of 1967, the situation worsened across the country, as the Cultural Revolution entered the phase of a ‘total taking-over’ of the authorities . The Cultural Revolution began in 1967, when the situation in China began to deteriorate .
 Different factions within the Red Guards had contradictory political orientations and different plans, leading to violent conflicts in many places resembling a civil war . The Red Guards were divided by factions with conflicting political orientments .
 The Red Guard movement continued and became more violent, and did greater damage not only to the government and the people, but this time to themselves . "The Red Guard" became violent and became violent again, the president says .
 The Red Guards splintered into factions based on schools they had attended, political status of their families, and rivalry among their leaders . Red Guards began to splinter into zealous factions, based on the schools they attended, the political status and their families .
 Each group claimed to be the “true’s representative of the Thought of Mao . Each group said they were the ‘true” representative of Mao.
 The resulting chaos led to civil wars between the different Red Guard organizations, and anarchy paralyzed the urban economy . The resulting anarchy led to the collapse of the economy .
 Mao employed the PLA to restore social and political order and to prevent a possible civil war in the country . Mao employed them to stop the national turmoil .
 In 1967, the PLA forcibly suppressed the more radical Red Guard groups in Sichuan, Anhui, Hunan, Fujian, and Hubei Provinces . The Red Guard was forcibly suppressed in 1967 .
 Students were also ordered to return to school, and student radicalism was branded “counterrevolutionary” and banned . In some regions, students were also told to return school . Student radicalism has been branded ‘counterrevolution’ and banned.
 In the spring, there was a wide backlash against the suppressions, including student attacks on the PLA units .
 Following Mao’s order, the military violently put down the national Red Guard movement in late 1967 and early 1968 . The military violently suppressed the movement in the late 1960s .
 A radical alliance of Red Guard groups in Hunan, Mao’s home province, refused to give up their weapons . For example, a group of Red Guards in the province of Hunan refused to hand over weapons .
 When the PLA sent local units (like the National Guards in the United States) to the area searching for the illegal weapons, the soldiers were ambushed by the armed Red Guards .
 PLA sent in a field army with tanks and heavy artillery pieces to the area to attack the Red Guards . The Red Guards were attacked by the PLA with tanks, heavy artillery and tanks . Then the PLA sent an army to attack Red Guards in the area .
 It was reported that more than 8,000 Red Guards were killed during the conflicts . It is reported that 8,00 Red Guards died during the conflict .
 At the same time, in Guangxi Province, the PLA carried out mass executions of Red Guards in order to stop their armed clashes against the PLA units . Red Guards were executed by the PLA to stop clashes against each other . The executions were carried out to stop the clashes against PLA units
 On July 28, 1968, Mao and the CCP leaders met with Red Guard leaders in Beijing . Mao met with the Red Guard in Beijing to meet with Red Guards .
 The chairman criticized their armed struggle, and officially abolished the Red Guards . The chairman of the chairman criticized the armed struggle .
 Millions of students sent away from the cities to the remote rural or border areas to do agricultural labor . Thereafter, millions of students were sent away .
 Many of them never completed secondary education or college education . Many of the students never completed their secondary education . Some of them were never completed college or college .
 Hundreds of thousands of Red Guards were killed, beaten, or injured from 1966 to 1968 . Hundreds of, thousands of people were killed or injured in 1966-68 .
 The interaction between the Tsarist and Qing Empires was mainly based on foreign trade . The beginning of Sino-Russian relation can be traced to the seventeenth century .
 In this phase the two states concluded a series of treaties such as the Sino-Russian Treaty of Nerchinsk and the Treaty of Kiakhta . The treaties fixed a common border and other trade regulations . The two states also concluded a number of treaties .
 By the nineteenth century, Russia became fully involved in China's affairs . Russia was encouraged by the success of Britain and France in extorting concessions from China .
 Tsar pressed Qing China to sign Treaty of Aigun and the Treaty of Beijing . China's territory on the northern shore of the Amur, together with that between the Ussuri River and the sea, were placed under Russia's control .
 It was not until the 1950s, after World War II, that the two nations became deeply connected again . The two nations first met in the 1940s, when the U.S. became close-knit .
 The Soviet Union became China's closest ally through most of the 1950s during the Cold War . Due to a common fealty to MarxismLeninism, the Soviet Union was China’s closest ally . The Soviet Russia was the country's most powerful ally during the 1960s .
 Soviet technology, equipment, and advisors flowed to China and helped support the latter’s Five Year Plan with success .
 The two communist regimes built a military alliance through the Treaty of Friendship and Alliance . The treaty heightened China’s dependence on the Soviet Union for economic support and nuclear protection .
 After the death of Joseph Stalin, a major political conflict emerged that made the Soviet Union and China bitter rivals in the Communist world for three decades . China and the Soviet Russia were bitter rivals for decades .
 In 1956, Nikita Khrushchev’s (1894— 1971) speech denounced some of Stalin's policies and practices . The speech was a response to a speech by the Soviet Union leader in 1956 .
 Soviet leaders held a summit meeting with the U.S. president, showing a conciliatory gesture toward the United States . It was viewed by their Chinese comrades as a betrayal of revolutionary responsibilities in the third world .
 Two shootouts broke out on Damansky (also known as Zhenbao) Island near the Chinese bank of the Ussuri .
 Both sides have drawn back from the brink of war . But after that, it seemed both sides seemed to have pulled back .
 China soon sought reconciliation with the U.S. to confront the Soviets, which eventually ended the worst time of confrontation . China eventually sought reconciliation .
 As the ideological potshots become passe, Sino-Russian relations were starting to get better .
 In 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev reduced military forces along the border and restored normal relations with China . The two countries were restored to normal relations in 1985 .
 After the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, China tightened its relation with Russia . China further tightened its relations with Russia, partially due to its concern about possible U.S. intervention in Taiwan Strait .
 In 1993, the two nations concluded an agreement that officially closed all their border disputes . The two nations signed an agreement in 1993 .
 In 1996, a loose alliance encompassing Russia, China, and the Central Asian republics was created . The alliance was created in 1996 . Russia and China are the two countries that formed the alliance .
 The Russo-Japanese War was a major conflict in the Pacific . Russian forces engaged the Japanese Empire in a bid for supremacy in East Asia . The Russian Empire was defeated by the Japanese in the war .
 The subsequent defeat of Russia would do much to bolster the international standing of Japan as a global power, as they had successfully taken on a major European nation .
 The event also aided in discrediting the Tsarist government, which would soon find itself in the throes of revolution . The event helped to discredite the Russian government .
 The lead-up to the war represented a tumultuous struggle by Japan to realize its ambitions of becoming a world power . Japan's struggle to achieve world power was a tumultuous period .
 From 1894 to 1895, Japan engaged in a war with China, eventually gaining the island of Taiwan and the warm-water harbor of Port Arthur . The war ended in 1895, when Japan gained the island and Port Arthur, and the harbor .
 Russo-Japanese War was fought in 1904-1905 between Japan and the Russian Empire over competing territorial claims in northern China . The Russian Empire tried to apply diplomatic pressure on Japan to turn control of Port Arthur back to the Chinese .
 Russia in turn leased the port from China, and maintained control over the surrounding area . Russia also maintained control of the area surrounding the port .
 During the Boxer Rebellion of 1900, European powers, including Russia, intervened and stationed troops in China . Russia intervened in 1900, and sent troops to China .
 Russia subsequently stationed a military force in Manchuria and began to eye further expansion in the surrounding area, including Korea . Russia subsequently began to expand its military presence in the area .
 Japan saw its sphere of influence threatened, as it maintained considerable influence over Korea, and considered Russian expansionistic aims to be dangerous to their goals .
 Russia and Japan entered into negotiations over the issue in 1901 . With the threat of war mounting, the two nations entered into peace talks . Japan and Russia entered into talks over the matter in 1901.
 Japan signed the Anglo-Japanese Alliance with Great Britain in an effort to bolster their position . Negotiations were deadlocked, so the alliance was signed .
 Under the terms of the treaty, if Japan entered into a war in the Far East and a third party attacked Japan, Britain would go to war on the side of Japan . The treaty was signed by Japan in 1945 .
 Russia continued on with the negotiations, and did not suspect that Japan would escalate the conflict further . Russia continued to negotiate with the Japanese government .
 On February 9, 1904, Japan’s navy attacked Russian forces at Port Arthur . The attack took place in Port Arthur, Japan, in 1904 . Russia was defeated by Japan's naval forces .
 A declaration of war had been sent to the Russian government, but it was delivered three hours after the attack . The Russian government had been informed of the attack, but the attack was not declared war .
 Tsar Nicholas II did not believe the Japanese would attack, and the Russian forces were taken off guard by the maneuver . The Russian army was unprepared for the Japanese maneuver .
 Under the command of Heihachiro Togo, the Japanese Navy inflicted damage to several Russian cruisers . Togo was in command at the time of the attack .
 Russian forces were able to stave off a complete defeat . The battle itself served as a distraction from the Japanese land invasion at Inchon .
 Japanese army, under the command of Kuroki Tamemoto, marched on Seoul and solidified its control over all of Korea . The Japanese army was responsible for the capture of Seoul .
 Japan commenced a blockade of Port Arthur and turned back attempts by the Russians to break out . Port Arthur was the first port to be attacked by Russia in the war .
 Russian Far East general Aleksey Kuropatkin attempted to stall Japanese advancement into Manchuria . He was the first Russian general to try to stop the Japanese advance into China .
 He was under orders to delay them in time for reinforcements to arrive via the Trans-Siberian Railway and to hold the Japanese at the Yalu River . He was ordered to delay the Japanese by the time they arrived .
 On May 1, 1904, the Japanese army crossed the Yalu River and assaulted the entrenched Russians . The Japanese army attacked the entrenched Russian forces in the area .
 The Japanese suffered heavy losses, but with support from other troops landing in Manchuria, they were able to drive Russian forces further back . With support of other troops, the Japanese managed to drive Russia further back into Manchia .
 All Russian ships were either destroyed or forced to scuttle . This had a devastating effect on all Russian ships . This led to the collapse of the Russian fleet .
 Major General Anatoly Stessel, commander of the garrison at Port Arthur, became dismayed after the loss of the Russian fleet .
 He was able to inflict disproportionate casualties on the Japanese every time they attempted to take the port . Although he had enough food and ammunition to last through a siege, he nevertheless surrendered on January 2, 1905 .
 Russian general, Aleksey Kuropatkin, put up a defense of the area utilizing artillery . The Russian general said the area was under threat .
 The Japanese pressed on, and the two forces engaged in fierce and bloody fighting . The Japanese press pressed on .
 The Battle of Mukden was one of the largest land battles fought prior to World War I . The battle lasted from February 20 to March 10, 1905, and lasted between 1905 and 1905 .
 The Russian army strength was over 200,000 men, with the Japanese army boasting a similar number of men .
 Japanese troops were under the command of Prince Oyama Iwao, a field marshall in the army .
 The superior Japanese tactics allowed them to encricle the Russian forces, and General Kuropatkin gave the call to retreat . The Russian forces were defeated by Japanese forces .
 Russian forces suffered roughly 90,000 casualties, with the Japanese suffering 70,000 . The Japanese suffered around 70,00 casualties .
 Although the cost was high for Japan, the battle proved to be a resounding success for them, as they had successfully smashed the major Russian army in the region . The cost of the battle was high, but it was a major success for Japan .
 No further significant land battles would take place for the rest of the war . No further land battles were held for the duration of the conflict .
 The Russian Empire mobilized elements of its Baltic Fleet to sail around the world to confront the Japanese navy . The Baltic Fleet was mobilized around the globe to confront Japan's navy .
 The Second Pacific Fleet consisted of eight battleships and several smaller cruisers and destroyers . This battle group was under the command of Admiral Zinovy Petrovich Rozhestvensky . The fleet was renamed the Second Pacific .
 Russian fleet finally arrived in late May 1905 and attempted to sneak undetected into the port at Vladivostok through the strait between Korea and Japan known as Tsushima Strait . The Russian fleet was finally able to enter the port in late 1905 .
 The fleet was sighted by the Japanese navy, and battle commenced from May 27 to 28 . Battle commenced on May 27 and 28 .
 The Japanese fleet consisted of four battleships, but they outnumbered the Russians in destroyers and cruisers as well as possessing a significant number of torpedo boats . The Russians outnumbered the Japanese fleet in the Battle of the Second World War .
 The Russian fleet was almost completely destroyed, losing all eight of its battleships among other smaller vessels, and over 5,000 men . All eight battleships were lost, including all eight smaller vessels .
 Japanese forces occupied the Sakhalin Islands and forced the Russians to sue for peace . Japanese forces then occupied the island and made it into a Japanese colony .
 Theodore Roosevelt stepped in as a mediator between the two sides and helped them negotiate peace terms . Theodore Roosevelt (1858-1919) was the president of the United States . Roosevelt died in 1919 at the age of 92 .
 The Treaty of Portsmouth was eventually signed in Portsmouth Naval Shipyard near Portsmouth, New Hampshire in the United States on September 5, 1905 . The treaty put an end to the Russo-Japanese War in place .
 The treaty ceded Manchuria back to China and allowed Japan to keep half of Sakhalin Island . It also ceded half of Manchurium to China . The treaty also gave Japan the right to keep part of the island . Japan and China signed the treaty in 18
 A prior treaty negotiated earlier in the year, the Japanese were also able to have total control of Korea . According to a prior treaty, Japan was able to control Korea .
 By the end of the war, the Japanese were seen as a new global power, having successfully taken on a Western power and won, and having project its ambitions for imperialist domination to other regions .
 Boxer Rebellion; Japan, Attack on Manchuria; Manchuans; Qing Dynasty; Russia, Relations with China; SinoJapanese War. Manchus; Qing dynasty; Russia; Russia .
 The corps commands 120,000-150,000 troops with its headquarters in Beijing . Its headquarters are in Beijing, China .
 China controls and operates the third-largest nuclear weapon system in the world . China launched its nuclear and missile programs in the 1950s . It controls the world's third largest nuclear weapons system after China .
 Russian nuclear and missile experts began to arrive in Beijing in 1958 . In early 1958, Russian nuclear experts arrived in Beijing .
 As part of the 1950s military reform of the PLA, the Soviet Union greatly influenced China’s nuclear and missile weapon programs . The Soviets refused to offer data on their nuclear-powered submarines and other weapon systems .
 At that time, the PLA established its first surface-to-surface missile battalion as a strategic force . At that . time, China established its . first surface to . surface to surface missile battalion . The PLA established it first surface . to .
 In late 1958, the PLA Air Force established three surface-toair missile battalions . On May 21, 1959, it opened its surface to air missile training center, and in March 1964, it established the first surface to-air missile division . The PLA established its first surface-
 In 1958-1960, 40,000 engineering troops of the PLA moved into Lop Nur, the nuclear testing ground, to begin construction of the site .
 They established a huge testing ground with launch sites, an airport, a railroad, and warehouse facilities . It was a huge test ground for space shuttle missions .
 On September 9, 1960, the first Chinese missile, modeled on Soviet P-2, was launched successfully in Inner Mongolia . The missile was short range and not suitable for carrying a nuclear warhead . It was short-range and not capable of carrying a nuke .
 On November 5 and December 6 and 16, China tested three missiles of its own design, C-1059 . Two of the missiles were surface-to-surface missiles . China tested the missiles in November and December .
 In JuneJuly, 1964, there were three successful mediumand long-range surface-to-surface missile tests of China’s own models . China tested its own missiles in June July 1964 .
 China had its first successful nuclear test on October 16, 1964, which had an estimated yield of over 22 kilotons of TNT . The test was about twice the power of the Hiroshima bomb . China's first nuclear test was in 1964, when it was estimated to have had a yield
 Zhou held the Special Commission’s meeting on August 9-11 to discuss the combination of nuclear warheads and missiles in order to produce strategic nuclear weapons . Zhou also held the meeting to discuss combining warheads and missile warheads .
 The meeting also started initial plans for nuclear submarines, satellites, and an antimissile defense system . Initial plans also started plans for a satellite and nuclear submarines .
 On June 6, 1966, General Wu Kehua was appointed as commander of the Second Artillery Corps, China’s strategic missile force . He was appointed by the Chinese government in 1966 .
 From the beginning, the corps maintained the arsenal for both conventional and nuclear-armed missiles . From the start of the corps, the arsenal has been maintained for both nuclear and conventional missiles .
 In 1968, Second Artillery regiments were divided into short-, intermediate-, long-range, and intercontinental units . The Second Army was formed from the Second Army in 1968 .
 In 1966, the first group of operational nuclear warhead and missiles were delivered to the Second Artillery Corps . First group of nuclear warheads and missiles delivered in 1966 . First operational nuclear warheads and missiles are still being used in North Korea .
 In 1980, China successfully tested “Dong Feng05” , a full-range ICBM, launching in western China and reaching the western Pacific . The test was the first of its kind in China in 1980 .
 By the 1980s, the Second Artillery Corps became a nuclear deterrent force since its nuclear warhead could reach both western Russia and the United States . By the 1990s, it had a nuclear weapon that could be sent to western Russia or U.S.
 The Second Artillery Corps retains operational control of China’s land, air, and seabased nuclear missiles today .
 Chinese ballistic missiles submarines fall under the PLA Navy, but are discussed here as part of China’s nuclear deterrent, which is generally the responsibility of the Second Artillery Corps . Chinese ballistic missile submarines are also considered part of the nuclear deterrent .
 The corps has also completed a transformation of mobility to ensure the deterrence . The corps is also completing a . transformation of . mobility .
 In 2006, it developed a new solid-fuel and road-mobile ‘Dong Feng 31A” ICBM system . The system is designed to increase the survivability of its nuclear deterrent .
 The new ICBMs will be combat ready faster than the liquidfueled missile . They will be more quickly launched and easier to hide . The missiles will also be easier to launch and more quickly launch .
 The U.S. is expected to continue to expand its ICBM capabilities and improve upon its land attack cruise missile and antiship missile arsenals . It is also expected to expand upon its Land attack cruise missiles and anti-sceptic missiles .
 Second Field Army One of the main forces of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army during the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949 .
 On August 20, 1945, the Central Military Commission of the Central Committee started the formation of field armies by reorganizing the existing forces to change the war fighting from the guerrilla warfare to a conventional warfare .
 Following this decision, Liu Bocheng and Deng Xiaoping reorganized part of the Eighth Route Army in Taihang, Taiyuan, Jinan, and Ji-Lu-Yu regions into regular armies .
 Between July and October, Liu and Deng engaged in continuous battles, and their troops had reached 420,000 men . Liu, Deng and Deng's troops had been fighting for more than two years .
 In 1947, the CMC formed the Central China Field Army with Liu as its commander and Deng as its political commissar . Liu was the commander of the army and Deng was the political commissar of the political commissionar . Deng was Deng's political comm
 The army successfully carried out several counterattack campaigns, and their main battlefields had by this time moved to the GMD-controlled areas .
 Deng led 120,000 troops of the Central China Field Army across the Yellow River and brought the GMD offensive to an end in central China . Deng was the leader of China's largest military force in the country .
 The last phase of the Chinese Civil War, from August 1948 to October 1949, was a CCP offensive from rural areas against GMD defenses in urban areas . The CCP offensive was an attempt to take advantage of the GMD defense .
 The Central China Field Army participated in the Huai-Hai Campaign from November 1948 to January 1949 . More than 555,000 GMD troops were annihilated in the campaign .
 In January 1949, the CMC established four field army groups, including the First Field Army Group in the northwest, the Second in central China, the Third in east China, and the Fourth in the northeast .
 The Second Field Army commanded the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Army Group, including nine armies . It was one of the most successful armies in the world .
 On April 20, the Second Field Army followed the CMC order to cross the Yangzi River from the north to the south . CMC ordered the move to the north and south of the river .
 The Second Field Army marched into the southwestern provinces of Sichuan (Szechwan) and Guizhou in November .
 On February 22, 1950, the CMC formed the Southwest China Military Regional Command to replace the headquarters of the Second Field Army . The CMC was formed in February 1950 .
 In May 1950, the Second Field Army merged into Southwest China Command, and the field army system was abolished . The field army was abolished in May 1950 .
 The term “Self-Strengthening,” also known as Ziqiang in Chinese, was a movement to save the Qing dynasty from being destroyed by domestic rebellions and imperialist aggression . The movement was to embrace appropriate strategies to revitalize the Chinese empire, strengthen the nation
 The movement also focused on the modernization of the Qing army and navy in the later nineteenth century .
 Prince Gong, Wenxiang, Zeng Guofan, Li Hongzhang and Zuo Zongtang (1812-1885) believed that in order to strengthen China against the West, China had to learn Western techniques of manufacturing ships and guns .
 The first phase, from 1861 to 1872, emphasized the adoption of Western firearms, machines, scientific knowledge and training of technical and diplomatic personnel through the establishment of a diplomatic office and college .
 The Chinese government established a foreign-language school in Beijing in 1862 . It was designed for teaching both Western and Chinese languages . China needed to train its interpreters .
 Similar kinds of schools were established in Shanghai, Guangzhou (Canton), Fuzhou (Fuzhou) and other cities . Later, similar kinds of school were established .
 Such subjects as mathematics, astronomy, physics, chemistry, and international law were added to the curriculum at these schools . This marks the beginning of Western education in China .
 The most important achievement of this phase was the development of military industries, especially the construction of military arsenals and shipbuilding dockyards to strengthen the Chinese navy . China's most important achievements were the construction and development of its own military industries .
 Jiangnan Arsenal and Shipyard in Shanghai was established in 1865 . For example, it was set up in 1865.
 During the second phase, from 1872 to 1885, commerce, industry and agriculture received increasing attention in order to strengthen the country . Commerce, industry, and agriculture were also given increasing attention .
 The development of profit-oriented industries, such as shipping, railways, mining, and mining, was becoming a new venture for the Chinese government .
 These were profitorientiented enterprises operated by merchants, but they were controlled and directed by government officials . Government officials controlled the enterprises .
 Capital for these enterprises came from private sources, but the government managed them . Government managed them and provided subsidies in some cases .
 Government-supervised merchant undertakings include the China Merchants’ Steam Navigation Company, Kaiping Coal Mines, the Shanghai Cotton Mill, and the Imperial Telegraph Administration . Examples of such undertakings are those of the China Merchant’s Steam Navigation Co. and Kaiping .
 During the third phase, from 1885 to 1895, such industries as textiles and cottonweaving developed rapidly . Textile and cotton weaving industries developed rapidly during the period .
 Like all other newly sprouted enterprises of this kind, they were very weak and represented only a small fraction of the total investment in industry . Like all others, it was very weak, and represented a small part of the investment .
 New types of enterprises that appeared in this time were joint government and merchant enterprises or private enterprises . New kinds of enterprises appeared to appear in this period .
 The Chinese government traditionally discriminated against private merchants, but it changed its attitude because it was only interested in getting capital from private enterprises . The government is now looking to get more money from private businesses .
 The government is not ready to let them take an active role in economic development . The government, however, was still not ready .
 The movement did not strengthen China to meet Western challenges independently, says China's leader . The movement is not strengthening China's ability to cope with Western challenges, he says .
 Britain, France, and Russia established sphere of influence in China, supporting local warlords to promote and protect their interests . The old imperialist powers, such as Britain, Russia, and Britain, established their sphere of . influence in . China .
 The new imperialist powers, such as Germany and Japan, were rising after their unification movements and promoting industrialization . The new imperialism powers were rising .
 After achieving industry and military modernization, they became more aggressive in China . After achieving their industry and . military modernization they became . more aggressive .
 China’s defeat in the French-Chinese War of 1884-1885 and the Sino-Japanese War of . 1894-1895 indicated the failure of the Self-Strengthening movement . China's defeat in . the French .-Chinese war of 1885
 The Self-Strengthening movement failed, but it was successful in some aspects . Self-strengthening is a term for self-organisation in the United States .
 Qing government was successful in suppressing peasants’ rebellions because it had established arms and ammunition industries . The Qing government purchased new modern weapons from the Western countries .
 Qing Empire was able to survive two or three more decades and did not collapse immediately . Thus, the Qing Empire survived for more than two decades .
 The movement contributed to the beginning of industrialization in China and paved the way for industrial and military modernizations in the following decades .
 The cities where modern enterprises were built eventually developed into the richest cities in China . Those arsenals, dockyards, schools, and factories that were established became the foundation of modern industries .
 Beiyang Army; Chinese Revolution of 1911; Jiangnan Arsenal; Li Hongzhang; New Army; Qing Dynasty; Sino-French War; Zeng Guofan; Zuo Zongtang .
 Shang dynasty is the earliest Chinese dynasty supported by archaeological and documentary evidence . Shang dynasty lasted from around 1766 to around 1027 BC .
 Long thought to be only a legendary dynasty, the Shang ruled over a large area centered in China’s north plain . The Shang was thought to have ruled over the area for more than a century .
 Shang society was highly stratified with a divine-right king and a closely knit aristocracy ruling over large numbers of commoners . Shang society had a highly-strictly stratified society with a close knit aristocracy .
 Shang religious practice centered on reverence for one’s ancestors and animal spirits . Shang religious practices are centered around reverence for ancestral spirits and animals .
 The Shang also developed a system of writing that was the foundation of the written Chinese language . The Shang developed a writing system, which was the basis for the written language .
 Anyang became the city from which the last 11 kings ruled . It had many different capitals until around the fourteenth century BC, when it became the capital of Anyang .
 Shang China was a largely agricultural civilization, but the Shang also had some cities, which were both administrative and religious centers of society . Shang China is largely agricultural, but had some urban centers, such as cities .
 The basis of the Shang economy was agriculture . The vast majority of the population engaged in farming land controlled by the king and nobility .
 The king frequently conscripted commoners to fight wars, and coerced them to work on large-scale state construction projects such as city walls . The king often conscripts commoners into fighting wars .
 On some occasions, a few commoners were called on to serve as human sacrifices .
 Remains of such incidents have been unearthed in many Shang royal burial pits . Remains have been found in many of the Shang royal burials pits .
 One of the richest sources of evidence of the Shang dynasty comes from ceremonial bronze work and oracle bones excavated from tombs, storage pits, and houses .
 The designs reveal aspects of Shang religion wherein animal and other nature spirits, along with the spirits of family ancestors, determined the future . The designs on the highly crafted bronze work reveal the Shang religion .
 The inscriptions on bronze work and oracle bones display the Shang contributions to the characters that eventually constituted the written Chinese language . The Shang contributed to the creation of written Chinese .
 Zhou dynasty ruled in its early years with the help of former Shang officials . Zhou dynasty did not dismantle the Shang administration but ruled in the early years of the Zhou dynasty .
 The Zhou and future dynasties also benefited from the advances made during the centuries of Shang rule, including advanced bronze work, a complex writing system and multifunctional urban centers .
 Many Shang-era archaeological sites continue to yield new information for historians . Shang-style archaeological sites yield new knowledge for archaeologists .
 Muye, Battle of; Qin Dynasty; Xia Dynasty; Warring States Period; Zhou Dynasty . Zhou Dynasty. Qin Dynasty . Qin Dynasty. Xia Dynasty . Xia Dynasty. Zhou Dynasty: Zhou Dynasty; Qin, Xia, Zhou Dynasty, Zhou, Zhou .
 The Joint Communique of the United States of America and the People’s Republic of China was issued on February 27, 1972, when United States president Richard Nixon was visiting China . The document was an important diplomatic document issued by both governments .
 Nixon became the first U.S. president to travel to the People’s Republic . The People's Republic was nominally a political enemy of the United States . Nixon was the first United States president to visit the republic .
 The main objective of the communique was to facilitate both countries to work together to improve their relations for the good of the American and Chinese people, the U.S.
 There were essential differences between China and the U.S. in their political, social, and economic systems . The two parties agreed that countries, regardless of their social systems, should conduct their relations on a series of principles .
 Both sides agreed that international disputes should be settled on this basis, without resorting to the use or threat of force .
 Both sides hoped that the gains achieved during the U.S. president’s visit would open up new prospects for the relations between the two countries . Normalization of relations between China and the United States was not only in the interest of the Chinese and American peoples but also would contribute
 Beijing claimed that the government of the People’s Republic of China was the sole legal government of China . Taiwan was a province of China, according to the communique . The communique also claimed that Taiwan was Taiwan's province .
 Washington acknowledged the One-China policy and affirmed the ultimate objective of the withdrawal of all U.S. forces and military installations from Taiwan .
 The United States claimed that it would progressively reduce its forces and military installations on Taiwan as the tension in the area diminished . The U.S. has said that it will progressively reduce forces and installations on the island .
 Both parties regarded bilateral trade as another area from which mutual benefit could be derived . Both agreed that economic relations based on equality and mutual benefit were in the best interest of both nations .
 They had the same opinion of smoothing the progress of the progressive development of trade between the two countries .
 The Shanghai Communique was important in the history of the SinoUnited States relationship . It helped end hostility between the two that lasted from 1949 to 1971 . It contributed to normalization when both countries established a formal relationship on January 1, 1979 .
 The war ended in a clear victory for Japan, and the Qing government was obliged to negotiate with the Japanese . The Qing government finally signed the accord on April 17, 1895 .
 Under the treaty, China granted the independence of Korea which was traditionally under Chinese suzerainty . The treaty was signed by China in 1949 .
 The Pescadores Islands, Taiwan, and the Liaodong Peninsula, including Port Arthur, were ceded to Japan according to the settlement . Port Arthur was the last of the islands to be taken by Japan .
 Shashi, Chongqing, Suzhou , Suzhou and Hangzhou as well as several rivers for Japanese trade . Shashi was one of the most important ports in China's history .
 Japan also enjoyed a fixed tariff, most favored nation treatment . In that manner, Japan also enjoys fixed tariff treatment .
 According to the treaty, China paid Japan a large war indemnity of 200,000,000 Kuping taels of silver equivalent to two-and-a-half years’ revenue of the Japanese government . The treaty was signed by China in 1903 .
 Russia, France and Germany forced Japan to retrocede the Liaodong Peninsula to China in exchange for an additional indemnity of 30,000,000 taels . As a response, the Triple Intervention of Russia and France forced Japan . Japan was forced to retrace China's Lia
 Russia moved almost immediately to occupy the entire Liaodong Peninsula, including the strategic Port Arthur . Much to Japan’s surprise, however, following the withdrawal of Japanese forces, Russia moved very quickly . Russia is now occupying the area, including Port Arthur, in China .
 In China, the treaty was considered a national humiliation by the public . The treaty was seen as an act of humiliation by China .
 It aroused nationalist sentiment and stimulated the demands for radical reforms of the political system, as well as calls for revolution and overthrow of the Qing dynasty .
 Li Hongzhang; Nanjing, Treaty of; Qing Dynasty; Russo-Japanese War; SinoJapanese War . Unequal Treaties; U.S. and China's First War .
 Silk Road is a land trading route from ancient Chinese capital city Chang’an to central and western Asia . Silk Road was one of the world's most famous land trading routes . It is now known as the Silk Road in China .
 After Zhang Qian’s adventure to the western region, commercial activities between China and central Asia as well as Europe started to blossom and increased dramatically .
 Chinese silk was popular in central Asia and Europe, and it became a precious commodity . Chinese silk became a valuable commodity in Europe and Asia .
 Due to the heavy trade of silk products, the route was called the Silk Road . The route was also known as the route to trade silk .
 Silk and porcelain products were the symbols of East Asian culture and civilization . Along this 7,000-kilometer route, silk was the symbol of East Asia culture . Silk was the first silk produced from China in 18th century to be shipped to Europe .
 The silk .'.-vufc* ^um-au<a ^vrn .vrn^'Vcl nn^i y\ vrr.t^Minr .vta'pvc v / •* Caravan crossing the Silk Road .
 Map of Asia from the Catalan Atlas, Spain, Majorca, fourteenth century AD. was not only a luxury consumer good but also an effective political tool for the different Chinese dynasties .
 Friendship ambassadors of China like Zhang Qian always used silk products to show the friendship between China and other countries when visiting as messenger to the western Asian countries and even farther .
 Silk and porcelain products enhanced the Chinese image in the Westerners’ minds . The silk and porcellain products were used to enhance China’s image in Europe .
 Due to the high prices of such products in their countries, the people there would imagine that China was a very rich region with abundant natural resources and social wealth .
 The kings and noble families in those countries used Chinese silk dyed with Phoenician red and interior decoration with Chinese porcelain to show their prestige and nobility .
 China also imported a variety of foodstuffs such as grapes, walnuts, carrots, peppers, beans, spinach, cucumbers, and pomegranates .
 Asian and European merchants brought to China rare animals, birds, plants, furs, medicines, spices, and all kinds of jewelry .
 Silk Road was the longest international transportation route between the east and the west in the ancient times . The exploration of the Silk Road is also a great adventure of human civilization as well as the longest transportation route .
 It was the creation of many different ethnic groups living along the route . The route was created by people from around the world .
 It greatly strengthened the economic and cultural exchange between the east and the west . It played an important role in the rising influence and power of the Chinese Han dynasty .
 The other important role played by the Silk Road was the dissemination of religions . The Silk Road also played a role in disseminating religions .
 Some Indian monks stayed in Chinese cities like Chang’an and worked on translating Buddhist teachings into Chinese . Some of the Indian monks worked in China to translate Buddhist teachings .
 During the Han dynasty, Buddhism became recognized in China and assimilated into Chinese culture . Eventually, during the Han Dynasty, Buddhism was accepted into China .
 Buddhism spread from China farther east to Korea, Japan, and other Asian countries . Buddhism continued to disseminate from China to Korea and Japan .
 During the medieval age, more European merchants traveled along the Silk Road from the west to China because of Mongol domination over Eastern Europe and central Asia, which had made such a profitable journey profitable .
 Over the Silk Road, many Europeans reached China, and a few left accounts of their travels . A few accounts of Europeans reaching China have been left behind by Europeans .
 Marco began his trip in 1271 with his father and uncle as Italian traders . Young Marco traveled to Italy with his family and uncle . Marco died in 1272 .
 The group left Venice, Italy, traveling east to the Black Sea, South Russia, central Asian oases, and into China . They traveled to central Asia, central Asia and the Middle East .
 Marco Polo returned to Italy in 1295 and published a book, Description of the World, in 1298-1299 . Marco Polo published the book in 1299 and published it in 1296-1297 .
 Marco Polo gave a detailed account of the geography, economic life, and governments along the Silk Road . Marco Polo is the only other European traveler to give such a detailed description of the region .
 Geologist F von Richthofen began his research on the Silk Road in the nineteenth century . He began researching the area in the early 1900s .
 Another German, Juan Patterson, wrote a book, Silk Road, based on his many years of research and study . Juan Patterson's book Silk Road was published in 2009 .
 10,900 kilometers from Lianyungang, China, to Amsterdam, Netherlands, across the Asian and European continents . The ancient route has been replaced by a much faster railway of 10,000 kilometers .
 Han Dynasty; Han, Han, Cavalry of; Han Wudi, Emperor; Qin Dynasty; Qin, Qin, Xiongnu; Yuan Dynasty . Mongols; Song, Song and Song Dynasty; Song-Mongol War; Xion Gnol War . Xion,
 The initial Outline of the Working Plan of SACO, agreed to by Dai and Miles on August 15, 1943, detailed 34 areas of planned intelligence and special operations cooperation .
 The organization replaced previous efforts by U.S. agencies to establish their own independent operations within China .
 Dai Li, as head of the National Military Council Bureau of Investigation and Statistics, was accorded full United States Navy support in creating a joint force of more than 50,000 guerrillas . Dai Li was later added personnel from the U.S. Army and Marine Corps .
 SACO consisted of 14 camps for training in guerrilla warfare, sabotage, intelligence, weather reporting, mining, air crash rescue, demolition, amphibious warfare, and other tactics for combating Japanese forces . The camp was designed to combat Japanese forces in the Pacific .
 Chinese participants in the training programs later returned to both regular and commando units . Others served in the Loyal and Patriotic Army under Dai’s personal command .
 This SACO-run “FBI school’s and concentration camp elicited concern from U.S. China Theater command that American personnel and equipment were being used against Communist agents rather than Japanese soldiers .
 SACO helped create the basis for the contemporary Taiwan’s Military Intelligence Bureau of the ROC Ministry of Defense .
 The organization was never an effective curb on the conduct of independent OSS secret intelligence activities, which were carried out with the support of Lieutenant General Claire Lee Chennault and his Fourteenth Air Force and the United States Army .
 Dai Li appears to have hoped British command would be driven out of CBI Theater . Dai Li was not driven out by British command, as he had hoped . Nor was British command ever driven out .
 Sino-French War grew out of the Black Flag/Tonkin Wars of 1882-1885 . France and China fought in August 1884-April 1885 . French and Chinese were involved in the war .
 French gains in Tonkin in northern Vietnam alarmed China, for Vietnam was still its tributary state, and the Chinese were concerned about the increasing French presence along their southwestern border .
 When Nguyen dynasty emperor Tu Due appealed to the Qing dynasty in China for assistance, the Chinese responded by sending troops to assist the Black Flags or Chinese pirates already fighting the French .
 On March 12, 1884, they abandoned Bac Ninh to the French after only minimal resistance . The French took control of the area in 1884 .
 In June 1884, French troops occupied Lang Son, the closest major Tonkinese town to the Chinese frontier . The French sent troops to occupy Lang Son in 1884 . The town was the closest to the China frontier .
 At Bac Le, 30 miles short of their goal, the French encountered Chinese troops . The French encounter Chinese troops 30 miles from their goal at Bac Le .
 The French were repulsed at a cost of 22 French dead and 60 wounded . Accounts differ over the cause of the clash, but fighting broke out .
 French premier Jules Ferry was determined to secure Tonkin . The French made their major military effort in Tonkin, where in the spring of 1884 they had 9,000 men .
 French spent most of the spring and summer of 1884 clearing the Red River Delta . Under aggressive generals Louis-Alexandre Briere de Lisle and Francois de Negrier .
 In relatively easy fighting they managed to push deep into the northwest highlands . They managed to get into the region's northwest highland .
 The Black Flags and Chinese regulars enjoyed the advantage of superior numbers and, for the most part, better infantry weapons . The Chinese and Black Flags were the main rivals in the battle .
 Both the Black Flags and Chinese preferred to fight defensively, and they built strong forts, although these tended to be badly sited .
 While courageous and well disciplined, the Chinese were often badly led, they were often led . The Chinese were well disciplined and disciplined, but often poorly led .
 They had artillery but they seldom used it, and they were very poor marksmen, preferring not to fire their rifles from the shoulder in aimed fire .
 The French employed both light artillery and dynamite to blast holes in bamboo palisades . The French were outnumbered by four or even five to one, their bayonet charges usually routed the defenders .
 French lacked sufficient manpower to surround the fortresses, most of the defenders escaped to fight again . Most of the French lacked enough men to surround their fortresses . But because of the lack of manpower, they escaped again to fight .
 The Chinese dug up French corpses to cut off the heads and place them on lances or flag poles . The Chinese used the heads to be placed on their lances and flag poles in order to cut them off .
 The French won a series of relatively easy victories, which led to a false sense of confidence, underestimation of their enemy, and overextension of resources . Nonetheless, the French won the French victories, leading them to underestimate their enemy .
 In early autumn 1884, Chinese regulars from southwestern Yunnan Province joined the Black Flags, led by Liu Yongfu (Liu Yung-fu), in surrounding the French garrison town of Tuyen Quang on the Clear River .
 The siege of that place is one of the glorious chapters in the history of the French Foreign Legion . The siege was one of France's most famous moments in its history .
 The French held out from November 24, 1884, until they were relieved on March 3, 1885 . Although vastly outnumbered, the French were vastly outnumbered . The French were relieved of the siege in March 1885.
 On February 13, 1885, 12 French battalions took the city of Lang Son in far northeastern Tonkin . On February 23, they forced the Chinese from Dong Dang, 10 miles to the north, next to the Chinese border . The city was taken by the French on February
 General Briere de 1’Isle then marched south again to relieve the Tuyen Quang . General Briere de 1'Isle then marched south to relieve Tuyen Quang .
 The French defeated a Chinese force at Hoa Mac in what turned out to be the bloodiest battle for the French in Tonkin since their 1883 invasion . Departing Lang Son on February 16, he defeated a . Chinese forces .
 In late March, seemingly on the brink of defeat a month earlier, the Chinese went on the offensive . The Chinese go on an offensive month after a series of defeats .
 The French were convinced that the French were going to invade southwestern Guangxi Province, they struck in force . The massacre was the first French invasion of Guangxi .
 On March 29, the Chinese retook Lang Son and then began organizing thousands of Vietnamese volunteers . Thousands of Vietnamese are expected to take part in the fight .
 Premier Ferry’s opponents used the defeat at Long Son to drive him from office . Already the Tonkin campaign of 1884-1885 was one of the more controversial episodes in the history of the Third Republic .
 Ferry accused of "treason" for bogging France down in Vietnam . Georges Clemenceau accused Ferry of “treason’s” role in the Vietnam war .
 An armistice was declared in April 1885, before Chinese forces could capitalize on their success at Lang Son .
 This was largely as a consequence of French naval operations against China proper . This was a result of French operations against the country proper .
 Courbet dispatched to Keelung the ironclad La Galissoniere, cruiser Villars, and gunboat . In October 1884, Courbet sent three ships to the island .
 The French bombarded the port and sent troops ashore, but this force was soon reembarked . The French bombed the port, but it was soon returned to the port .
 Courbet had five unarmored cruisers, three gunboats, and two small torpedo craft . Courbet's ship was the Volta, the first of his fleet to be armed .
 Chinese defenses included shore batteries and 11 ships as well as 11 ships . Chinese warships were vastly inferior to those of the French, whose most powerful ships were ironclads .
 The battle then became general, and within an hour all the Chinese ships were either sunk or on fire and drifting . The battle became general and the battle became a general .
 Courbet estimated Chinese casualties at 2,0003,000 men and put his own “cruel losses” at 10 dead and 48 wounded . Courbet also put his "cruel losses" at 10 killed and 48 injured .
 After blowing up the docks and shelling the arsenal, the French steamed for the open sea . The French blew up the dock and sailed to the sea .
 Courbet then took his squadron to Keelung to avenge the earlier repulse there . Courbet's squadron then went on to take on the enemy . The battle was fought in the Battle of the Red Cross, which ended in a defeat .
 At Keelung the French sank a Chinese frigate and sent ashore only 1,800 men . The French sank the Chinese ship, sending ashore only a handful of Chinese men .
 They occupied the port and a neighboring harbor, but even with reinforcements their numbers were inadequate . Even with reinforcements they were completely inadequate, they were not fully equipped .
 Courbet sent part of his squadron from Keelung to confront an effort by the Chinese Nanyang Fleet to break the naval blockade of Taiwan . In early February 1885, Courbet's squadron was sent to confront the Chinese .
 The French ships encountered the relatively modern Chinese ships Kaiji, Nanchen, and Nanrui . Kaiji was accompanied by the frigate Yuyuan and the composite sloop Dengching . On February 11, near Shipu Bay, France encountered the Chinese ships .
 The French succeeded in trapping the Yuyuan and Dengching in Shipu Bay . The Chinese ships fled on spotting the French, but the French succeeded .
 The French destroyed both Chinese ships in a torpedo boat attack on February 14 . The French destroy both ships in the attack on the Chinese ships .
 Courbet located the three cruisers, which had taken refuge with four other Chinese warships in Zhenhai Bay, near Ningbo . Courbet found the cruisers on March 1 .
 Courbet settled for a blockade of the entrance of the bay, but on that same day there was a brief exchange of fire between the French cruiser Nielly and the Chinese shore batteries, which the Chinese claimed as a major victory . The Chinese claimed that the French ship was a major
 The Chinese were unable to break the French naval interdiction of the seaborne rice trade between Taiwan and the Chinese mainland, however, they decided to seek peace . With the French being unable to stop the trade, the Chinese sought peace .
 Under its terms China renounced its suzerainty over Vietnam and recognized the French protectorate . The terms had tremendous consequences for Vietnam, for under its terms .
 Chinese regular troops and Black Flags retired behind the Chinese border . Both Chinese regular forces and Black flags retired behind China border .
 Laos was added in 1893 after the Siamese were bluffed into withdrawing their outposts on the left bank of the Mekong . The French had offered protection to the king of Luang Prabang .
 Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Self-Strengthening Movement; Tianjin, Treaty of Tianjin . Tianjin Treaty of. Tianjin. Opium war, First . Qing Dynasty .
 The Chinese-Indian War arose over a border dispute along the Himalayan Mountains in Ladakh and Aksai Chin in the west and the North-East Frontier Agency in the east . Sino-lndian Border War was the first Chinese war between China and India .
 China launched a large-scale offensive campaign against the Indian garrison in October 1962 . The small-scale border conflicts began in August 1962, and in October, China launched an offensive campaign .
 By late November, when China declared a cease-fire, both sides had engaged more than 100,000 troops with a total of 11,100 casualties and losses . Both sides were involved in more than 10,000 battles in November .
 Tibet had served as a buffer zone between the People’s Republic of China and India since 1949 . Beijing recognized the autonomy of the Tibetan government in 1949, when Beijing recognized it .
 In 1951, the central government negotiated with Tibet and signed the Agreement on Measures for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet on May 23, 1951 . The central government signed the agreement on measures for the peaceful Liberation .
 The Chinese government sent the People’s Liberation Army to Tibet to safeguard its borders with India and Nepal . Then the People's Liberation Army was sent to Tibet .
 The agreement affirms Tibet’s political autonomy, social system, and religious freedom . The agreement affirmed Tibet's political autonomy and social system .
 In 1959, the central government accused the Buddhist spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, of organizing a separatist movement in Tibet . The Dalai Lama was accused of leading a Tibetan separatist movement . The government accused him of being a separatist leader .
 On October 21, there was another incident along the border of the western sector at Kongka Pass . The incident occurred on October 21 in the western section of the border .
 Both sides claim that the other fired first, and both prepared an escalation of the border conflict . Both sides claimed that the each fired first and that they were preparing for an escalation .
 PLA employed four regiments in Tibet, about 13,000 men, as combat troops . The PLA employed about 7,000 troops in Xinjiang and Tibet as combat forces . The Chinese government employs about 13 million troops in Tibet and Xinjiang .
 Large-scale offensive campaign took place at altitudes of over 14,000 feet . The Chinese high command deployed a large number of transportation and communication troops across Tibet .
 In the east, the PLA troops crossed the border and destroyed defense points of the Indian Army . In the west, the Chinese army crossed the borders to destroy defense points from the Indian army . The Indian Army is still at a stand-off with China .
 Xinjiang's regiment took over 37 Indian strongpoints by traveling over 1,000 kilometers along the borders . Xinjiang’s regiment crossed the border and took over . 37 strongpoints . In the west, the Xinjiang . regiment crossed . border and crossed over .
 The CMC has deployed more troops to the borders . Facing the Indian attacks, the CMC deployed more forces to the border . CMC deploys more troops .
 By mid-November, the PLA had reinforced eight infantry and three artillery regiments along the eastern borders; four regiments at the middle section of the eastern border; and one regiment in the west, totaling 56,000 troops . The Chinese government has reinforced eight regiments, four reg
 On the 22nd, the Chinese government announced a cease-fire along the Chinese-Indian borders . The Chinese government also announced a ceasefire with India .
 Between October 20 and November 21, India lost 8,700 troops, including 4,800 killed and 3,900 captured . According to the Chinese reports, the loss of troops was India's biggest loss of all its troops .
 The PLA faced new social and political issues such as religion, minority, geopolitics, and independence movements in Tibet and Xinjiang . The PLA is facing new social, political issues .
 Unlike their wars in the 1930s and 1940s, the Chinese troops fought in the middle of a hostile population—Tibetans . The Chinese troops were fighting in the midst of the hostile population of Tibet .
 Tibetans had the same religions, ethnic tradition, close political connection, and similar languages as the Indian troops . The Tibetans were the same religion and ethnic tradition as the Indians .
 Unlike the North Koreans in the Korean War, the local Tibetan and Uygur people did not provide much support, even moral support, to the Chinese troops . Tibetans did not support Chinese troops in the war .
 The few Tibetan and Uygur soldiers in the PLA could not bridge the social, cultural, and political gaps between the Chinese troops and local people . The few Tibetans in China's army could not overcome the social and cultural gaps between them .
 The PLA’s warfighting experience in India demonstrated that the Chinese troops were much better prepared for a foreign war than they were in Korea 10 years earlier . The Chinese troops are now more prepared for war in India than in Korea .
 The improved logistics supply, communication and transportation, and chain of command all reflected positive results of Peng Dehuai’s reform efforts . The better logistics supply and communication, transportation and chain-commanding efforts were made .
 The technology and professionalism achieved in the mid-1950s was maintained after the fall of Peng in 1959 and the Sino-Soviet split in 1960 . Technology and professionalism was maintained in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Sino-Japanese War between 1894 and 1895 was a conflict between China and Japan . It was primarily over control of Korea . The war was fought over the Korean peninsula .
 After the Japanese Shogunate government collapsed in 1868, the Meiji government dispatched Japanese students to Europe and the United States to study Western technology and science to strengthen Japan’s power .
 In just 30 years, Japan was transformed from a divided state to an industrialized country . Japan had become the most powerful state in Asia by the end of the nineteenth century .
 As a newly rising power, Japan began to adopt an aggressive foreign policy . It promoted overseas territorial expansion to protect its interests and security .
 Korea had been a tributary state to imperial China for centuries . China exerted great influence over the conservative Korean officials who gathered around the royal family .
 After the First Opium War of 1839-1842 between the Imperial Qing dynasty and the British Empire, China had become weak and was unable to resist political intervention and territorial intrusion by Western imperialist powers . The French-Chinese War of . 1884-1885 was the French-
 The decline of imperial China provided the Japanese an opportunity to replace Chinese influence in Korea with its own power . The Japanese were able to replace imperial China with their own power in Korea .
 The Japanese believed that Japan had to occupy Korea because Korea’s coal and iron ore deposits would help Japan promote its industrialization . Japan believed that the country needed the country's coal and ore deposits .
 Chinese military presence on Korean Peninsula would pose a serious threat to Japanese national security and interests . In addition, the Chinese presence on the Korean Peninsula is also a threat to Japan's interests .
 For these two reasons, Japan was determined to terminate the centuries-old Chinese suzerainty over Korea . For these reasons, the Japanese government was determined .
 Conservative Koreans still tried to maintain the traditional obedient relationship with Imperial China . Reformists advocated the creation of a closer relationship with Japan and Western powers .
 In 1882, a severe drought broke out across the Korean Peninsula, which resulted in food shortages . The drought caused much suffering and conflict among the Korean people . The Korean people suffered from drought in 1882 .
 Korean society was at the edge of starvation, and the government was in danger of bankruptcy because of its debts . The government was unable to pay its debts, particularly to its armies, particularly .
 Profound anger was rising amongst the soldiers of the Korean army because they had not been paid for months . The soldiers were angry as they were not paid in Korea's first months .
 Pro-Japanese reformers overthrew the pro-Chinese conservative government of Korea in 1884 . As a result, a group of pro-Japanese reforms overthrew a pro-China conservative government .
 The pro-Chinese Korean armies were successful in defeating the pro-Japanese reformers and in regaining control of the Korean government in a bloody countercoup . In spite of this successful coup, this coup was not successful .
 Nearly 1,000 Chinese sailors drowned in the Sino-Japanese War of 1894-1895 . Deaths of many pro-Japanese reformers, but also the burning of the Japanese embassy and the deaths of several Japanese security guards .
 The Sino-Japanese Convention of Tianjin of 1885 helped put down their differences . This incident contributed to a conflict between Japan and China .
 Japan and China agreed to withdraw their expeditionary troops from Korea at the same time, send no more military advisors to train the Korean armies, and inform the other side in advance if one party resolved to send armies to the Korean Peninsula . According to the convention, both countries withdrew their expedition
 The agreement gave the Japanese a status that almost equaled that of China in Korea . The Japanese were still irritated by the Chinese government, which was determined to maintain its power and influence .
 The Korean situation increasingly deteriorated and the conflict between China and Japan was becoming intensified . The Korean conflict between Japan and China became increasingly intensified .
 China dispatched troops to Korea to put down the Dongxue Rebellion . In 1894, to answer the call of the Korean emperor, the Chinese government dispatched troops . The Chinese government responded by sending troops to South Korea to fight the Korean Emperor .
 The Chinese government notified the Japanese government of its plan to send an expeditionary force of nearly 3,000 troops to the Korean Peninsula according to the terms of the Convention of Tianjin . The Japanese government has not yet responded to the announcement .
 The Japanese believed that the Chinese expeditionary force to Korea would violate the convention and decided to send 8,000 troops to Korea . The Chinese expedition force was considered a violation of the convention by Japan .
 The new pro-Japanese Korean government authorized Japan to force all Chinese armies out of Korea . Japan is also authorized to dispatch more Japanese troops to the Korean Peninsula .
 Since the Qing government refused to recognize the new Korean government, a conflict over Korea between China and Japan seemed unavoidable . Since then, a war between Japan and China was unavoidable .
 By that time, the Japanese military had been ready for a war against the Chinese . The Japanese military was ready for war against China .
 During the Meiji Restoration, the Japanese emperor began to build an effective modern national army and navy . During the era of the Meij Restoration, Japan began to . build a modern modern military and navy.
 In 1873, national conscription was imposed and a professional army was established, while military schools and arsenals were created . National conscription in 1873 was imposed, and professional army established .
 Meiji government sent many Japanese military officials to European countries to study the strengths, strategies, and tactics of European armies and navies . The Meij government then sent many officials to Europe to learn the strengths and strategies .
 By the 1890s, Japan had developed a modern, professional, well-trained army . Japan's army was a well-prepared army .
 Japan’s imperial army of 120,000 troops was divided into two armies and five divisions . Well equipped and supplied, Japan's imperial army was well-equipped and supplied .
 The modern Japanese navy was established with the help of the British Royal Navy, the leading naval power in the world in the nineteenth century .
 The British sent naval advisors to Japan to teach and train the Japanese imperial Navy . The British were sent to train and teach the Japanese Imperial Navy .
 The Meiji government sent Japanese students to Great Britain to learn and survey the British navy . Meanwhile, the Japanese government also sent students to Britain .
 The Japanese soon created their own modern warships, such as cruisers and torpedo boats . The Japanese became the first to create modern warships in the 1930s .
 China's military was not modernized, poorly trained, and inadequately equipped . In contrast, the Chinese military was poorly trained and poorly equipped .
 After suppressing the Taiping Rebellion of 1851-1864, the Chinese army was divided into Manchu, Mongol, Hui and Han Chinese armies under the leadership of the local independent warlords .
 Huai and Xiang armies made up the larger Beiyang Army, which was the most powerful army at that time . The Huai/Xuan armies were made up of the largest army in China .
 The divided Chinese armies did not have much strength due to regional rivalry . The divided armies were divided by regional rivalry, according to reports .
 The Beiyang Fleet was one of the four major Chinese navies in the late Qing Dynasty . It was the fourth major naval force in China's history .
 China's Beiyang Fleet was the leading navy in East Asia before the first Sino-Japanese War .
 Qing government spent much money on building the Summer Palace in Beijing while stopping purchase of any modern weapons, arms, and ammunitions after 1891 . However, the corrupt government spent most of the money .
 The Beiyang force was the best equipped and best trained, standing for the new, modernized military of China . It was founded in 1888 but did not obtain any new warships after it was founded .
 Warships were not maintained correctly, and disorderliness was widespread among the Chinese navy . The Chinese navy was not maintained properly and disorder was widespread .
 The morale of the Chinese armies was usually very low by reason of lack of pay and prestige . It was usually low due to lack of prestige and lack of money .
 Many in the Chinese armies were using opium and became opium addicts, which significantly reduced the strength of the military . To make things worse, many in the . armies were also using opium, which led to the decline in the strength .
 The Chinese tried to use Korea to restrain the more imperialist encroachment of Japan in East Asia, but their weak military helped contribute to Japanese aggression in Korea . Their weak military contributed to Japan's invasion of Korea .
 The Sino-Japanese War was officially declared on August 1, 1894, although some naval skirmishing had already occurred .
 The Japanese army defeated the Chinese in a series of battles around Seoul and Pyongyang . The Chinese defeated the Japanese army in a number of battles .
 The powerful Japanese army began to invade Manchuria after defeating the Qing army in October . The invasion began in October and began in November .
 The modern Japanese navy defeated China’s Beiyang Fleet at the Battle of Yalu on September 17, 1894 . The battle took place at the mouth of the Yaru River in the southern part of China . The modern Japan navy defeated the Chinese fleet .
 The Chinese navy, after losing 8 out of 10 warships, was forced to retreat behind the fortifications of the Weihaiwei naval base . Japan’s domination of the sea was secured .
 The Japanese lost no time in launching a sudden land attack across the Liaodong Peninsula . The rest of the Beiyang Fleet at the naval base was smashed with intense shelling .
 Weihaiwei, Shandong Province, fell to the Japanese on February 2, 1895 . The Japanese quickly occupied Manchuria . The area was occupied by the Japanese .
 The Japanese military invaded the Pescadores Islands off the west coast of Taiwan in 1895 . After defeating the Chinese army and navy, on March 23, 1895, the Japanese invasion began .
 In a short military campaign without bloodshed, the Japanese overcame the islands defended by the Qing force and took over the major town of Makung . The Japanese defeated the Qing forces in a short battle .
 The campaign prohibited the Chinese forces in Taiwan from being strengthened and gave the Japanese government an opportunity to force the Qing government to surrender Taiwan to Japan in the negotiation thereafter .
 Poor preparation, inadequate training, and a great disparity between weapons and munitions were the major reasons for China’s defeat in the war . Poor preparation and inadequate training were the main reasons for the defeat in China .
 The war was fought largely with Li Hongzhang’s forces without any support from other Chinese forces . In addition to the war, the war was also fought largely without any other Chinese support .
 Qing government forced to sign Treaty of Shimonoseki on April 17, 1895 . Qing government under pressure was compelled to sign the treaty .
 Under this treaty, the Qing government recognized the entire independence of Korea and surrendered the Liaodong Peninsula, Taiwan, and the Penghu Islands to Japan . The Qing government also surrendered Taiwan, Taiwan and the penghu islands to Japan in the treaty .
 Some European powers, especially Germany, Russia, and France, did not want to allow the Japanese to establish a colony on the Liaodong Peninsula in mainland China . Japan forced the Chinese government to sign the treaty, but some European powers refused to allow it .
 Japan was compelled to stop colonization of the Liaodong Peninsula in exchange for another 30 million taels as indemnity on April 23, 1895 . As a result, Japan, under great pressure from the European powers, was compelled .
 The first Sino-Japanese War helped prove the supremacy of Japanese military tactics and training . It was a result of the acceptance of a Western-style military .
 The Japanese triumph in the war was also the consequence of the successful modernization and industrialization in Japan from 1868 to 1894 . The success of the war in Japan was also a result of the success of modernization in Japan .
 The defeat of China helped cement Japan as a regional power, if not a great power on equal terms with the Western powers, and a dominant power in Asia .
 As the Japanese reputation was rising, Japan began to challenge the Western powers’ interest in East Asia . Japan began the . challenge to the . Western powers' interest in . East Asia.
 One of the results of the challenge was the Russo-Japanese War between 1904 and 1905 . The Japanese military tried to force Russia out of northeast China .
 First SinoJapanese War indicated that the military strength and sovereignty of the Qing dynasty had been severely weakened . The consequence of the first Sino-Japanese War was that it was likely to weaken the Chinese dynasty .
 The outcome of the war revealed the Qing government’s incompetence and serious corruption . The Qing government's incompetence and corruption was revealed in the war, the author says . The war was the first of its kind in China .
 Thereafter, many Chinese intellectuals demanded political and social reform in China, which resulted in the Hundred Days Reform of 1898 . Kang Youwei and Liang Qichao were the leaders of the reform movement in China .
 The 1911 Revolution paved the way for the 1911 Revolution, which overthrew the Qing dynasty and established a republic in China in 1912 . The reform movement failed, but it led to the 1911 revolution .
 Chinese Revolution of 1911; Beiyang Army; Manchuria, Manchus; Mongols; New Army . Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Russo-Japanese War . Russo-Japan War; Shimonoseki, Treaty of; Sino-French War;
 Sino-Soviet Conflict Border war between the People’s Republic of China and the Soviet Union . Border war began in 1950s .
 Border disputes between China and Russia have a long history, dating back to the eighteenth century . China's border disputes with Russia have been a long-standing dispute between the two countries .
 China and the Soviet Union agreed to a 4,150-mile-long border agreement in 1949 . Both countries signed the 1951 Border Rivers Navigation Agreement . The agreement was made following the Communist-Soviet-Union alliance .
 With the emerging Sino-Soviet split in the 1960s, the border issue resurfaced . The border issue has since resurfaced in China's border with Russia .
 China claimed some border territories as its own and sent troops of the People’s Liberation Army into these areas . The People's Liberation Army is currently stationed in China .
 Fighting was usually avoided until the late 1960s . Soviet forces expelled the Chinese, and fighting was avoided .
 Soviet Union increased its troops by the end of 1968 from 17 divisions to 27 along the Sino-Soviet border . The Soviet Union also increased its forces in China to 27 divisions .
 In 1968— 1969, the PLA was apparently under tremendous pressure and felt directly threatened by the Soviet Union . The PLA was under pressure . In 1968- 1969, it felt directly under pressure and was under threat .
 Marshal Lin Biao (Lin Piao) warned the army and the country that Soviet forces would invade China soon . In October 1968, China’s defense minister, Lin Piao, warned the country . China's defense minister said the Soviet invasion was imminent .
 Thereafter, the country became militarized and prepared for an invasion . The country was prepared for invasion, and became more militarized . The nation was prepared to prepare for invasion .
 Lin instructed the PLA to confront the Soviets wherever an invasion occurred . While planning to defeat the invading troops by a “people’s war,” Lin planned to defeat them by a "people's war"
 Smallscale border skirmishes erupted at the Zhenbao and Bacha Islands in Heilongjiang, northeast China; and at Taskti and Tieliekti in Xinjiang, northwest China .
 In the first clash on March 2, 40 Chinese soldiers patrolled Zhenbao Island, one of the small uninhabited islands in the middle of the Ussuri River . The island is one of several disputed islands in China's territory .
 The Soviets dispatched 70 border troops to the island, but the Chinese refused to leave . The Soviet-Chinese border troops were sent to help defend it .
 The Soviets lost eight men and one T-62 tank, which sank in the river when artillery fire shattered the two-meter-thick ice cover . The tank was one of the last to sink in the Soviet Union .
 Both nations stood on the brink of war, with the Soviets threatening nuclear retaliation . For the rest of the year, sporadic fighting continued in many places along their borders .
 On June 10, 50 Soviet soldiers attacked the Chinese in Taskti, Xinjiang . Among the border incidents, the Chinese attacked the Soviet soldiers on June 10 . The incident was the first border incident between China and the Soviet Union in decades .
 Fighting in Heilongjiang extended to Bacha Island along the Amur River . On July 8, the fighting extended to the Bacha island along the amur River.
 The border conflicts did not escalate into a total war between the two Communist countries . The border conflict did not escalated into a full war between China and Russia .
 Zhou Enlai met Soviet president of the Ministers Council Aleksei Kosygin in Beijing on September 11, 1969 . The two leaders met at the end of the war . Zhou En lai met Kosygen in 1969 .
 The border clashes continued along the ChineseRussian borders until the late 1970s . But the border clashes between China and Russia continued in the late 1980s .
 Reportedly, Moscow’s leaders considered using a ‘preemptive nuclear strike’ against China . Russia considered a pre-emptive strike against China, according to Russian media .
 By the early 1970s, the Soviet Union had deployed up to 48 divisions, constituting nearly 1 million troops along the RussianChinese border . The Soviet Union also had up to a million troops on the Russian Chinese border .
 China prepared for total war, including possible Russian nuclear attacks . China readies for possible Russian attacks on China, Russia, Russia .
 As a result of its frequent engagements, the PLA increased to more than 6 million men, the highest point in its history . The PLA is now at the highest level in its military history .
 Beijing demanded a reduction in the number of Soviet troops on the Sino-Soviet borders as one of the three conditions for a normalization of relations with Moscow . Beijing demanded the reduction of the Soviet troops as a condition for normalization .
 Mao intended to undermine the rising power of the Soviets in Asia by playing the “American card” Mao wanted to open a new relationship with the U.S. Mao also wanted to undermine Soviet influence in Asia . Mao also intended to play the "American card" and open a
 The Soviet threat and conflicts pushed the Chinese leaders to improve relations with the U.S. The Chinese leaders were forced to improve their relations to the United States .
 U.S. president Richard Nixon visited Beijing in February 1972 . Nixon's visit led to normalization of the Sino-American relationship in the early 1970s .
 1990. Sino-Soviet Normalization and Its International Implications, 1945. 1990 . 1990. 1990. China-Russia relations with the Soviet Union . 1990 .
 SinoSoviet Rivalry and the Termination of the Sino-Vietnamese Alliance . Sino Soviet Rivalry . The Soviet-Sino Soviet Union was founded in 1945 .
 The Sino-Soviet alliance began on February 14, 1950, with the conclusion of the Treaty . Superficially an ideological partnership between the world’s two largest communist countries .
 The advanced state of the alliance’s disintegration became known to the outside world by the early 1960s . Sino-Soviet disagreements over Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's (18941971) 1956 de-Stalinization campaign remained hidden .
 By the late 1940s, the Chinese Communists had decided to lean toward the Soviet Union . Viewing any alliance with a great power solely as a temporary means to help restore past Chinese glory and power .
 Soviet leader Joseph Stalin first hesitated but agreed for utilitarian reasons to conclude a Friendship and Alliance Treaty . Treaty provided the Soviet Union access to railroads, warm-water ports, and important raw materials deposits in Manchuria and Xinjiang in exchange for Soviet military and economic aid .
 Stalin's limited support of the PRC during the Korean War revealed the limits of the military aspects of the alliance . Stalin’s limited support during the war showed the limits .
 After the end of the Korean War, the focus of the Sino-Soviet relationship gradually shifted toward economic development and improved party relations .
 Khrushchev’s “secret speech’ of February 25, 1956, charged Stalin with arbitrary and criminal rule, but strengthened his hand in his relations with the Soviet leaders . The speech was made by Stalin in 1956, but it was meant to have strengthened Mao’
 Mao considered Khrushchev’s criticism of Stalin unfair and imbalanced, but said it had revealed the need to preempt internal dissent in China in order to prevent a crisis similar to the Hungarian Revolution . After increasing his influence in the socialist world through diplomatic mediation during the 1956 Hungarian Revolution
 The PRC’s Hundred Flowers campaign in the spring of 1957 was designed to allow party members and intellectuals to vent their pent-up frustrations in a highly controlled framework but threatened within only a few weeks .
 Both events proved to be crucial for the further development of the Sino-Soviet relationship . They put the PRC and the Soviet Union on two conflicting political, ideological, and economic paths .
 Mao’s willingness to trigger a nuclear war over a series of small, disputed islands in the Taiwan Strait placed the first significant strains on the Sino-Soviet relationship . Mao stated to Soviet foreign minister Andrey Gromyko in early September, that he would trigger a war over
 Faced with widespread famine as a result of the misguided economic policies of the Great Leap Forward, the CCP leadership undertook internal discussions in mid-1959 about economic reforms aimed at averting further disaster .
 Mao was able both to purge his opponents within the party and to relaunch an unreformed Great Leap Forward in late 1959 in order to save his vision of a communist utopia . Fearing challenges to his leadership, he was able to purveve his opponents and relaunch the Great
 The economic catastrophes resulting from the Great Leap Forward shocked the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union's economic success in the 1960s shocked the world .
 Mao's radical anti-American stance clashed with Khrushchev's rapprochement policies . Mao’s anti-U.S. stance also clashed with the Khrushchement policy of the late Soviet leader .
 The April 1960 Chinese publication of the so-called Lenin Polemics revealed the brewing Sino-Soviet tensions to the world . Three articles were released on the occasion of Vladimir I Lenin’s ninetieth birthday that promoted ideologically radical positions diametrically opposed to Soviet viewpoints .
 Beijing used the withdrawal to blame Moscow for its economic problems . The Great Leap Forward had caused the collapse of China’s economy and brought trade to a virtual standstill .
 Until the mid-1960s, the PRC shifted much of its foreign trade away from the Soviet Union toward Japan and Western Europe .
 Both sides realized the necessity of an ideological truce, which they formally reached at the Moscow Conference of the world’s communist parties in late 1960 . Khrushchev's rapprochement with United States president Dwight D Eisenhower after the May 1960 U-2 Crisis .
 Mao used the 1961 Soviet-Albanian conflict as a tool to rebuild his political fortunes at home . Mao was left aside from domestic decision making because of his close association with the failed Great Leap Forward . Mao used it as a way to rebuild political fortunes in China .
 Anti-Soviet propaganda in the PRC triggered conflicts between Soviet citizens and ethnic central Asians living in Xinjiang on the one side and the local Chinese administration .
 Beijing abrogated its consular treaty with Moscow on the basis of alleged Soviet subversive activities in western China . The mass flight of 67,000 people to Soviet Kyrgyzstan in the late spring of 1962 caused Beijing to abrogate its treaty . Beijing had been angered by the
 Mao used these developments to restore his standing in the CCP leadership . Mao pushed for more anti-Soviet policies in the second half of 1962 . Mao used the developments to promote his anti-Russian policies .
 Washington played on Soviet fears about China’s nuclear weapons program . Khrushchev was unhappy with Mao's ideological warfare, according to a report .
 The signing of the treaty by almost all countries of the world within five months isolated the PRC internationally . Despite the fact that the PTBT (initialed on July 25, 1963) did not infringe on China’s nuclear program, the signing .
 The period from mid-1963 to mid-1966 witnessed the final collapse of Sino-Soviet party and military relations . The period between mid-1962 and mid-1960 witnessed the collapse of China-Russia relations .
 Mao fanned and exploited ideological conflict and territorial disputes with his Soviet comrades for domestic purposes . Mao was convinced that the Sino-Soviet pact had fulfilled its usefulness . He exploited ideological conflicts with Soviet comrades in China for domestic gain .
 By the mid-1960s, the military alliance between Beijing and Moscow factually ceased to exist . The treaty did not officially expire until February 14, 1980, although it expired in 1980 .
 For nearly 25 years Sino-Soviet relations consisted of lowlevel cultural relations and limited trade links . Until the rapprochement initiated by Mikhail Gorbachev in the late 1980s, relations were low level .
 Soviet military and economic aid to the newly established Chinese Communist government . Soviet military assistance to the new Chinese government .
 CCP created a new communist state in Asia . After 22 years of military struggle on the road to power, the CCP created 22 years after 22 years .
 In his �lean-to-one-side’ policy, Mao stated the new republic would favor the Soviet Union and join the socialist and communist camp in the post-World War II world . The new republic was ruled by Mao in his “lean to one side”
 Soviet leader Joseph Stalin (1878-1953) was never an easy person, not even to his next-door communist comrades . Stalin was never easy to his comrades .
 Mao was frustrated after two fruitless meetings in December, and became irritated since he hadn't had a chance to meet Stalin for more than three weeks in January 1950 . Mao became irritated because he hadn’t had a meeting with Stalin for over three weeks .
 Mao had a better understanding of Stalin’s intention . Mao spent 65 days in Moscow, a total of 65 days, in total .
 The Soviet leader wanted to convince Mao that the Soviet Union had its own difficulties; that there would be no “free ride” for China; and that China should share the responsibility of the worldwide communist movement; .
 Stalin made it clear that China should support the international communist movements in Asian countries . Stalin made the clear he should support China's support for Asian communist movements . Stalin said China should also support the movements of Asian countries like China .
 Stalin needed China to help with the ongoing Asian Communist revolutions like the First Indochina War in Vietnam . Stalin was preoccupied by European affairs, needed China for the ongoing .
 Stalin told Mao in his office that “the victory of the Chinese revolution proved that China has become the center for the Asian revolution.” In early February 1950, 1950, Stalin said that China had “become the center’s . for the . Asian revolution .
 We believe that it’s better for China to take the major responsibility” in supporting and helping the Asian Communist tasks . China is better for it to take responsibility for supporting and assisting Asian Communist task forces, the authors say .
 On February 14, 1950, the ‘SinoSoviet Treaty of Friendship, Alliance, and Mutual Assistance’ was signed between the Chinese and Soviet leaders in Moscow . The treaty was signed in 1950 .
 The alliance also allowed the CCP to expand its capacity to promote the post-victory revolution at home . The alliance has also been expanded to promote post-war revolution in China .
 The Sino-Soviet treaty made the leanto-one-side approach the cornerstone of China’s external relations and military modernization . The treaty was made the centerpiece of China's external relations .
 After signing the Sino-Soviet Treaty, Mao and Zhou Enlai signed a huge naval order with Stalin for the amphibious operation of the People’s Liberation Army to attack Taiwan .
 The Soviet Union agreed to arm a new Chinese naval force with gunships and equipment worth $150 million . Half of the total loan package Stalin granted through the treaty was half of the loan package .
 Soviet Union rearmed 60 infantry divisions for the PLA in 1951-1954 . Soviet Union also rearmed Soviet-era infantry divisions .
 The Soviets shared technology for the production of rifles, machine guns, and artillery pieces . The Soviets also shared technology with the Soviets .
 Soviet support in economy, government, education, and international affairs was critical for the new regime’s political consolidation and economic development . Soviet support for the regime was critical to its political consolidation .
 Russian aid and military technology helped the Chinese military with its transformation in the early 1950s from a peasant, rebellion army into a professional, regular force . The Russian model was the model that shaped the revolutionary and communist nature of the new China .
 The alliance between Beijing and Moscow was essential for the Communist international alliance system in the 1950s . The alliance was essential to the Communist International alliance system .
 China began to move onto the central stage of the global Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States . The two camps headed by the two superpowers head by the U.S. and the two .
 Sino-Vietnamese Border War officially named in China the “SelfDefensive Counterattack against Vietnam” emphasizing Vietnam’s invasion of China's border area and the mistreatment of ethnic Chinese in Vietnam as justifications for launching the war .
 A more important cause of the war was Vietnam’s alliance with the Soviet Union in the Sino-Soviet dispute and attack on Cambodia in 1978 . Vietnam's alliance with Russia was the result of its attack on the Cambodian border .
 The rise of pragmatist Deng caused a policy shift from world revolution to domestic development, which made China cut its aid to Vietnam . Deng's policy shift was made to focus on domestic development in China .
 It would give Deng an upper hand in his struggle with Mao’s designated successor Hua Guofeng . It would also help consolidate China‘s alliance with the United States, Vietnam’�s archenemy, which was perceived to be an important source of investment and
 The war broke out at 5:00 A.M. on February 17, 1979 . Over 200,000 Chinese troops (or over 600,000 according to Vietnamese estimates) of the People's Liberation Army attacked Vietnam’s northern frontier (from Quang Ninh Province in the
 By February 26, Chinese troops had attacked and taken Muong Khuong, Thanh Thuy, Lao Cai, Dong Dang, Cao Bang, Ha Jiang, Mong Cai and Loc Binh . The Chinese troops also took other places in northern Vietnam .
 In March, Vietnamese troops launched a counterattack and forced the Chinese out of Lang Son . In early March, the Chinese were forced to withdraw from Lang Son, which was captured by Vietnamese troops .
 Fierce fighting did not end until March 4 when Chinese forces retook Lang Son, considered the most strategic place among all the cities taken by the Chinese troops . Lang Son is considered a strategic place in the region .
 On March 16, China affirmed that all Chinese troops had retreated and the war was over . The war was declared over by China on March 16 .
 The war was mainly fought on the ground, but the air force and navy of both countries were also involved . Both countries were involved in the war .
 One Chinese source reports that nearly 7,000 Chinese soldiers and militias were killed and nearly 15,000 were wounded in the fighting . Another Chinese source says nearly 14,000 people were wounded .
 A Vietnamese source estimates that 20,000 Chinese soldiers were killed and 60,000 were wounded . A Vietnamese government source estimates 20,00 Chinese soldiers died in the conflict .
 An independent source reported 26,000 killed and 37,000 wounded for the Chinese side and 30,000 for the Vietnamese side . Independent source reported that the Chinese were killed and wounded in the conflict .
 International reactions had substantial impact on the course of the war . International reactions to the war had substantial influence on the outcome .
 China’s allies, including the Soviet Union, socialist countries in Eastern Europe, and Cuba, severely condemned the invasion of Vietnam . Vietnam's allies called for the immediate withdrawal of Chinese troops and called for an immediate withdrawal .
 Soviet Union sent arms and a military delegation to Vietnam and dispatched warships to patrol the South China Sea . The Soviet Union also sent warships and arms to Vietnam in the region .
 It has been widely speculated that China’s worry about a possible attack from the Soviet Union served to end the war as quickly as it did . It has also been speculated that it was a result of a possible Soviet attack .
 China’s allies such as North Korea, Burma and Democratic Kampuchea supported the attack on Vietnam . In Asia, Laos and India took Vietnam's side, while North Korea and Burma supported China's attack . China's allies supported Vietnam's attack against Vietnam .
 The United States, the ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) countries, some European countries, and Japan took a neutral stance . The U.S. and some Asian countries, including Japan, are neutral .
 For China, the brief invasion caused heavy casualties, and it revealed serious problems in its military . The brief invasion revealed serious military problems in China's military .
 China’s military maneuvers during the war were severely handicapped by its poor logistical system and the lack of fighting experience on the part of Chinese troops . China's military maneuvering was hampered by a lack of experience and logistical problems .
 The war failed to resolve the disputes between the two countries . More importantly, it failed to solve the issues between the countries .
 The war itself became another serious problem between the two countries, pushing them further apart . In fact, the war itself itself became a serious problem .
 China withdrew its troops from Vietnam a month after the outbreak of the war, but military conflicts lingered on along the border for over a decade .
 China, People’s Republic of; Chinese Military Advisory Group; Deng Xiaoping; Chinese military Advisory Group . Deng Xiaop; Hua Guofeng; Movement to Resist America and Aid Vietnam . Sino-Soviet Conflicts; Sino War; Soviet Union; Spratly
 The Small Sword Society is an underground antigovernment organization . The group was founded by an underground anti-government group .
 The movement became part of the nationwide Taiping Rebellion during the same time period . The movement was also known as the Taiping Movement .
 The Small Sword Society was one of the branches of the Heaven and Earth Society . It was a secret underground organization helping the urban residents against the Manchu rulers and city officials .
 The Small Sword Society in Shanghai mainly included migrants from southeastern Fujian Province, and some of the commercial business owners .
 Taiping movement in southwestern Guangxi Province launched a nationwide armed rebellion against the Qing dynasty in 1850 . Taiping began in 1850, a movement in southwest Guangxi .
 Hong Xiuquan (1814— 1864), leader of the Taiping Rebellion, declared the existence of the “Taiping Tianguo” in 1851 . Hong Xuan led a military expedition from the south to the east across the country . He led a
 The Taiping army began a string of military victories over towns along the Yangzi River toward Nanjing and Shanghai in 1851-1852 . Taiping began to win control of the area in 1852 .
 Zhou Lichun, a member of the Heaven and Earth Society, led an uprising in Shanghai’s Qingpu County . In 1852, inspired by the Taiping's victories over the Qing army, he led a revolt in Shanghai's Qingpu .
 He refused to surrender the county’s agricultural products to the city government for defense of the area against the Taiping army . The county's agricultural products were used to defend against Taiping forces .
 Other counties such as Nanhui, Huating and Shanghai followed Zhou’s lead and joined the uprising to alleviate the burdens on the impoverished .
 Xu Yao, a member of the Luohan Society, led the Jiading’s uprising just outside Shanghai . Xu Yao was one of the leaders of the uprising in the city of Jiading .
 In the summer of 1853, under the influence of the Taiping Rebellion, the secret groups in Shanghai united into a uniformed organization and renamed it the Small Sword Society with Liu Lichuan as its leader .
 Liu and Gang Guangdong then began to prepare for a citywide armed uprising . Liu and fellow member Gang Guangzhou began preparing for an uprising in Guangzhou, China .
 Zhou Lichun and Xu Yao started the armed uprising in Qingpu and occupied Jiading County . Zhou Lich unofficially started the uprising on September 5, 2011 . Xu Yao was the first person to start the uprising .
 Liu Lichuan and Chen Aling started uprisings in Shanghai County on September 7 . They occupied the county government in Shanghai .
 The uprising troops quickly defeated the Qing’s troops in the city . They quickly occupied Baoshan, Nanhui, Chunsha, and Qingpu Counties . The Qing's troops were quickly defeated .
 After their takeover of Shanghai, the Small Sword Society established a new city government . The Taiping Tianguo was established under the title of “Da Ming Guo” .
 During the establishment of their government, Liu Lichuan wrote to Hong Xiuquan to accept his leadership and join the Taiping Rebellion . Liu wrote that he would join the rebellion and join his leadership .
 During their control of Shanghai, the Small Sword Society also started to make new currency, develop trade, assure the food supply, and suppress the usury . During the time they were in control of the city, they also made new currency and developed trade .
 Qing troops were under the command of Xu Naizhao, Jiangsu’s provincial governor . The Qing troops had been under command of the Qing troops .
 Qing troops attacked the garrison of the Small Sword Society at Jiading County, China . The attack took place on September 22,1853, during the Qing invasion .
 Qing army defeated the rebels and killed Zhou Lichun during the attack . The Qing army was defeated the rebelling troops and died .
 Rebellion troops under the command of Zhou Xiuying and Xu Yao withdrew into Shanghai and continued their defense . Then the rebellion troops withdrew and continued to defend the city . The rebellion troops continued to withdraw into Shanghai .
 The surrounding counties continued to be taken by the Qing troops one after another . By the end of the month, the surrounding counties had been taken by Qing troops .
 The Small Sword Society continued their defense with the support of the people of Shanghai through 1853-1854 . The SmallSword Society continued its defense through the years .
 Foreign troops in Shanghai declared their neutrality in the civil war around Shanghai . Great Britain, the United States, and France declared neutrality .
 In July 1854, the Qing government appointed Jierhanga to be the new Jiangsu governor . The Qing government also appointed him as the governor of Jiangsu .
 Jierhanga sent Wu Jianzhang, commissioner of Suzhou and Songjiang, to Shanghai to negotiate with the British, American, and French representatives . Wu then went to China's capital, Shanghai, to meet with British, French and American representatives .
 Qing offered Western powers a joint foreign administration of the Shanghai customs and sovereignty of their concessions for their support to deal with the Small Sword Society rebellion . The Qing offered the Western powers the sovereignty of Shanghai customs .
 The Shanghai Customs started a tri-control of the Tax Affairs Department, composed of representatives from Great Britain, the United States, and France . Thereafter, the Shanghai Customs .
 In Shanghai’s Concessions, these Western countries also established a joint foreign administrative organization independent from the Chinese administrative and legal system . The organization is independent from China's administrative system .
 The Chinese city government had no administrative, judicial, and legislative power over the foreign concession areas, including foreign business and residents . It meant that the Chinese city had no legal and administrative power over those areas .
 Western powers established a ‘foreign city’ inside the city of Shanghai with their own security force . The Western powers set up a “foreign . city” inside Shanghai with its own security forces .
 Foreign forces began cooperation with the Qing troops in Shanghai . The foreign forces began their cooperation with Qing troops .
 Western forces and the Qing army built a high wall along the north side of Shanghai to separate the Small Sword Society rebellion troops from the other part of the city . The wall was built to separate them from other parts of Shanghai .
 On January 6, 1855, the French naval fleet assisted the Qing troops to attack the Small Sword Society garrison at the North Gate of Shanghai County .
 During their defense, the uprising troops fought furiously against both the French and Qing troops . During the defense, they fought furiously .
 Foreign forces finally had the excuse to operate with the Qing troops to blockade and cut off food and arms supplies to the rebelling troops in Shanghai .
 On February 17, the uprising troops were forced to abandon Shanghai and attempted to fight their way out of the city . The uprising was the first of its kind in Shanghai .
 During their breakout, Liu Lichuan, Zhou Xiuying, Xu Yao, and other leaders were killed . Liu Lichu, Zhou Xia, Xu Xu Yao and others were killed during the breakout .
 Some remnant troops followed Pan Liang and entered the area under the Taiping army’s control . The area is now under the control of Taiping Army .
 Other remaining groups of the Small Sword Society left Shanghai and moved into the countryside to continue their fight against the Qing rulers .
 By March 1855, the Small Sword Society uprisings ended in Shanghai . Thus, by March 1854, the small Sword Society had ended .
 Ever-Victorious Army; Hong Xiuquan; Ming Dynasty; Manchus; Martial Arts; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty . Qing Dynasty; Taiping Rebellion . Taiping rebellion .
 Song dynasty reigned from the late tenth through thirteenth centuries . The Song dynasty had a far-reaching impact economically, culturally, and socially .
 Confucianism witnessed new life as it undergirded the growth of the Chinese middle class . Economically, commerce, trade, and manufacturing grew exponentially . culturally, socially, and socially, the Chinese civil service examination widened government representation . China's middle class grew as Confuc
 In 960, Chinese military general Zhao Kuangyin usurped the throne and began the Song dynasty . Zhao had been the dominant military power during the late Zhou dynasty, usurping the throne .
 After taking over the throne, Zhao Kuangyin became known as Emperor Taizu . His rule was called the Northern Song dynasty .
 Taizu united most of the competing regimes of China, defusing the power of regional military commanders . Taizu brought an end to the militarism that had plagued China since the mid-ninth century .
 Taizu created a professional army that was loyal to his dynasty . Encroaching invaders in the north, including the Khitans, the Jurchens and later the Mongols, gave impetus to a heightened military buildup .
 Taizu effectively nationalized the military by creating a palace army . The palace army was rewarded with sizable military pensions . Taizu created the palace army by creating an army that he rewarded with large pensions .
 In addition to sheer numerical dominance, technological innovations strengthened the forces . They included the manufacture of stronger steel arrow tips, devices that launched fire and thrown bombs, and the use of gunpowder .
 Taizu established the capital of the Song dynasty in the northern city of Kaifeng . He established the city in the north of China's northern city .
 Song dynasty represented a period of busy economic development, particularly in manufacturing and commerce . The Song dynasty was one of China's most successful dynastates .
 The period included advancements in iron and steel production used for agriculture and also for the construction of suspended bridges . The period was also known as the period of iron production .
 Newfound innovations in metallurgy resulted in a cohort of some of the most advanced shipbuilders in the world .
 The Song dynasty was the first to create air-tight compartments and rudders beyond the stern of the ship . It also was able to navigate with a south-pointing compass .
 Widespread coinage of money, aided by the development of new waterways, proved to be a boon to Song trade .
 Wood blocking for printing became popular during the Song dynasty . Wood blocking was invented much earlier by the Chinese, but was invented by the Song Dynasty .
 The availability of inexpensive texts increased literacy, thus creating a new middle class in China . It created a new generation of Chinese people .
 Chinese glazed pottery and advances in music, especially sung poetry, also made Song a culturally rich time in history .
 Exams were altered to remove bias, and they incorporated lengthy sections on classic Confucian texts . Exams included sections on Confucalian texts .
 Those changes resulted in a more diverse body of civil service employees . Those changes have resulted in more diverse bodies of civil servants .
 The Mongols had succeeded in toppling both the Jin dynasty and the Liao dynasty in the north . They ended the Southern Song dynasty in 1279 .
 Confucian-Mencian Paradigm; Mongols; Northern and Southern Dynasties; Song, Fortified Cities; Song-Mongol War; Yuan Dynasty . Mongols and Mongols fought for control of China .
 Song, Fortified Cities After the Northern Song dynasty (9601127) lost in their war with the Jin dynasty in 1127, the newly established Southern Song dynasty built fortified defense works around cities against attacks by the Jin first and then the Mongols .
 It succeeded due to a willingness to endure sieges, effective use of natural barriers and terrain, and an affinity for new or neglected technology such as early gunpowder weapons .
 In 1211, the Mongols attacked the Jin dynasty, the Jurchens, who controlled North China . The Jin dynasty was ruled by the Jurchen, who ruled North China, in 1211 .
 In the 1220s, the Mongols negotiated with the Southern Song to attack the Jin together . The Mongols attacked the Jin from the north and the Song from the south .
 Jin dynasty was defeated by a joint attack of the Mongols and Southern Song in 1234 . In 1234, the Jin dynasty lost its control of the region .
 When the Southern Song tried to claim the territories in the north, the Song-Mongol War began . The Song-Song War was the result of the war between the two sides of the peninsula .
 In 1251, the Mongol army launched an offensive campaign again the Southern Song dynasty in three directions from the north . The Mongol army was launched in 1251 . The campaign was part of a three-phase offensive against the Song dynasty from north .
 Southern Song made effective use of terrain and fortifications around the cities . The Southern Song was first recorded in 17th century .
 Song's defense suggests that the Song well understood both the weaknesses and advantages of their enemies . Their defense suggests they knew their enemies' weaknesses and weaknesses .
 Mongols were not only ineffective at conducting sieges, but also required significant resources to stay in the field for any period of time due to the difficulty of feeding horses adequately . Mongols with their vast cavalry armies were not as effective as the Mongols . The Mongols required significant
 Given the edge provided by mountain fortresses and controlled waterways, the Song military forces did not need to be nearly as strong as those of the invaders . The Song was defeated by the invading army in the Song dynasty .
 The Chinese became more proficient with their city walls, primarily because the defense was operated traditionally . The city walls were built in China's first city walls .
 Song court encouraged the development and upgrading of city walls . Song court also did much to encourage the development of the city walls in China .
 The new walls were constructed of brick rather than earth and stone, and several innovative defensive features were added to these walls . The walls were built in the 1930s and are now the world's largest Roman settlements .
 The Song took full advantage of the natural defensive characteristics of the rugged terrain as they built this network . Sometimes the mountain fortresses, water bastions, and walled cities were linked together .
 A defensive system that both made it difficult for invading forces to penetrate the interior and forced them into costly and untenable sieges allowed the Southern Song to hold out for decades .
 The defensive-minded nature of the Southern Song is amply illustrated in the time, effort, and expense the empire invested in the development of defense fortifications, and the participation of the general population .
 Such defensive measures were not purely military, but required a great deal of coordination between civil and military entities . Such measures required great coordination, including cooperation from civil, military officials .
 The construction of a fortress network required a great deal of manpower . Evacuating civilians into those fortresses and maintaining order during sieges was by no means a purely military operation .
 Civilian entities had to cooperate and work with military authorities for such systems to work . The Song system is perhaps one of the primary hallmarks of the system .
 In 1275, the Mongol army launched a new offensive campaign against the Southern Song dynasty . Mongol forces launched an offensive campaign in 1275 against Song .
 Song army may have been able to effectively defend for a long period of time, but when removed from that environment, it was a weak force indeed . The Song army was able to successfully defend for long periods of time .
 The Southern Song military was not nearly as capable as the Mongol forces and had no effective way to repel them . Thus when their defensive structures could be broken through or bypassed in strength, they were not as capable .
 In 1276, the Mongols took over Linan, the capital city of the Southern Song dynasty . Linan was the capital of the southern Song dynasty, but was taken over by the Mongolians .
 Eventually, the Southern Song was not enough to keep the Mongol invaders out, and the regime fell in 1279 . The Mongol invaders were eventually defeated by the Mongols .
 The Song-Mongol struggle lasted remarkably for decades with the Mongol invasion of the Southern Song dynasty and their defense during the medieval age . The Song dynasty was invaded by the Mongols and defended by the Song .
 In 1125, the northern Jin dynasty (1115-1234), the Jurchens, began to attack the Song dynasty . The Song emperor lost the war in 1127 . The Jurchens attacked the Song in 1125 .
 When the Jurchens captured the Song emperor in the north, the anti-Jin Chinese supported the emperor’s brother to move the throne to the south . When the emperor was captured, the Chinese backed his brother to take the throne south .
 Southern Song was a dynasty in exile to some extent, having been pushed out of the north by the Jurchens . The Southern Song dynasty was in exile from the north of China .
 On occasions they felt capable of launching assaults against the Jin dynasty into the north, they did so, despite the disappointing results . Indeed, on the occasions that they felt . that they . felt . capable of . launching assaults into the . north, despite . the . disappointing results, they
 This dream of reconquest, whether or not it was widely felt among the aristocracy, was largely academic without a strong army and strong military leaders to organize successful campaigns . The dream of reconquest was largely academic, with the lack of strong army or military leaders .
 The Southern Song was forced into a military strategy that allowed their dynasty to be preserved despite limited military resources at their disposal . The defensive posture was often seen as typifying the Southern Song .
 In 1211, the Mongols attacked the Jin dynasty, which controlled north China, including the Hebei and Shandong Provinces . The Jin dynasty was the last dynasty to lose control of north China in 1211 .
 Mongols promised to return the Song territories south of the Yellow River back to the Song after their victory . The Mongols also promised to give back the Song territory south of Yellow River to its people .
 Southern Song army tried to return to north China in 1234 . They were attacked by the Mongol army . Southern Song was attacked by Mongol forces .
 The Southern Song army failed to recover the northern territories, and the Mongols occupied northern China . The Mongols invaded northern China in 16th century .
 Since the Southern Song had a completely defensive mindset, they did not frequently engage in offensive campaigns . The Southern Song was known for its defensive mindset .
 It also took what might be considered extreme steps to prevent the rise of powerful military leaders . But it did put into place fairly effective offensive measures .
 The Southern Song army built fortified defense works around cities and on hills to defend the south effectively . The fortress system is precarious given the precarious nature of such a comprehensive defensive system .
 The prime merit of such a course was that an effective defensive posture amplified the force of the military, says President Barack Obama .
 Southern Song military policy thus became evident. An important characteristic of the Southern Song was evident. The Southern Song became evident .
 The U.S. lacked the strength to wage open warfare without a defensive framework . The United States has been in the throes of a defensive strategy for years .
 Southern Song strategy was self-defeating in the long run, for it institutionalized a weak army, preferring to rely on relatively static defenses . The Southern Song Strategy was thus self-Defeating for the sake of its success .
 Kublai conquered the Southern Song . The obvious weakness was revealed in the battle of the Southern Tongue . The apparent weakness of the Song was revealed by Kublani .
 Genghis Khan; Kublai Khan; Mongols; Mongol, Cavalry of; Song Dynasty; Song, Fortified Cities; Yuan Dynasty; Yancheng, Battle of; Yue Fei .
 The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was formed in 1922 and dissolved in 1991 . A large ethnically diverse Eurasian nation slightly less than 2. times the size of the U.S.
 To the south, its Asian neighbors were the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK, North Korea), the People’s Republic of China , Mongolia, Afghanistan, Iran, and Turkey . To the north, the Korean peninsula was occupied by North Korea .
 To the west, Soviet European neighbors included Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Norway, Finland, and Finland . To the east, Soviet Europe neighbors included Poland, Romania and Hungary .
 To the north, the Soviet Union bordered on the Arctic Ocean, and to the east it bordered the North Pacific Ocean . To the east, the USSR also had borders on the North American Ocean .
 As the world’s leading communist power during the Cold War, the Soviet Union was the principal antagonist and opponent of the U.S. The Soviet Union is the principal opponent and antagonist of the United States .
 Tensions between the two powers date back to the revolution and civil war that led to the creation of the Soviet Union . Tensions from the two countries date to the Soviet-Russian conflict .
 It was not until 1933 that the U.S. extended diplomatic recognition . Relations remained chilly until 1941, when the two powers found themselves on the same side of the war against Germany .
 As World War II drew to a close, however, lingering mistrust between the two reappeared . The Cold War was the result of fundamental ideological differences that led to the Cold War .
 The principal postwar goal of the Soviet Union under the leadership of Joseph Stalin was national security . National security was the focus of national security in the post-war .
 Stalin sought to acquire territorial buffer zones that would provide physical defense against first Germany and then any possible Western attack . The buffer zones would provide a physical defense for Russia and the West .
 Soviet leaders believed that this, along with reparations to restore the shattered economy and society of the Soviet Union, was the least they deserved for their role in defeating Germany . The Soviet Union was forced to accept responsibility for the collapse of the USSR .
 The Soviets hoped to secure and expand the future of communist ideology by surrounding the Soviet Union with like-minded regimes . At the same time, they hoped to . secure . and expand . The Soviet Union .
 Stalin was a committed socialist who saw the future in Marxian terms as a struggle between capitalism and communism . Stalin's policies appear to have been fundamentally motivated by practical concerns of national security . Stalin was also committed socialist .
 Stalin’s initial pragmatic approach led him to withdraw Soviet forces from northern Iran in 1946, to disassociate himself from the communist rebellion in Greece, and to try to rein in the Chinese communists . Stalin withdrew Soviet forces in 1946 and disassociated himself with Greece in Greece
 The Soviets’ inability to reach an acceptable agreement regarding the future of Germany, however, drove Stalin to take a harder ideological line . Stalin's refusal to reach a deal with the West eventually drove him to take an ideological stance .
 Stalin avoided any blatant displays of disagreement over Germany until the spring of 1947 . The announcement of the Marshall Plan convinced him that the United States was trying to build an industrial base in Western Europe for future attacks against communism .
 The Soviet response was to blockade Berlin, which lay deep within the Soviet zone . Berlin was the first city to be hit by a Soviet blockade .
 The Soviets hoped to win support by providing food and energy to the population . They hoped to force the Allies from the city, which they could then use as a bargaining chip .
 British and American resolve, manifested in the Berlin Airlift and counterblockade of Soviet zone, forced Stalin to admit defeat in May 1949 .
 Even before that, however, the Soviets had subtly abandoned their policy of accommodation . The Soviets had subtlely changed their policy on accommodation in Russia .
 In September 1947, Stalin orchestrated the creation of the Communist Informational Bureau . The bureau had been abandoned during World War II as a gesture of goodwill . It was created as a renewal of Communist International .
 During 1948-1949, the carefully balanced and ‘democratic” governments of states within the Soviet sphere were purged of any potential opposition to Soviet control, even by native communists .
 Even as the Iron Curtain rang down in Europe, the Soviet Union faced a new challenge in Asia . The Soviet Union took on the challenge of China in the 1980s .
 In 1949, the Chinese communists led by Mao Zedong emerged triumphant in the long struggle for power in China . The People’s Republic of China was established in October 1949 . The Chinese communists emerged victorious in 1949 .
 The Soviet Union publicly welcomed the arrival of a second communist power and championed Mao’s regime in the United Nations . Stalin was less than delighted with the rise of the Soviet Union .
 When Mao visited Moscow in the winter of 1949-1950, Stalin refused to meet with him . Stalin initially refused to speak to Mao when he first visited Moscow . Mao's visit was the first time Stalin had met with Mao .
 The fear that China might emerge as the leader of Asian communism led Stalin to relent in January 1950 . The fear also influenced his decision to support Kim II-sung, the communist leader of North Korea .
 Meanwhile, in August 1949, the Soviet Union exploded its first atomic bomb . Meanwhile, the USSR exploded its own atomic bomb in 1949 .
 The Soviets’ absence from the UN General Assembly (in protest over refusal to allow Mao’s regime to assume the Chinese seat) allowed the U.S. to marshal international support .
 The Soviet Union provided air defense for China proper, but Mao was angry that this did not include air support for Chinese forces within Korea . Mao believed he had been promised air support in Korea, which he believed he'd promised .
 Stalin’s maneuvers preserved the appearance of Soviet ideological leadership and communist solidarity, but the costs were significant . Stalin's maneuvers preserved at least .
 Fearing monolithic communist power bent on world domination, the Western Allies rallied together . Fearing the threat of communism, Western Allies fought together to defeat the Soviet Union .
 They opened negotiations to rearm the Federal Republic of Germany and bring it into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to defend against communist aggression in Europe .
 The United States also signed a separate peace treaty with Japan, pairing it with a defense treaty . The treaty denied the Soviet Union de jure recognition of its territorial acquisitions in Asia . It also provided military bases to support the American strategy of containment .
 Stalin attempted to regain the initiative by proposing a united, neutral Germany in March 1952 . There was little hope of this being accepted by the Soviet Union .
 When the Soviet dictator died in March 1953, the Cold War was at its peak, with a proxy war going on in Korea . Both sides were racing to build up their armaments in case a hot war broke out .
 Stalin’s successors moved quickly to lessen tensions both domestically and internationally . In the uncertainty that followed, Stalin's successors move quickly to ease tensions .
 Georgy Malenkov and Nikita Khrushchev (1894— 1971) directed policy . Khrushchchev was the first group that succeeded Stalin in the Soviet Union .
 Both men favored pragmatic politics and better relations with the West . Both men were prominent figures in the world's most powerful nations .
 Soviet policy shifted focus of Soviet economy from industrial goods to consumer products . Food prices lowered food prices and shifted the focus of the Soviet economy away from industrial products .
 Thousands of other inmates from Stalin’s camps also received their freedom . Thousands of others were freed from Stalin's camps .
 Khrushchev met with Western leaders in Geneva in July 1955 in an attempt to mitigate tensions . In July 1955, the Soviet Union leader met with the West in Geneva to try to ease tensions .
 New accusations caused rebellions first in Poland and then Hungary . The new accusations caused rebellion in Poland, Hungary and Poland .
 Popular protests against the Soviet occupation forced the Red Army to withdraw from Budapest . The Red Army was forced to withdraw after the popular protests .
 Khrushchev ordered in the Soviet Army, which suppressed the rebellion in bloody street fighting . Hungary would withdraw from the Warsaw Pact, however, in November 1956 .
 Khrushchev’s adopted philosophy of peaceful coexistence held that war between the superpowers was neither inevitable nor desirable but that competition was allowed . The Soviet Union was one of the world's most powerful countries .
 He and other members of the Soviet leadership traveled extensively, offering friendship and Soviet aid . He and others traveled extensively to Russia to offer friendship .
 In 1955, Khrushchev and President Nikolai Bulganin had visited India, Burma, and Afghanistan . In 1955 they visited India and Burma, Burma and Afghanistan, and visited Burma and Burma .
 Khrushchev was quick to recognize Fidel Castro’s revolutionary movement in Cuba in 1959 . He recognized it as an ally and proffer assistance to the Castro regime .
 A new Sino-Soviet Friendship Pact extended large-scale technical and financial aid to China in 1959 as well . The pact was signed by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 Khrushchev’s largest and best-known venture in this regard was to subsidize construction of the Aswan High Dam in Egypt, extending Soviet influence into the Middle East . The Aswan Dam was the largest project in the history of the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet leader allowed an exhibit of the American way of life in Moscow in 1959 . He engaged United States vice president Richard Nixon in the famed Kitchen Debate on the merits of the two economic systems .
 Khrushchev was the first Soviet leader to visit the U.S. in September of that year . In September, he visited the United States and became the first president to visit .
 Khrushchev had his successes, most notably in space (which he had aggressively promoted) with the launch of Sputnik I in 1957 and Yuri Gagarin’s orbiting of Earth in I960 . The Soviet Union made little progress economically .
 Khrushchev’s highly touted Virgin Lands program to vastly expand the cultivated areas of Soviet central Asia was a failure . The program was a failed attempt to expand Soviet-cultured areas of central Asia .
 His rapprochement with the United States angered the Chinese, who accused the Soviets of revisionism . The Chinese accused the U.S. of revisionistism .
 Mao argued in 1960 that even nuclear war would be preferable to peaceful dealings with the U.S. Mao argued even nuclear warfare was preferable to peace .
 U.S.-Soviet relations remained tense throughout the period, thanks largely to Khrushchev’s habit of fomenting crisis as a matter of policy . U.K. and the Soviet Union remained tense during the period .
 The Soviets produced their own hydrogen bomb in August 1953 . Four years later, they tested an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of delivering such weapons to the U.S. mainland .
 Khrushchev used the missile threat liberally, convincing many Western analysts that the Soviet Union had actually surpassed the United States in that area . The Soviet Union used the threat to convince many analysts that it had surpassed the U.S. in the area .
 The Soviet leader intended to use the city as a lever to open talks with the United States . He believed the talks would lead to a European settlement and perhaps even the end of the Cold War .
 President Eisenhower's 1959 meeting with President Eisenhower was cordial enough and seemed to bode well for the future . Although no progress was made even on smaller issues, the 1959 meeting seemed to be positive .
 The Soviets shot down a U.S. U-2 spy plane on May 1, 1960 . It did not help Khrushchev’s cause .
 The event scuttled a second summit with Eisenhower, and when Khrushchev did meet with President John F Kennedy in June 1961, progress was limited by the Soviet leader's condescending attitude .
 The construction of the Berlin Wall in August 1961, along with renewed Soviet nuclear testing, also helped curtail any realistic chance for an understanding with the U.S. The Berlin Wall was built in 1961, and the Soviet Union continued to test nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba to prevent the arrival of additional weaponry . The blockade was ordered by the President of Cuba in 1961 .
 Khrushchev backed down after a period where the world held its breath while Soviet cargo ships approached the Caribbean and nuclear war seemed imminent . After a period of tension, Khrushvic backed down and the war was over .
 The Soviet ships bearing the weapons and their support systems returned to the Soviet Union . The weapons and support systems were returned to their Soviet ships .
 Khrushchev was removed from the Soviet Union in October 1964 . The failure of several domestic economic reforms in the early 1960s convinced the other members of the Soviet Presidium to remove him from the country .
 In Hungary, East Germany, and Czechoslovakia, new economic systems emphasizing market mechanisms instead of centralized control came into effect by 1968 . New economic systems emphasized market mechanisms .
 New Soviet leadership headed by Leonid Brezhnev was not prepared to tolerate such developments . The new Soviet leadership was not willing to tolerate these developments .
 Brezhnev Doctrine of 1968 emphatically restated the principle of 1956 that Soviet influence remained supreme in that sphere . Poland allowed Poland to raise loans in the West to facilitate economic expansion in 1970 .
 The statement of policy went unchallenged by the West, but it stirred dissent among other communist states . Although that statement went unchrenged, the West was not so critical of the policy .
 Only 61 of 75 nations attending a June 1969 meeting in Moscow agreed to sign the main protocol . The protocol was signed by only 61 nations attending the meeting . Only 61 nations attended the meeting agreed to the main agreement .
 China denounced the Soviet Union in strident terms . skirmishes along the Siberian border raised the possibility of open warfare between the two communist giants .
 On all other fronts, Brezhnev and his cronies were more successful in pursuing Khrushchev’s foreign policy than his own . On all fronts, however, the Soviet Union was more successful .
 Soviet friendship with Cuba remained warm, and the Soviet Union pursued close ties with India and, a lesser extent, Pakistan . The Soviet Union also pursued close relations with Cuba and Pakistan .
 Relations with West Germany also improved, and a treaty recognizing both German states was signed in 1970 . Relations between West Germany and West Germany improved in 1970s .
 Soviet Union joined Cuba in sending aid to liberation movements in Angola and Mozambique . The Soviet Union sent aid to the liberation movement in Angola .
 Whatever goodwill existed in the 1970s, however, dissipated in the wake of the Soviet decision to send troops into Afghanistan in December 1979 . The Soviet Union sent troops to Afghanistan in Dec. 1979 .
 U.S. president Jimmy Carter ordered an immediate increase in defense spending, and detente collapsed . President Carter ordered the immediate increase of defense spending . Detente collapsed after Carter's order to increase defense spending was rejected .
 The ideological divide between the two superpowers deepened when Ronald Reagan won the presidency in November 1980 and again when the Soviet Union approved the imposition of martial law in Poland in December 1981 .
 Even Brezhnev’s death in November 1982 and another transition period failed to halt the Cold War . Brezhnnev died in 1982, but his death in 1982 and a transition period did not halt the war .
 President Ronald Reagan responded by announcing the funding of research on a Strategic Defense Initiative . The so-called Star Wars system for space defenses against any missile attack, in March 1983 .
 Andropov’s declining health and death in February 1984 and then by the illness and incompetence of his successor, Konstantin Chernenko, an octogenarian who suffered from emphysema and lived only until March 1985 .
 The man who succeeded Chernenko, however, moved with speed great enough to make up for both his predecessors . The new president of Ukraine is Vladimir Putin .
 Mikhail Gorbachev was known as a reformer, a practical intellectual, and an ambitious man of action . He was a protege of Andropov, and a close ally of the late Soviet leader .
 He believed that vigorous reforms would prove the viability of the system and that Soviet communism and capitalism could coexist peacefully even as they competed economically . He believed the Soviet system would prove its viability .
 These soon gave way to a general restructuring that included foreign affairs, especially Eastern Europe . The country's foreign policy was restructured in the 1980s .
 As Andropov had had, Gorbachev sought a respite from the arms race and from international distractions . Gorbavachev sought on the one hand, and the other hand, to avoid a nuclear arms race . He sought on both sides of the issue .
 A reformed and reenergized Soviet socialist economy could deal with the challenges of the U.S. and world capitalism, he said . On the other hand, he also believed that a . reformed Soviet socialist . economy could also deal with challenges of world capitalism .
 Gorbachev stated his intention to reverse the long-standing Soviet policy of controlling internal developments in the states of Central and Eastern Europe at a meeting of Warsaw Pact leaders in March 1985 . He initiated plans to extricate the Soviet Union from Afghanistan .
 He had cordial meetings with President Reagan in Geneva and Reykjavik, Iceland, in 1985 and 1986 .
 At the second meeting, he briefly won Reagan’s agreement that all nuclear weapons on both sides should be destroyed within a decade . United States advisors effectively vetoed the accord, effectively vetoing the accord .
 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty was signed in December 1987 . Treaty stipulates destruction of all ground-based nuclear weapons of a particular range .
 In April 1988, the Soviet Union pledged to withdraw all its troops from Afghanistan by the end of the year . Gorbachev announced a 10 percent reduction in the size of the Soviet Army that would coincide with the recall of six Soviet divisions from Eastern Europe .
 Poland held free, if limited, free elections in June 1989 that the opposition won handily . Poland's democracy was overthrown by the Soviet Union in June 1991 .
 Hungary dismantled its fortified frontier with Austria in September . In September, the Hungarian government permitted free movement across the border with Austria .
 Thousands of East Germans exploited this loophole to escape to the West . Thousands of others demonstrated in the streets of Leipzig and other East German cities .
 Erich Honecker resigned as chairman of the East German Council of State in October 1989 . He was forced to step down from the post in the wake of the collapse of East Germany .
 The Berlin Wall, long a symbol of the divided world of the Cold War, came down the next month . Berlin Wall was long symbol of divided world .
 The communist leaders of Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia stepped down, and Romania’s Nicolae Ceau§escu was overthrown and executed . The leaders of both countries were overthrown, and were executed .
 Within 18 months, it too would cease to exist, unable to either reform or sustain the communist system that had existed since 1918 . In 1918, the Soviet Union had been the only communist state in existence for 18 months .
 The Cold War, the ideological divide that had held the world in thrall for nearly 50 years, came to a close . With that, the Cold War came to an end .
 This archipelago comprises about 15 to 30 islands, depending on the way they are counted . It is thought to be the largest island island in the world, with about 30 islands .
 Several nations of Southeast Asia, China, and Taiwan currently dispute the sovereignty of these islands . The islands are located in Southeast Asia and Taiwan .
 The Spratlys have been claimed not only by Vietnam, the People’s Republic of China, and Taiwan . The Philippines, Malaysia, and Brunei also claim the area . The region is also claimed by the Philippines and Malaysia .
 Reasons given for the disputes over these islands were, among others, the strategic position of both the Paracels and Spratlys . Possible nearby offshore oil deposits were also cited as reasons for the dispute .
 From the Paracels, a naval power could control navigation in the northern part of the South China Sea . From the Spratlys it could follow all ship traffic within Southeast Asia between the Pacific and Indian Oceans .
 China bases its argument on the rights of discovery, while Vietnam emphasizes its continuous occupation since the seventeenth century . China has been occupied by Vietnam since the 17th century .
 The Philippines and Malaysia emphasize the Spratlys’ proximity to their own territory . Malaysia and the Philippines emphasize the region’s proximity to its territory .
 China, People's Republic; China, Republic of; People's Liberation Army; People’s Liberation Army . Xisha Islands Defensive Campaign; Xisha .
 Satellite Imagery, ConfidenceBuilding Measures, and the Spratly Islands Disputes . Satellite imagery and confidence building measures are key to building confidence .
 He was commissioned a second lieutenant of infantry on graduation from the United States Military Academy in 1904 . He served in the U.S. Army from 1904 .
 Promoted to temporary major in August 1917, Stilwell served with British Lieutenant General Joseph W Stillwell in 1942 . Promoted with Lt. General Joseph Stilworth in August 1942 .
 Stilwell was a successful combat leader, but his gruff personality made him unsuitable for coalition warfare . He was a gruff leader who was not suited to coalition warfare.
 Stilwell earned his nickname “Vinegar Joe” as a result of his direct and critical manner while an instructor at the Infantry School at Fort Benning, Georgia .
 Stilwell commanded III Corps at Monterey, California, in July 1941 . Promoted to temporary major general in October 1940, by July 1941, he was commanding III Corps .
 In February 1942, Stilwell received command of all United States Army forces in the ChinaBurma-India Theater, while also serving as chief of staff to Generalissimo Jiang Jieshi . In February of 1942, he was promoted to temporary lieutenant general in the U.S
 Stilwell was responsible for coordinating the efforts of Britain, China, and the United States against Japan . He was also responsible for preparing China for the planned Allied invasion of the Japanese home islands .
 Chennault believed his air force capable of defeating the Japanese without the assistance of significant ground forces . He continually argued that he should receive the bulk of supplies coming over the Himalayas .
 Throughout 1943 and 1944, tensions among Stilwell, Chennault, and Jiang mounted . Tensions among the three men rose throughout the years .
 Despite the demonstration of the potential of Chinese forces against the Japanese, Stilwell was unable to convince Jiang to reform his army . The capture of Myitkyina in August 1944 led to the defeat of the Japanese at the hands of the Allies .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt urged Jiang to place Stilwell (who had been promoted to temporary general in August 1944) in command of all Chinese forces . Jiang refused and then refused to place him in command .
 After his relief, Stilwell received command of the Tenth Army, a command slated for the planned invasion of Japan . He was relieved of his post-World War II command .
 Following Japan’s surrender and the inactivation of the Tenth Army, Stilwell returned to the United States and took command of the Sixth Army . He was in charge of the 6th and 7th Army .
 Stilwell died at the Presidio in San Francisco, California, on October 12, 1946 . Suffering from advanced stomach cancer, he died of his illness at home .
 Su Yu was born on August 10, 1907 in Huitong County, Hunan Province, to a minority family . Su Yu is one of the world's most famous Chinese women .
 On August 1, 1927, he participated in the Nanchang Uprising and joined the CCP Red Army . He was a member of the Communist Party of China .
 In 1930, his head was hit by a piece of shrapnel, which remained there for the rest of his life . His head was struck by shrapnel in 1930, and his life was never fully recovered .
 Su Yu led his division to establish the CCP military base in Anhui and Jiangxi Provinces . During the Anti-Japanese War of 1937— 1945, Su Yu established his division . Su Yu was a member of the Communist Party of China .
 From 1946, he fought in the Chinese Civil War as the deputy commander of the East China Command in 1947 and then the Third Field Army in 1948-1949 . He fought in China's Second Civil War .
 The Central Jiangsu Campaign was the first of many brilliant works that defined his legacy . The campaign was first of his many brilliant work that defined him .
 The successes of the battle persuaded Mao Zedong to change his military strategy of the Chinese Civil War from traditional guerrilla warfare to a new mobile and conventional approach . The battle was the first of Mao's military strategy to change tactics .
 After June 1946, when the GMD troops launched a general offensive campaign against the CCP military bases, the CPC accepted Su Yu’s suggestions and changed the plan . Su Yu's suggestions were accepted by the CPC .
 Su Yu suggested not to defend each area at home, but to take the fight outside of the CCPoccupied areas in the central region of Jiangsu Province by concentrating all the forces in one as the Central Field Army . Su Yu suggests not to take on each other at home .
 Su Yu led the 30,000-man main force and more than 100,000 militiamen to fight against 120,000 GMD attacking troops . Su Yu was the leader of the main force in the battle against GMD troops equipped with better weapons .
 His plan worked and his forces defeated the GMD troops in Jiangsu and Shandong . The GMD forces defeated Jiangsu forces in JiangSu .
 He was the CCP commander in the famous Menglianggu Campaign, in which the elite GMD Seventy-fourth Division was completely destroyed after Su Yu succeeded in encircling the unit . Su Yu was the leader of the GMD 70th Division .
 Su Yu suggested the major columns postpone their plan to move south and to integrate and concentrate in the area of the Yellow River and Huai River for a decisive battle against the Nationalist army . In both January and April 1948, Su Yu said the major army columns should not move south .
 Two armies of Liu Bocheng and Su Yu follow a sudden-disperse strategy that led to a decisive victory in late 1948 . The two armies destroyed five Nationalist armies and killed or captured 550,000 Nationalist soldiers .
 After the founding of the People’s Republic of China in October 1949, the Korean War broke out in June 1950 .
 Su Yu was appointed as the commander of the Northeast Border Defense Army . The Chinese People's Volunteer Force entered the Korean War in October 1950 . Su Yu became the Chinese People’s Volunteer Force in 1950 .
 Su Yu was unable to command the Chinese force in the Korean War . He was hospitalized in the Soviet Union during the war . Su Yu's illness and hospitalization prevented him from commanding the Chinese forces .
 Peng Dehuai was appointed as the commander in chief of the Chinese forces in the Korean War in 1950-1953 . He was appointed in October as the Chinese general in charge of Chinese forces .
 He served in numerous positions including the chief of the General Staff of the PLA in the 1950s . He served as the head of the general staff of the Chinese military in China .
 In 1958, he was wrongfully criticized by Marshal Peng Dehuai and mistreated for a long time . In 1958 he was wrongly criticized by Peng Pdehuai . He was also mistreated by the Marshal, who ruled China .
 In the same year, he was appointed the vice defense minister as well as vice president of China Academy of Military Science .
 In 1972, he was the first political commissar of the Academy of Military Science . He was also a political commissar of the Academy in 1972 . He has been married to two women .
 During the Cultural Revolution, he was in charge of railway, transportation, postal and telecommunication, port construction, and ship building in China .
 He was a member of the First, Second, and Third National Defense Commission; the First and Second National People’s Congress; and the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Standing Committee of the National People's Congress . He was also a member .
 He was also a member of the Eighth, Ninth, Tenth, Tenth and Eleventh Standing Committee of the CCP and the Central Advisory Commission . He served on the Eighth and Ninth Standing Committee .
 He was born Su Qisheng in Pingjiang County, Hunan Province, in 1912 . He changed his name to Su Zhenhua in 1912 and changed his surname to Su . He died in 2011 .
 He joined the CCP Red Army during the Pingjiang Uprising in 1928 and the Chinese Communist Youth League in 1929 . He was also a member of the Communist Party Youth League .
 Su participated in the Long March and many important battles in 1934-1935 . Su was a member of the British Army and served in World War Two . Su died in the Battle of St. Paul in 1945 .
 Red Army commander studied at AntiJapanese Military and Political College in April 1936 . After arriving in Yan’an, he became one of the first group of Red Army commanders, who studied at the AntiJapanese military and political College .
 In May 1941, he was appointed political commissar of the 343rd Brigade, 115th Division, Eighth Route Army . He later became the newly established Jin-Ji-Lu-Yu Military Command . He was later appointed political commissar of the new Jin-
 Su served as the political commissar of the First Column of the Jin-Ji-Lu-Yu Field Army during the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949 . Su was the political commissar of the Fifth Army Group of the Second Field Army . Su is
 Su Zhenhua became the commander and political commissar of the PLA Guizhou Provincial Command in 1949 . He was the commander of the People's Republic of China in 1949, and secretary-general of the CCP Guizhu Provincial Committee .
 In April 1954, he became the deputy political commissar of the PLA Navy . He became the director of the Political Department of the Navy . In April 1953, he was the head of the political department .
 Su Zhenhua led the delegation to the Soviet Union to procure and import equipment and new technology for the Chinese navy . Su led a delegation to Russia in 1958 to procure new equipment and technology for China .
 He established infrastructure for naval research and new systems for the warship building industry . Later on, he established infrastructure .
 Su also established six specific research institutes for the naval technology and maritime science . Su established six different research institues for naval technology . Su has also established a research institute for the navy technology .
 China built an integrated and dynamic system of combining military scientific research, industrial production, and training utilization . Under his leadership, China built a system combining scientific research and industrial production .
 This enabled the Chinese Navy to become an effective force with modern operational capability . The Chinese Navy is now the world's most powerful naval force .
 Su Zhenhua was accused of forming a military club in the party and army by Lin Biao and radical Maoists . He was dismissed from all his military positions . During the Cultural Revolution of 1966— 1976, he was dismissed .
 When he returned to service in 1972, he was appointed the first deputy commander of the Chinese navy . He returned to China in 1972 and became the first naval commander .
 The report gave detailed plans in seven fields, such as the formation of a modem fleet including submarines and long-and-missile destroyers .
 Su Zhenhua was appointed director of the Xinhua News Agency in 1976 . He was in charge of all national broadcasting stations, TV stations, newspapers, magazines, and other propaganda entities in Beijing .
 During the political struggle against the Gang of Four and the Maoist leaders in the fall of 1976, he was appointed the first party secretarygeneral of Shanghai to control the political and social situation there . He was appointed by the party secretary general of Shanghai .
 Sui unified China and worked to further consolidate Chinese government and strengthen the country’s defenses . During its reign, the Sui unofficially unified China . Sui also worked to strengthen China's defenses .
 Despite its short reign, the Sui dynasty was an important part of Chinese history . The Sui Dynasty was a short-lived dynasty of Chinese people .
 Wendi installed himself as the emperor after taking control of northern China . When Zhou dynasty was reduced to various plots of murder and mayhem, Wendi took over . Wendi was the first Chinese emperor to take over .
 During his rule, Wendi created the Kaihuang Code, which combined the laws of the northern and southern parts of China . Wendi was the first Chinese ruler to take over China . He was also known for his rule in China .
 Wendi sought to improve the governing body of China through the creation of a simplified organization . Wendi also sought to create a simplified organisation for the Chinese Communist Party of China .
 He held regular examinations for their selection, which allowed him to remove those he felt were more easily corruptible .
 Sui produced large-scale breakthroughs in the country’s infrastructure and defense . The Sui is the country's largest military force in the world .
 The Da Yunhe was extended north from the city of Hangzhou across the Yangzi River to Yangzhou, China . It was extended from Hangzhou to Hangzhou, then extended north .
 The sections of the Great Wall of China along the northern borders with Mongolia were strengthened . In addition, sections of China's Great Wall were strengthened in recent years .
 Wendi reconstructed two capital cities along the Yellow River and worked on a third at Yangzhou . Wendi also reconstructed two capitals cities along Yellow River .
 The main capital of the Sui dynasty was at Chang’an, a city six times larger than the current city of Xi'an now found on its site . The main city of Chang'an was found on the current site .
 Emperor Wendi provided relief to China’s farmers by distributing land plots based on the number of people in a given household . He distributed land plots to those who live in a household based on number of households .
 He also lowered the taxes on the farmers, which caused China’s economy to grow . The tax on farmers was also lowered, which led to the growth of the Chinese economy . China's economy has grown in recent years .
 Sui dynasty began expensive military campaigns in order to extend its borders . In addition to the Sui, the dynasty also began expensive campaigns to expand its borders.
 The campaigns to the south were successful, but the Sui encountered strong resistance in Korea . The Sui faced strong resistance from Korea .
 After four failed attacks on Korea, the eastern Turks managed to surround the emperor, and Wendi was forced to escape . Wendi escaped after four failed attempts to take over Korea .
 In response to fear of the emperor’s weakness, local independent governments began to revolt, which divided China into smaller states once more . The emperor's weakness was seen as a weakness in China .
 The downfall of the dynasty reportedly stemmed from Emperor Yangdi’s abuses of power and exhaustion of resources . It is believed to have stemmed from the abuses of the emperor's power . The downfall was reportedly due to the exhaustion of the resources .
 Yangdi was murdered by one of his aides . A rebellion ultimately caused Yangdi to flee the capital, and he was forced to flee .
 Gong Di was briefly succeeded by Gong Di, who reigned for a year as a puppet prince . Gong Di reigned in China for more than a year before he died .
 Grand Canal, Great Wall, Great Canal; Great Wall; Mongols; Northern and Southern Dynasties; Sui Yangdi, Emperor; Tang Dynasty; Zhou Dynasty . Great Canal and Great Wall: Great Wall. Great Canal .
 Yangdi was the second son of Emperor Wendi and the last emperor of the Sui dynasty . He was second and last Emperor of Sui Dynasty . Yangdi died in the early years of his reign .
 Emperor Yangdi’s original name was Yang Ying, but he was renamed by his father to Yang Guang after consultation with oracles . Emperor Yang di was originally called Yang Ying but was renamed Yang Guang .
 In 588. He was put in charge as commander of the five army groups sent to invade and conquer the southern Chen dynasty . He was one of the army groups that were sent to take over southern China .
 In 590, he repressed the rebellion of Gao Zhihui and killed their chief commander . 10 years later he repulsed the invasion of Tujue and killed the chief commander of their enemy . He also killed the main commander of the rebel army in 590 .
 Yang Guang conquered all the feudal lords and warlords of the country at the age of 20 . He helped his father to unify China and build a solid foundation for later dynasties .
 Yang Guang ascended to the throne as Emperor Yang after the death of his father in 604 . Some traditional historians believed to have been a murder ordered by Yang Guang despite a lack of direct evidence .
 The most notable one was the completion of the Grand Canal, which connected the southern and northern parts of China . It remains in use in China today .
 He began reconstruction of the Great Wall, a project that employed nearly 6 million laborers . The Great Wall was a labor-intensive project of 6 million people .
 He cleared the path through the Silk Road again and enlarged his territory to present-day Uzbekistan . Also, he cleared the way through the silk Road again . Also cleared the paths through the . Silk Road, he enlarged his . territory .
 He ordered several military expeditions that brought Sui to its greatest territorial extent . One of them, the conquest of Champa in what is now central and southern Vietnam, caused the death of thousands of Sui soldiers .
 These expeditions, along with a series of disastrous campaigns against Goguryeo (one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea), left the empire bankrupt and the people in revolt .
 Emperor Yang spent his last days in Jiangdu, where he was eventually strangled in a coup led by Yuwen Huaji, one of his generals . With northern China in turmoil, Emperor Yang was forced to leave Jiangdu .
 Emperor Yang committed almost 8 million people to the construction of roads, palaces, the Grand Canal, the Great Wall, and ships . Emperor Yang spent millions of dollars on the construction .
 The redesigning of Luoyang alone, designated as the eastern capital, consumed a quarter of that amount . The building of the Grand Canal took up to 2 million men .
 Three expeditions against Goguryeo each one required around a million men . Equally consuming of manpower were the three expeditions . Each one of the expeditions required around one million men to complete .
 Some traditional historians say he was one of the worst tyrants in Chinese history . He was considered by some to be the reason for the Sui dynasty’s relatively short rule .
 Other historians consider him one of the greatest emperors in Chinese history . Alternatively, other historians say he was one of China's greatest rulers .
 The reason why his valuations are so negative is that he was the last emperor of Sui, and after his death there was no historiographer to portray him in a positive light . The reason for valuations is that there is no one who has a positive view of him .
 "Because of his impractical nature and desire for success, he made blunders in ruling," he said .
 Grand Canal, Great Wall; Great Wall, Manchuria; Silk Road; Sui Dynasty; Suing Dynasty; Tang Dynasty . Great Canal; . Great Wall and Great Wall: Great Wall .
 Sun Yat-sen was China’s most important revolutionary leader during the fall of the Qing dynasty and the following decade . He was the leader of China's revolutionary movement during the early twentieth century .
 Determined to oust foreigners from China but at the same time attracted to many Western ideas . China's President Xi Jinping keen to oust foreign influence in China .
 He led nationalists into an alliance with communists based on their shared hopes for the lasting reunification and reform of their vast nation . He was the leader of nationalists in the 1950s .
 Sun was born into a poor peasant family on November 12, 1866, in Guangdong Province, China . He was born in a poor family .
 In 1879, his brother brought him to Honolulu, Hawaii . He obtained a traditional Confucian education, but in 1879 he moved to Honolulu .
 He attended British missionary school and then U.S.-run Oahu College in Hawaii .
 Sun returned to Guangzhou in 1883, where he was heavily criticized for his Westernization . In 1883 he returned to China and was criticized for Westernizing .
 He then moved to Hong Kong, where Western influences were more accepted, where he moved .
 In 1884, he began studying at the Diocesan Home before transferring the next year to the Government Central School .
 He married Lu Mu-chen, who had been chosen by his parents to be his wife . Around that time, a United States missionary baptized him, and he married Lu .
 He enrolled in Canton Hospital Medical School, followed by the College of Medicine for Chinese, located in Hong Kong . He enrolled at the Canton hospital Medical School .
 He tried to begin his medical practice at Macau, a Portuguese colony . Graduated in 1892, he tried to start his practice there .
 Sun returned to Hong Kong, where he began a brief career as a doctor . However, the Portuguese denied him a license, and Sun went back to Portugal .
 Sun condemned his country’s technological backwardness that allowed outside powers to dominate . Along with many Chinese, especially the younger, educated groups, Sun condemned China's technological backwardsness .
 He criticized foreign nations that had humiliated the dynasty and the nation by carving China into spheres of influence . He criticized the foreign nations who had humiliated China .
 He tried to get the Chinese authorities to listen to his pleas for reform, but when he got only rejection, he gave up his medical practice . He dedicated himself to radical revolutionary change and dedicated himself .
 In 1894, he went back to Hawaii and formed the Revive China Society, a secret revolutionary organization . He went on to become a prominent leader in Hawaii . The society was formed in 1894 .
 Sun plotted an uprising to be staged in Canton after China suffered more humiliation with its loss to Japan in the Sino-Japanese War of 1894-1895 . Sun journeyed to Hong Kong, where he plotted to stage an uprising .
 The Chinese government uncovered his revolutionary group, however, and executed several of its members . Several of his revolutionary members were executed .
 Sun fled to Japan, where he found new stimuli, for many Chinese exiles gathered there to discuss and plan great changes . Sun fled the country to find new stimuli for many .
 Sun traveled extensively and spread his belief that revolution must ensue and sought monetary contributions from Chinese living overseas . Sun sought money from Chinese citizens living overseas to help fund the revolution .
 In July 1897, Sun arrived back in Japan and obtained financial assistance from several influential Japanese . Sun arrived in July 1897 and received financial assistance .
 Sun’s ideology never assumed the importance of his actions, which he himself considered the marrow of revolutionary activity . Sun considered his actions to be the "breadstake of revolution," according to Sun .
 In 1900, he sponsored an uprising in Huizhou, but it collapsed after just 12 days . He sponsored a revolt in 1900, but the uprising was short of success . In 1900 he sponsored a uprising in China's Guangzhou but it was too short .
 In 1905, he and several other radicals formed the Tongmenghui (United League, or Revolutionary Alliance) in Tokyo . He and several others formed the United League (Revolutionary Alliance)
 Sun then went to Hanoi, where he put together several uprisings in southern China . Sun then traveled to Vietnam to put together anti-government movements .
 Sun lost supporters and financial backing . Sun's failed revolts also failed, and Sun lost support and support . Sun was forced to give up his support .
 Qing dynasty continued to struggle, however, as its attempts at reform pleased nobody . The Qing dynasty struggled to find a way to reform .
 On October 10, 1911, a rebellion the Chinese call the Double Tenth, broke out in Wuhan . The rebels, led by army units sympathetic to the Tongmenghui, overthrew the provincial government .
 Several provinces in central, south, and northwest China declared independence from the Qing dynasty . Several provinces declared their independence from Qing in 1866 .
 He departed quickly for China, and revolutionary delegates gathered in Nanjing . He was elected president of a provisional government .
 Sun, however, lacked the military support he needed to extend his power throughout China . Local leaders had always tested the control of the central government . Sun lacked military support in China, where local leaders have always tested central government control .
 Yuan Shikai, an official in the Qing government and a political boss in northern China with military backing, has expressed his support for Sun and his desire to mediate a settlement between Sun and the government .
 In February 1912, the Qing dynasty agreed to abdicate, and as part of the arrangement, the abdication was part of an arrangement .
 Yuan was inaugurated at Beijing, the new capital of the provisional government . Sun relinquished his presidency in favor of Yuan, who is inaugurated in Beijing .
 Sun became director of railroad development and formulated plans to modernize China’s transportation . Sun was director of railroads development and led the country's railroad development .
 Yuan amassed power for himself and undermined the Kuomintang-dominated legislature . At the same time, Yuan amassed powers for himself, he undermined the legislature . Yuan was assassinated in 1989 by the U.S. government .
 Sun benefited from events during World War I , when Japanese incursions spurred Chinese nationalism . Sun benefited during the war, which was fought in China .
 Sun rebelled against Yuan, but he was forced to flee in failure to Japan . Sun was forced by Yuan to flee to Japan in failure .
 Sun formed a military government in Canton allied with a southern warlord in 1917 . In 1917, Sun formed an alliance with the warlord of Canton .
 Many factions of Chinese society were aware of the need for unification and reform in order for the nation to become strong . By that time, many factions of China society were increasingly aware of unification .
 In 1919, the May Fourth movement developed in Beijing as students held a mass demonstration at the Tiananmen gate to protest Japan’s intrusions and call for nationalist and socialist goals . The May Fourth Movement was formed in 1919 as students protested Japan's intrusions .
 The movement stirred an intellectual ferment that strengthened the Marxist beliefs of many educated Chinese . That movement stirred the intellectual ferment in China .
 He was frustrated in his attempts to create a nationwide movement . Once again, however, he was frustrated with his efforts .
 When he allied with northern Chinese warlords to expand his power, he met resistance from his major military supporter in the south, Chen Jiongming . When he allies with northern warlords, he faced resistance from major military supporters in south .
 Sun admired the Russians for having led a successful revolution in their own country . He joined with a Russian agent, Adolf Joffe, to collaborate in China . Sun admired Russia for their success in the revolution .
 In 1923, Sun sent his chief lieutenant and brother-in-law, Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kaishek) to Moscow for training . Sun sent him to Moscow in 1923 for training in Russia .
 Sun gained a lifetime appointment as party director, but his alliance with the communists alienated some conservatives within the Guomindang . Sun gained the lifetime appointment but was also given lifetime appointment by the communists .
 During 1923, Sun maneuvered himself to gain control of a military government in Canton . Sun renewed his drive to link with the north and unite China .
 In 1924, he went to Beijing and met with the warlord who controlled that city, but the negotiations failed . In 1924 he met with Beijing's warlord, but negotiations failed, he said .
 While still in Beijing, cancer overtook Sun, he died on March 12, 1925 . Sun died in 1925 .
 Sun Yat-sen and the Origins of the Chinese Revolution . Sun Yats-sen was a revolutionary leader of the 1930s and 1940s .
 Sun Zi Sun Zi was an ancient Chinese military strategist and author of The Art of War . Sun Zi became the most renowned and influential military classic in Chinese history . He was the most influential military strategist in ancient China .
 These periods had many years of ferocious warfare aimed at expansion and annexation among the seven states . These periods of warfare aimed to expand and annexation .
 The disorder continuing social chaos and endless warfare that all the Chinese rulers had to face required solutions through these two periods . The disorder continued social chaos .
 Sun Zi read military texts from his youth and learned from the war experiences of previous dynasties . Sun Zi learned from military texts of his youth . He also learned from previous dynasts .
 In 517. he left Qi and went to the southern state of Wu, present-day Suzhou Province, where he farmed and wrote The Art of War .
 Sun Zi presented King Heliu with a copy of The Art of War . Sun Zi supported the king’s plan to reunify the country .
 The king wanted to test Sun Zi’s theories by commanding him to train the palace guards . The king was impressed by the strategy, warfighting tactics, and military organization, described in the book .
 Sun Zi revised and improved The Art of War based on his war experience and tested expertise . Sun Zi: "The Art of the War" is published by Sun Zi .
 His strategies dominate the book’s 13 chapters, always keeping the goal of winning the battle .
 The book has had a significant impact on Chinese and Asian history and culture . Considered as a product of Daoist thinking, the book has been influential in Chinese history and Asian culture .
 Sun Zi’s son Sun Ming was granted the title Lord of Fuchun . After his death, Sun Zi was granted a title of the title . Sun Ming's son Sun Zi died in 2011 .
 Sun Bin, also became a military strategist and wrote a treatise on military tactics . Sun Bin also became an author of a book on tactics and tactics .
 Art of War, The; Guerrilla Warfare; Qin Dynasty; Warring States Period; Zhou Dynasty. Qin Dynasty . Zhou Dynasty . Qin Dynasty. Warring states period; Zhou dynasty. Zhou Dynasty; Qin period. Qin period .
 Battle of Taierzhuang was one of the numerous military confrontations in the Xuzhou Campaign during the Anti-Japanese War of 1937-1945 . Battle of Xuzhuang is one of many confrontations during the anti-Japanese war .
 China's War of Resistance against Japan’s invasion . It destroyed the myth of Japanese invincibility . The Chinese GMD military officers and soldiers displayed courage and determination .
 This battle was perhaps the most impressive of the few few Chinese military victories during the war . It was also perhaps the best Chinese military victory .
 Taierzhuang is located on the north bank of the Great Canal and 13 miles to the northeast of Xuzhou, Jiangsu Province . It is located in the north of the canal and is located 13 miles northeast of the city .
 The small town itself was a terminus of a local rail line from Lincheng . The town was a railway terminus for a local railway line .
 Battle of Taierzhuang began on March 29, 1938, when the Japanese Fifth Division attacked the city under the command of Itagaki Seishiro . The Battle began in 1938 .
 By the end of the month, Japanese troops only received their supplies from airplane drops, which were insufficient . The Japanese troops were forced to rely on airplane drops .
 Japan’s Tenth Division under the command of Isogai Rensuke arrived as reinforcement at Taierzhuang . The Japanese troops arrived as reinforcements at the border .
 In early April, the Japanese divisions, totaling 30,00050,000 troops, launched several frontal attacks with tanks and heavy artillery pieces . In April, Japan launched several fronts with tanks .
 Chinese commanders were determined to stop the Japanese northern movement by eliminating these two Japanese divisions . The Chinese commander was determined to eliminate these two divisions .
 Li Zongren combined flexibility and strict military discipline to direct regional armies . 100,000-300,000 troops were concentrated to fight the technologically advanced Japanese with primitive weapons .
 The GMD armies engaged in the Battle of Taierzhuang were commanded by Generals Zhang Zizhong, Tang Enbo, Sun Lianzhong, and Chi Fengcheng, who all made their name nationally known .
 Overconfidence that came from the rapid victories in north China and the Lower Yangzi River region in 1937 and early 1938 led the Japanese commanders to underestimate the fighting power of the Chinese armies .
 The Japanese commanders’ arrogance also led them to underestimate Chinese civilians’ willingness to aid the Chinese war . The Japanese commander’s arrogance led to the underestimating Chinese civilians' willingness to help .
 The Chinese troops were very effective fighting at night, when their generals could best utilize their numerical superiority . The Chinese forces were effective fighting night-time, when they could best use numerical superiority.
 The successful attack ended with Chinese reclamation of Taierzhuang and Japanese retreat . Japanese retreats .
 Heavy casualties and limited mobility kept Chinese from pursuing the retreating Japanese units . Heavy casualties kept Chinese forces from pursuing Japanese units.
 Both sides committed a significant number of soldiers to the fighting, which was merciless . The fighting was merciless, with the deaths of more than 100,000 people .
 Chinese and Japanese armies were engaged in brutal bayonet fighting in the lanes and streets within the walls of Taierzhuang .
 The Japanese army lost 11,000 soldiers in the battle, which was a major loss since the open war began . It was the first major loss of the Japanese army since the war began in 1945 .
 The Chinese army paid a heavy price for the short-lived victory with casualties of 20,000 . The battle was fought in the early 1900s in China .
 During the battle, an estimated 30,000 wounded soldiers were sent to Zhengzhou for treatment .
 Most of these soldiers were wounded in the head, arms, or legs as a result of lane-to-lane battles . Most of the soldiers were injured in head or arms or legs . Most were wounded during lane-and-lane clashes .
 During the conflict, the whole of Taierzhuang was caught up in the fighting . The whole of the city was also caught up during the conflict .
 Many residents fled before the open fire, and others were killed by bombing from the air . Many of the residents were killed before they fled, including many who were killed in the attack .
 The Battle of Taierzhuang was the first major victory for the Chinese Army since the Marco Polo Bridge Incident in July 1937 . The Chinese Army achieved its first major success in the war since the 1937 Marco Polo bridge Incident .
 The victory had major symbolic import for the Chinese because it shattered the myth of Japanese invincibility . The victory was a symbol of China's strength in the world .
 This battle provided hope to Chinese resisters after repeated defeats and humiliation, thus it figured prominently in Chinese newspapers and journals . The battle was the first of its kind in China .
 It was celebrated as a major demonstration of China's determination and potential to set up effective defense and even offense in a time of national despair .
 The uprising lasted more than 14 years and devastated 17 Chinese provinces . The uprising was the largest uprising in China's history . It devastated 17 provinces .
 Estimates of the rebellion’s death toll range from 20 million to 30 million people . Estimates range between 20 million-30 million people died .
 Hong's plan was to overthrow the Manchus, who established the Qing dynasty in 1644 . The first step in Hong’s plan to create a utopian society was overthrowing them . Hong's first step was to overth overthrow the Chinese dynasty, which had established a dynasty in
 Hong’s forces may have numbered some 30,000 men and women, but also possessed a carefully drilled military force of 10,000 . Hong's forces may also have been well drilled by a small but well-trained military force .
 Taiping forces initially made rapid progress in their push north, but they were repulsed before they could reach the capital city . The Taiping force was repuffed before it could reach capital city of Beijing .
 A second expedition, which traveled west to secure territory in the central Yangzi valley, was more successful . The expedition was successful .
 In areas under their control, the Taipings embraced communal property and gender equality . They prohibited such activities as opium or tobacco smoking, alcohol drinking, gambling and ancestor worship .
 The Taipings had to maintain themselves on a wartime footing . Those ideals were difficult to put into practice, however .
 During the late 1850s, the power of the Taipings waned as infighting led Hong to kill several Taiping leaders, including Yang Xiuqing, who had been the commander of the . Taiping armies .
 Hong's decision to retreat from active political and administrative role is devastating for the Taipings . Hong’s decision to concentrate on more spiritual and sensual pursuits is even more devastating .
 A good portion of Hong’s time was spent meditating, rewriting the Bible, and entertaining his 86 consorts .
 Chinese military led by Zeng Guofan and Li Hongzhang (1823— 1901) had recouped its strength . Green Standard Army helped turn the tide in favor of the Manchus .
 Zeng’s army of 120,000 soldiers included his younger brother Zeng Guoquan, who led the successful siege of Anqing, Jiangxi Province, which marked the beginning of the end for the Taipings . Zeng's army of more than 120,
 In the early 1860s, Chinese government forces retook most of the areas conquered by Taiping troops . They encircled the Heavenly Capital by 1862 .
 Following a two-year siege, Chinese forces burst into Nanjing on July 19, 1864 . Nanjing was captured by Chinese forces in 1864 after two years of siege .
 Hong is believed to have committed suicide, and the rest of the Taiping forces in the city were massacred . Hong committed suicide and the city was destroyed .
 The recapture of Nanjing brought the rebellion to a violent end, although pockets of Taiping resistance battled against the Manchus for a few more years . Nanjing was captured by the Chinese government in 1945 .
 Ever-Victorious Army; Hong Xiuquan; Li Hongzhang; Manchus; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Small Sword Society; Xiang Army; Zeng Guofan .
 The conflict took place between the People’s Republic of China and the Republic of . China governments in which the PRC shelled the islands of Matsu and . Quemoy .
 First Taiwan Strait Crisis may be attributed to PRC president Mao Zedong's desire to enhance his country’s international standing in view of its growing diplomatic isolation . Mao Tse-tung may be trying to enhance China's international standing .
 This isolation was chiefly a result of poor relations with the United States and a deteriorating rapport with its erstwhile ally, the Soviet Union . The U.S. is now isolated in the Middle East .
 Sino-American ambassadorial talks following the Bandung Conference and the First Taiwan Strait Crisis had been suspended in late 1957 because of irreconcilable positions over Taiwan .
 By mid-1958, after Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev’s Beijing visit and his advocacy of peaceful coexistence with the West, Mao realized that the Soviet Union could not be counted on to lead the Communist bloc .
 Mao was emboldened to pursue his own independent course in hopes of establishing himself as the true leader of the socialist world . Mao was so emboldened that he was able to establish himself as a leader .
 International events during July 1958 provided Mao with the perfect opportunity to test his mettle . Mao was not impressed with international events during the summer of 1958 .
 The United States sent troops to intervene in Lebanon’s civil disorder . Britain deployed troops to quell uprisings in Jordan, and the U.S. intervened in Lebanon .
 President of the Republic of China ordered his military on alert, which the PRC perceived as provocation . Meanwhile, Taiwanese leader Jiang Jieshi ordered his country on alert . The PRC felt provocation .
 Mao ordered the shelling of Jinmen, known to Westerners as Quemoy and Matsu, two island groupings 8 miles off mainland China’s southeastern coast . In response, on August 23, 1958 Mao ordered shelling of the two islands .
 Mao played up by publicly denouncing “continuing U.S. imperialism” in the Taiwan Strait . Mao played this up by . denouncing ‘continuing . United States imperialism’ in Taiwan Strait, Mao said .
 He also restated the PRC’s claim of sovereignty over Taiwan and its offshore islands .
 Khrushchev gave his full support to the PRC’s claims over the offshore islands . At the same time, he momentarily drew closer to the Soviet Union .
 Unlike in the First Taiwan Strait Crisis, the U.S. was fully prepared to defend Taiwan and the offshore islands . The United States was ready to defend the islands and Taiwan .
 U.S. deployed additional air and naval forces to protect the Taiwan Strait . American and Chinese forces exchanged fire in a show of force .
 The United States and the PRC appeared to be headed for a full-fledged conflict, which was not what Mao had intended . The U.S. and PRC were seen as the two countries headed for war in China .
 He viewed the Jinmen as nooses constraining the United States, with Taiwan as another more distant noose . The Jinmen are nooses that constrain the U.S. with Taiwan .
 He reasoned that America had put a rope around its neck by trapping itself in the Taiwan Strait . America committed itself to the defense of these three areas, he said .
 This, he thought, would not only stretch United States resources but also provide the PRC with the upper hand in the region . The PRC would be able to take advantage of the United States, he said .
 Mao decided to ease tensions in the Taiwan Strait after successfully hooking the U.S. on the nooses . Mao wanted to ease the situation in Taiwan .
 On September 6, 1958, the PRC proposed the resumption of the Sino-American Ambassadorial Talks, which finally reconvened at year’s end . The talks were first held in 1958 .
 On October 5, 1958, the PRC issued the “Message to the Compatriots in Taiwan,” in the name of Peng Dehuai . China’s claim to sovereignty over the Taiwan Strait and its willingness to settle the crisis by peaceful means .
 On October 25, 1958, the PRC issued the “Second Message to the Compatriots in Taiwan,” from Defense Minister Peng . The shelling of the Jinmen would be restricted to odd-numbered days and limited by certain conditions, which helped defuse the Second Taiwan
 Periodic bombardment continued until January 9, 1959, when Mao lifted the shelling orders . The shelling orders were lifted by Mao in 1959 .
 Grand Strategy, Domestic Mobilization, and Sino-American Conflict, 1947—1958, 1947-1958. Grand Strategy . Grand Strategy: Domestic . Mobilization . Aims to prepare for the Chinese invasion of the U.S.
 Nuclear Diplomacy in Unequal Conflicts: The U.S. and China, 1950—1958 . The United States and China were involved in nuclear disarmament .
 Taiwan Strait Crisis of 1995-1996 was caused by the People's Liberation Army on the mainland to launch missiles against the island . Tension mounted in the Taiwan Strait between the People’s Republic of . China and the Republic of China in 1995-96 .
 The military action led to the Third Taiwan Strait Crisis, which involved United States armed forces in the area . The U.S. armed forces were involved in the incident .
 China’s defense minister convinced Jiang that a show of force was necessary to condemn the United States for ruining Sino-American relations . General Chi Haotian, China's defense minister, convinced Jiang . Jiang: "Show of force is necessary"
 From July 21 to 26, the PLA conducted its first missile test in an area only 36 miles north of a ROC-held island . The PLA conducted the test in the area only .
 The Central Military Commission of the CCP concentrated a large force in Fujian Province . At the same time, the Central Military . Commission also concentrated a . large force .
 In mid-August, the PLA conducted another set of missile firings, accompanied by live ammunition exercises . The PLA conducted a series of missile and ammunition firings .
 In the fall, the high command launched one wave after another of military exercises, including a joint amphibious landing exercise in November . The exercises were launched by the U.S. in the fall .
 This is the first time in many years that military activities have been announced publicly . Even though there were military activities along the strait in the past, this was the first .
 Beijing’s military aggression reversed what some observers had called a period of significant rapprochement across the Taiwan Strait . The most serious international crisis since Beijing and Taibei engaged in military conflict over the islands of Jinmen and Mazu in the 1950s .
 During the short period of crisis, crossstrait tensions rose drastically, as if war were imminent . Cross-strait tension rose drastically during this short period, as though war was imminent . During this period, tensions rose dramatically, and tensions rose sharply .
 Taibei declared that it had made all necessary preparations to deal with a possible invasion of China . Taibai was on high alert and declared that . it has made all the necessary preparations for a potential invasion .
 The Clinton administration sent the United States aircraft carrier the Nimitz to pass through the Taiwan Strait in December 1995 . To respond to the PLA activities, the U.S. government sent an aircraft carrier through the Strait .
 Between January and February, the PLA concentrated 100,000 troops along the coast across the strait from Taiwan in order to send a stronger signal to both Taibei and Washington . The PLA concentrated its troops across the Strait from January to February .
 The tension mounted in the Taiwan Strait even though the Clinton administration believed that Beijing would not attack Taiwan and other offshore islands in the winter of 1995-1996 . The Clinton administration and the Pentagon believed that China would not strike Taiwan .
 Beijing intended to discourage the Taiwanese to vote for Li because he had tried to separate Taiwan from China through the independence movement . Beijing wanted to discourage Taiwan from voting for Li as he had failed to separate China from Taiwan .
 Flights to Japan and trans-Pacific flights were prolonged because airplanes needed to detour away from their flight path . Flights were delayed because of the detour .
 On March 8, the U.S. announced that it was deploying the Independence carrier battle group to international waters near Taiwan . The Independence carrier group will be deployed in international waters .
 On March 11, the U.S. deployed the Nimitz carrier battle group to the Taiwan area . The Nimitz warship was deployed to Taiwan on March 11 .
 Nimitz steamed at high speed from the Persian Gulf to the Taiwan Strait to join the Independence carrier battle group to monitor Chinese military actions . The Nimitz is the first carrier carrier carrier to join a carrier carrier group .
 This was the largest U.S. naval movement in the Asia-Pacific region since the Vietnam War . It was the first transit by United States warships in the area since 1976 . It's the largest United States naval movement since that war .
 China and the U.S. seemed at the brink of war again in the Taiwan Strait . China and China seemed to be at odds with each other in the region .
 The U.S. showed its readiness to fight over the issue of Taiwan . Two carrier battle groups have been deployed to the Taiwan Strait .
 Li Denghui was elected as Taiwan’s president on March 23, 1996 . The Third Taiwan Strait Crisis did not evolve into a war between China and the U.S.
 Actually, China’s intimidation was counterproductive and aroused more anger than fear in Taiwan, says Tengeng . China's intimidation arouses more anger in Taiwan than fear, he says .
 China’s missile test in March boosted Li 5 percent in the polls, according to a Taiwanese survey . According to the poll, Li is a majority of the voters in Taiwan .
 PLA offensive activities in the 1995-1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis also strengthened the argument for further U.S. arms sales to Taiwan . The incident led to the strengthening of military ties between the United States and Japan .
 The high command in Beijing had learned an important lesson from the 1995-1996 crisis, that the United States would not watch a PLA attack on Taiwan with folded hands . The U.S. would not have folded hands, the Chinese high command said .
 The PLA has to be prepared to deal with a major U.S. military intervention in the Taiwan Strait . The PLA must be prepared for a major United States military intervention . The Chinese military has been warned of a major military intervention against Taiwan .
 Tang dynasty rose to the top in 618 after the dissolution of the Sui dynasty . The Tang dynasty was one of several factions struggling for power .
 Tang spread Chinese culture, maintained trade relations with the West, and acted as a bulwark against Islamic expansion . The Tang spread culture and maintained trade ties with West .
 His son Li Shimin was his chief general and did most of the conquering for the Tang . He was the son of the Tang chief general . He died in his son's death .
 Li Shimin captured the capital city of Luoyang and destroyed the Sui palace to prove that that dynasty had indeed come to an end . He then pensioned the surviving Sui survivors of the dynasty .
 Li Shimin established control over eastern China and to pacify the north and south . He established control of eastern China . Li went on to establish control .
 Taizong expanded China’s borders far westward . Regarded as one of the greatest of all Chinese emperors . Taizongs was one of China's greatest rulers .
 Tibetan head of state requested a Chinese bride to seal their relationship . Tibetans began to adopt Chinese culture after initiating talks with the Tibetan leader .
 Emperor also began to establish sovereignty over western kingdoms along the Silk Road . Emperor also established sovereignty over Western kingdoms .
 Taizong was as good an administrator as he was a military leader . He was also a good administrator and a good military leader, according to Chinese media reports .
 He lowered taxes, instituted a fair civil service, and set the example for his government to follow . President Obama lowered taxes and instituted a good civil service .
 Confucian believed that it was necessary for a leader to promote the harmony of his people by personal excellence .
 He married one of his father’s concubines, known as Empress Wuhou . He married an extremely ambitious woman who came to be known as Emperor Wuhu . He died in 1866 .
 When Gaozong died in 683, she seized power (684704) openly, one of the only women ever to do so in Chinese history . She was the power behind the throne .
 Border wars continued against the Tibetans in the west and the Khitan Mongols in the north . The Tibetans were the main rivals for centuries .
 In the middle and latter part of the eighth century, the Chinese depended more and more on Turkic mercenaries, who proved to be able soldiers for the Chinese . Turkistan received Chinese aid to keep the Muslims at bay .
 A golden age of poetry and art early in the 700s gave way to rebellions and a weakening imperial government in the second half of the eighth century . A weakened imperial government began to weaken in the late 700s .
 Provincial warlords and generals struggled for dominance over the next century . Provincial warlord and generals struggle for dominance of the country .
 Tang dynasty stayed in power, at least in name, until 907, when the final emperor conceded power to one of his generals . The Tang dynasty ended in 907 when one of its generals took over .
 Confucian-Mencian Paradigm; Mongols; Silk Road; Sui Dynasty; Tang Gaozong, Emperor; Tibet; Tributary System . Mongols, Mongols and Silk Road .
 Emperor Gaozong was aided in his rule by Empress Wu during the later years of his reign after a series of strokes left him incapacitated . Empress Wu was the only woman to hold on to his rule during his reign .
 Emperor Gaozong delegated all matters of state to his wife, and after he died in 683, power fell completely into her hands . She was the sole monarch of China .
 He was interred at the Qianling Mausoleum along with Wu Zetian . After his death, he was placed in a state of mourning .
 During the first part of his reign, Tang gained territorial gains, which started with his father . Tang was one of the most powerful men in China . He ruled the country for more than three decades .
 Emperor Taizong, continued, including the conquest of Baekje, Goguryeo, and Western Tujue, but throughout the 670s, much of those gains were lost to Tufan, Silla, Khitan, and Balhae .
 territory previously conquered by both Eastern and Western Tujue were subjected to repeated rebellions . Further, territory previously controlled by both sides was subject to repeated revolts .
 In 650, Gaozong's general Gaokan defeated Tujue’s invasion and captured their king . The Tang dynasty captured the king, forcing them to surrender to the Tang dynasty .
 In 651, under the leadership of King Heliu, the western Tujue invaded the Tang . The western Tang invaded the west in 651 . The Tang was defeated by the Tujues .
 In 660, Gaozong’s general Fashen Qiudao led the Tang army to conquer Paekche . The Tang army led to the victory in 660, and the city was conquered .
 In 661, Gaozong established a department called “Protectorate General to Pacify the West” in order to maintain the security of western Tang . The department was established to maintain western Tang security .
 In 662, Paekche fell to invaders once again, and Gaozong’s army reconquered it . In 663, Gao Zong‘s army re-conquered PaekChe . Paekch fell to invasion in 662
 Gaozong’s General Shun Renshi and Liu Rengui led the Tang army . They defeated Japan's military, killing around 80 percent of the enemy troops and forcing the rest to retreat .
 In 668, the Tang army conquered Pyongyang and the king of Korea surrendered . The Tang army captured Pyongyang and took over the city .
 In 670, the Tibetan military defeated Tang’s army and conquered the Tuguhun . The Tibetan army defeated Tang's army in 670 . The Tuguun was conquered by the Tibetan army of the same name .
 Liu Rengui conquered the Shilla in 675, forcing their king to surrender . In 675 he conquered their king, forcing him to surrender to the city of Shilla . The Shilla was conquered by Liu in 674 .
 In 676, the Tibetan military continued to invade Tang and conquered four provinces . The Tibetan army continued its invasion of Tang and continued to conquer the region .
 In 677, the Tibetan army conquered Fu Province, forcing the Tang to concentrate their army to defend the kingdom . The Tibetan army then attacked Fu Province . The Tang was forced to concentrate its army on defense .
 Tujue invaded Tang again in 680, and general Pei Xingjian achieved victory at Heishan . In 680, General Pei won over the Tang dynasty .
 An-Shi, Rebellion of; Li Shimin, Emperor; Tang Dynasty; Tibet, Tibet; Tributary System .
 The predominant theory about why this “army’s” was created is that it was intended to defend the emperor in his afterlife . The majority theory is that the army was created to protect the emperor .
 Terra-cotta Army found in 1974 in a field outside of the village Xiyang, Lintong County, northwestern Shaanxi . Terra-Cotta soldiers fill the mausoleum of Qin dynasty emperor Shi Huangdi .
 The emperor’s tomb, filled with life-size statues of soldiers and horses, is a monument to the military strength of the Qin dynasty . Uncovered in 1974 in China's Shanxi Province, the tomb is filled with statues of horses and soldiers .
 The discovery occurred when a group of six farmers started to dig a well 1.5 kilometers east of the first emperor Qin’s burial mound . The discovery was made by farmers digging a well east of Qin's burial site .
 After digging four meters down, farmers struck what they believed was a brick . After digging, farmers say they have found what they believe is a brick in their home .
 After clearing away the earth around the hard object, they saw a human figure, complete with a face . After clearing out the earth, they cleared it up and saw the face .
 A bronze arrowhead was also found in the hole . This location today is pit one . The arrowhead is also found .
 The farmers notified the Cultural Relics Bureau of the local government about the metal and stone fragments they discovered . The bureau sent out an archeologist to investigate the findings .
 A full survey would be necessary on the fields surrounding the tomb . After one day, the archeologist reported to the bureau that a full survey was necessary .
 After excavation, archeologists took notice that the warriors had different hairstyles, costumes, and facial features . Archaeologists say the warriors were different from each other .
 Each figure appears to have been hand sculpted, but in actuality, the artists took a small repertoire of body parts such as arms, legs, and torsos that they adjoined to other parts in different combinations . The finer details of the facial region and armor were done by
 Although each warrior was different, they do not appear to be actual portraits of individual warriors . The images were taken in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Most of the warriors have stamped inscriptions that appear to be a “unit” or an overseer of a work group’s name . The inscriptions are stamped with the name of a unit or overseer .
 This is an early form of quality control designed to follow which groups were making certain statues . It was designed to keep the quality of the statues from being made .
 The figures then would have been painted and placed in their spot in the pit . The figures would then be painted and put in their place in the car park .
 The best estimates place at a 36-year period . The method was repeated until the project was complete .
 This pit contained foot soldiers but also chariots, horses, and commanders of the army . The pit was filled with foot soldiers and chariots and commanders .
 This was not the only pit around the burial complex containing terra-cotta figures . This was also the second pit in the complex, which was filled with terra cotta .
 There are supplemental buildings under the ground; for example, a stable pit found southeast of the mound . In addition, there are also supplemental buildings .
 The damage to some of the statues occurred soon after the burial of the emperor .
 Archaeologists believe that raids on the pits for weapons by marauders caused some destruction . The biggest destroyer of the statues was fire, which roared through some of the pits . Archaeologists say the biggest destroyer was fire .
 The fire left behind evidence of itself by charring one of the pit walls as well as burning the wood supports holding the roof up . The fire also charred the wood supporting the roof of the building .
 The destruction of the supports forced the roof to fall in on some of the pits, causing major damage to many of the statues . The roof also fell into the pits causing the damage to the statues to be caused .
 The excavation exposed over 1,000 statues in the largest of the three pits . The largest of three pits was the largest and largest pit pit in the area .
 The second excavation took place over the span of just a year in 1985, but failed due to technological issues . The second attempt to excavate the site took place in 1985 .
 The third excavation, led by Liu Zancheng, began 24 years later in June 2009 . The third excavations began in June of 2009 in the site .
 Liu’s goals for the excavation include finding an overall commander of the entire army . Liu's goals are to find a commander of an entire army, Liu says . Liu hopes to find out more about the army's commander .
 Liu hopes to devise a system to save the ornate colors with which the warriors were painted, as previous excavations showed the statues quickly oxidized to a shade of gray . Liu also hopes to find a way to preserve the color of the statues .
 In 1987, the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization declared the site a world heritage site . The site was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987 .
 Great Wall; Han Dynasty; Qin Dynasty . Qin Shi Huangdi, Emperor; Rebellion Led by Chen Sheng; Warring States Period . Great Wall: Han Dynasty .
 The Third Field Army was the final iteration of the force that had originally been known as the New Fourth Army during China’s Anti-Japanese War of 1937-1945 and the East China Field Army during the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949 .
 East China Field Army became the Third Field Army, totaling more than 1 million troops . In the meantime, China has more than a million troops in the East China field Army .
 This event marked a significant turning point in the history of the Communist armed forces . It transformed them from armies based in specific regions to professional units of a standing army .
 This change was also a symbolic recognition of the fact that these field armies were now about to engage the Nationalists in enemy territory . This change is also a . symbolic recognition that . these field . armies were also about to . engage in enemy . territory .
 Su Yu basically ran operations for the army . By this time, Chen’s attentions were drawn more toward political endeavors . Su Yu essentially ran operations .
 First deputy political commissar Tan Zhenlin would go on to play prominent political roles in the PRC . Other notable figures included chief of staff Zhang Zhenli and first deputy political commissar .
 The Third Field Army consisted of four subordinate army groups . The Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, Ninth and Tenth Army Groups were the Fourth and Fifth Army Groups .
 By this time, the Nationalists’ best formations had been smashed in north China, and their leader, Jiang Jieshi , had resigned in the face of an inevitable defeat .
 Li Zongren left to bear the brunt of the Communist offensive into south China . Li left Li to bear brunt of Communist offensive .
 For the crossing of the Yangzi River, the Communists formed the General Front Committee consisting of Liu Bocheng (Liu Po-ch’eng) and Deng Xiaoping (Deng Hsiao-ping) The Communists also functioned as secretary of the committee .
 The original plan was to attack in early April, but this was postponed due to peace talks . The original attack was planned to take place in April . The peace talks have been postponed until April .
 Deng launched the attack on April 20, quickly establishing a bridgehead and sending the defenders into a headlong retreat . After negotiations failed, Deng launched an attack . Deng quickly established the bridgehead, sending defenders into an immediate retreat .
 Nationalist defenses in the Third Field Army’s sector consisted of almost half a million men, but this figure was largely illusionary as by this time their morale was all but broken . The Nationalist defense in the Nanjing -Shanghai-Hangzhou (Hang
 On April 23, the Third Field Army captured Nanjing, and by the beginning of May, they had penetrated southward into both Zhejiang and Fujian Provinces .
 Su deployed almost the entirety of the Third Field Army against Tang’s 200,000-man garrison in Shanghai . The Fourth Field Army's rapid progress on their flank in Hubei Province subsequently allowed Su to deploy almost the entire of the . Third Field .
 This operation was the bloodiest of the entire Yangzi River Crossing Campaign, costing the Third Field Army 17,000 casualties . Operation was the bloodyest of the campaign, costing 17,500 casualties . This operation cost 17,800 Chinese troops .
 The Communists only suffered 7,000 casualties during the operation . This stands in stark contrast to the rest of the operation, which had only cost the Communists a total of 7,500 casualties .
 The fall of Shanghai brought the Yangzi River Crossing Campaign to a close . The campaign was launched in 2008 .
 Chen Yi devoted his efforts to restoring business and normal life in Shanghai as mayor, while Su Yu began planning for the invasion of Taiwan . During this time, Chen Yi was mayor of Shanghai .
 The Communist Party was forced to postpone its attack on Taiwan indefinitely . This failure, combined with the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950, convinced the Communist Party to postpone their attack indefinitely .
 In September 1954, during a major PLA reorganization, the Third Field Army designation disappeared, and its constituent units were dispersed across three military regions . The Nanjing Military Region, which at the time encompassed Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and Anhui Provinces, was
 Three Kingdoms is a historical period in ancient China between the Han dynasty and Northern-Southern Dynasties . China was divided among three kingdoms when the country was divided between the three kingdoms .
 A history novel, Sanguo Yanyi, describes the era’s conflicts, relations, leaders, and military events in detail . The novel is written in detail, and is based on the history of the Vietnam War .
 The book became exceedingly popular not only in China but worldwide . It made the Three Kingdoms Period one of the most romanticized eras in Chinese history .
 The decline and fall of the Han dynasty is attributed to a variety of factors . Government overspending, heavy taxes, and service drafting are some of the factors .
 The military expeditions and territorial expansion convinced the Han emperors that they were superior in civilization and institution . The Han imperialists believed that they had superior institutions and institutions .
 Han emperors maintained a large army of over 1 million men . To secure its central position in Asia, Han . emperors . maintained a . large army to secure their central position .
 The conscription system, however, did not meet the extraordinary demands of frequent wars . Conscription system was designed to meet the needs of frequent conflicts .
 China's efforts to create an Asian powerhouse drained its resources and did not provide any significant economic return . These measures failed to stop the decline of the dynasty, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Border generals developed personally accountable mercenary military troops . Large landowners established private armies to protect their holdings . As a result, border generals developed personal accountability .
 In 220, the last Han emperor was deposed by such dissenting generals, bringing the dynasty to a close . China plunged into the Three Kingdoms period, plunging China into a period of Three Kingdoms .
 Three powerful military leaders established their kingdoms separately and developed into territorial magnates . Three of the three kingships were created by military leaders .
 Cao Cao gained control over northern China; Liu Bei claimed the provinces in the southwest; and Sun Quan controlled the central and southeastern parts of the country along the Yangzi River . Cao Cao was one of China's most powerful men .
 Each kingdom waged war against the others over territory, population, and economic resources . Each kingdom fought over territory and population .
 Cao Cao solidified his reputation by combating the Yellow Turbans as a cavalry commander for the Han . Cao Cao was one of the Han's most successful military leaders .
 He defeated Yuan Shao at the Battle of Guandu, obtaining the Yellow plains . He defeated him at the battle and obtained the Yellow Plains . He then died in childbirth .
 Cao Cao established military farms along the Yellow River . He repaired and constructed irrigation networks to bring water to the wheat and corn fields . Cao Cao set up military farms in order to ensure food supply .
 As a result, agricultural production in north China recovered quickly and progressed . Agricultural production in northern China has increased .
 Cao Cao still considered himself to be a servant of the Han and allowed Han Emperor Xian to stay on the throne . When Cao Cao died in 220, he considered himself a servant to the Han . Cao Cao was able to keep the Han from losing the throne in 220 .
 Cao’s eldest son, Cao Pi, forced Emperor Xian to abdicate, officially ending the Han dynasty and proclaiming himself emperor . Cao Pi's eldest son Cao Pi was not so kind and forced emperor Xian into abdication .
 Shu was the shortest-lived of the three competing states during the Three Kingdoms Period . Shu was one of three competing Chinese states during that period . Shu is the shortest lived state of the period .
 Liu took the advice of Zhuge Liang , an outstanding statesman and military strategist, and achieved a great victory against Cao Cao at the Battle of Chi Bi in 208 . Liu was a great statesman who fought Cao Cao Cao in 208.
 Liu kept some of Wu's western territories that he was entrusted with under Sun Quan’s service . Liu expanded into southwestern China and expanded into southwest China .
 In 220, Liu Bei claimed the restoration of the Han, with himself as emperor under the false impression that Cao Pi had murdered Emperor Xian . Liu Bei claims the murder of Emperor Xan and claimed to have murdered him .
 He efficiently maintained irrigation works centered on the Dujiang Dam . He encouraged and promoted rice farming and agricultural development among the minorities in southern Sichuan .
 Liu Bei died in 223, and left his trusted advisor Zhuge Liang as regent of his 17-year-old son Liu Chan . Liu Chan was the son of Liu Bei and Liu Bei's son Liu Bei .
 Sun Quan secured a strong military, and the state was never successfully invaded . The state was expanded under his leadership under his rule .
 Sun promoted the shipbuilding industry and the maritime trade along China’s southeastern coast . Sun promoted not only agricultural production, but also shipbuilding and maritime trade .
 Sun died in 252, his sons could not continue his feats, and Wu was eventually conquered by the Jin in 280 . After Sun died, the Jin conquered Wu in 280, and the Jin ruled Wu .
 After its reunification of China in 280, the Jin dynasty was challenged by another long period of division and civil wars in 304 . The Jin dynasty is known for its long periods of division, civil wars and division .
 The heroes and villains it featured remain favorites in modern Chinese society and the cultures of many other countries .
 The work reached the heights of popular Chinese culture and became the first long novel to be translated for Western audiences . The work was translated into English for the first time .
 Several video games in America also based their stories on this era, including Romance of the Three Kingdoms, and Dynasty Warriors .
 Cao Cao; Chibi, Battle of; Guandu; Han Dynasty; Han Wudi, Emperor; Liu Bei; Ming Dynasty; Sui Dynasty . Liu Bei, Liu Bei and Liu Bei were the sons of Cao Cao and Cao Cao .
 Tiananmen Square, literally meaning ‘Gate of Heavenly Peace,” has been the site of student movements since the 1919 May Fourth movement . The square is a large public plaza in Beijing, capital of the People's Republic of China .
 The Tiananmen Square protests of April 15-June 4, 1989 were of the utmost importance both domestically and internationally . The protests took place in the square in 1989 . They were the largest demonstrations in China's history .
 Hu was ousted from office in January 1987 because of his sympathetic stance toward the prodemocracy student movement of 1986 . The student movement turned mourning activities into a series of nationwide student demonstrations .
 Students renewed calls for immediate democratization and demanded direct dialogues with senior leaders . Students renewed their calls for urgent democratization of the country .
 The movement employed mass sit-ins, boycotts of classes, public forums, bicycle demonstrations, and hunger strikes .
 On May 4, 1989, organized prodemocracy demonstrations occurred in 51 Chinese cities . Organized pro-democracy demonstrations took place in 51 cities across China .
 The tanks stopped their advance momentarily as he cried and pleaded for an end to the killing in China's capital .
 The man was pulled away by bystanders, and the tanks continued . in mid-May, the protests received global media coverage . The man is pulled away from the tanks by bystanders .
 The worldwide attention and escalation of the student movement irritated PRC leaders . PRC leader: "The worldwide attention" and "escalating" the movement irritated the PRC .
 Deng Xiaoping introduced a market economy and open-door policy to modernize China in 1979 . Deng's policies were introduced by the paramount leader of China's paramount leader in 1979, when he introduced an open door policy .
 Zhao preferred a conciliatory stance, arguing that the protest was of a patriotic nature . Zhao said political reform should be accelerated to facilitate economic modernization . Zhao: The protest was patriotic nature and should have been accelerated .
 Li insisted on clear-cut coercive measures to disperse the demonstrators and restore stability . Li, by contrast, insisted that clear-cutting coercive measures were needed to disperse demonstrators . Li insisted that the protesters should not have been allowed to be dispersed .
 Deng remained influential as the chairman of the Central Military Commission . Deng was away from the front line since the early 1980s . Deng remained highly influential in the military .
 Fearing that his economic program would be jeopardized, he supported Zhao’s soft-line, accommodating posture . Zhao: “I’m not worried about what I’ve done, I just want to keep it quiet.” Zhao: China’
 Deng's patience was exhausted, and he decided to adopt Li’s hard-line approach . With no sign that the protests would soon end, Deng decided to take a hard line approach . Deng's government has been in a state of crisis since 2008 .
 On May 20, 1989, Li declared martial law in Beijing, ordering troops of the People’s Liberation Army to clear Tiananmen Square on the condition that no bloodshed occur . Li ordered troops to clear the square, but no bloodshed was allowed .
 Zhao was placed under house arrest and was replaced by Jiang Zemin . Jiang was the party secretary of the Shanghai Municipal Committee . Zhao closed down a newspaper for reporting Tiananmen Square protests .
 After consulting retired elder statesmen such as Li Xiannian , Bo Yibo, and PRC president Yang Shangkun (Yang Shang-kun) Deng finally agreed on more forceful means to end the standoff . Deng said the clearance of the square at all costs was necessary .
 On June 2, Yang ordered a military crackdown on student demonstrators and clearance of Tiananmen Square . Yang said an alleged counterrevolutionary riot was fermenting and that continued instability would retard economic reform .
 On June 4 at midnight, the PLA marched into the square, and by dawn it had fulfilled its orders, thereby ending the seven-week-long protests . The PLA had been ordered to end the protests in Beijing .
 On June 9, the government ordered the arrest of all student leaders and activists . To prevent a recurrence of this type of violence, the authorities ordered the arrests . The arrests were ordered by the government to prevent a repeat .
 Some leaders, such as Wang Dan, were arrested and sentenced to long prison terms . Others such as Chai Ling and Wuer Kaixi fled abroad .
 PRC’s use of the PLA to suppress the student demonstrations stunned the world . The PRC used the PLA in the suppression of student demonstrations .
 Foreign condemnations, including those from the Soviet bloc, flooded in . A number of punitive sanctions, including the suspension of arms sale to China, have been imposed .
 From a broader perspective, the legacy of the Tiananmen Square protests was twofold . The legacy of Tiananman Square protests is twofold. The protests were twofold, one of the largest in China's history .
 In the PRC, the protests enabled the conservatives to gain the upper hand . In the protests, the protesters were able to gain control of the government .
 Deng relinquished his remaining post to Jiang in November 1989, passing the ruling power to the third generation . Deng's economic modernization was slowed down and his economic modernization slowed down .
 There is a consensus that the Tiananmen Square protests in some ways inspired the liberation of Eastern Europe from Soviet control, precipitating the Cold War’s end . In the 1950s and '60s, the protests in China were the first to break away from the Soviet Union
 The Chinese Leadership’s Decision to Use Force Against Their Own People—In Their Own Words . The Chinese leadership's decision to use force against their own people is in their own words .
 French naval victory at Fouzhou in August 1884 cut off the seaborne rice trade from Taiwan (then known as Formosa) to the Chinese mainland . The Chinese were prepared to make peace with the French .
 France suffered a major defeat on land at Langson on February 13, 1885, that brought the fall of Premier Jules Ferry’s government and made the French side amenable to a peace settlement . The French side nonetheless secured the major French war aims .
 The treaty is an important milestone in Vietnamese history . Under it China renounced its long suzerainty over Vietnam and recognized the French protectorate over Tonkin and Annam .
 Both Chinese regulars and the Black Flags, guerilla troops of Chinese peasants, were to retire behind the Chinese border . The Black Flags were to be retired behind the border .
 The treaty also permitted French traders in southern China, granted the French favored status over the other European powers in Yunnan Province . It also permitted the French to build a railroad line from Hanoi to Kunming, the capital city of Yunnan .
 Two treaties were signed in Tianjin between China and Western powers in 1858 and 1885 . Laos was added in 1893, after the Siamese had been bluffed into withdrawing their outposts on the left bank of the Mekong .
 The painting shows the signing of the first Treaty of Tianjin in 1858 by representatives of China, Great Britain, France, Russia, and the United States . The treaty ended the Arrow War .
 Second conflict of the Opium Wars raged between Great Britain, France, and China during 1856-1858 . The Arrow War was the second conflict between the three countries .
 Qing Dynasty; Opium War, First; Self-Strengthening Movement; Sino-French War. Qing Dynasty . Opium war, First, First Opium Wars, First . Self-strengthening movement; S.S. War.
 Tibet is a provincial-level administrative region of the People's Republic of China since 1951 . It is officially known as the Xizang Autonomous Region, with the capital at Lhasa . Tibet has been Tibet's main source of power since Tibet began in 1951 .
 Tibet covers an area of 461,700 square miles and is located in southwestern China . Tibet is the largest Tibetan region in the world, Tibet is located on Tibet's borders .
 Tibet grew into an independent theocracy after the introduction of Indian Buddhism in the seventh century . Tibet is now an independent state of Tibet . Tibet has been ruled by Tibetans for centuries .
 In the seventeenth century, the Yellow Hat sect gained supremacy and practiced Lamaism, a hierarchical organization .
 Atop the hierarchy was the Dalai Lama, both the spiritual and political head of Tibetans . The Dalai Lama is the spiritual head of the Tibetans and the spiritual leader of Tibet .
 Isolated Tibet forced to open itself to the world in 1904 by the British . The British sought to secure a trade route to China and erect a buffer against Russian expansion into British India .
 In 1907, Britain, Russia, and China agreed on Chinese sovereignty over Tibet and pledged noninterference in Tibetan affairs . China, Russia and Britain agreed on Tibet in 1907, pledging non interference .
 Tibet declared independence in late 1911 after overthrow of China’s ruling Qing dynasty . Tibet declared its independence in 1911 after the overthrow of the Qing dynasty in 1911 .
 Chinese Communist leaders sent 80,000 troops of the People’s Liberation Army into Tibet in October 1950 . A year after the PRC's birth in October 1949, the Chinese Communist Party was born in Tibet .
 Unable to defend his people, the Fourteenth Dalai Lama unsuccessfully appealed to the U.N. for assistance . The Dalai Lama was unable to help his people .
 In May 1951, the Tibetan government reluctantly accepted the PRC’s 17-Point Agreement for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet . The agreement instituted a joint Chinese-Tibetan authority . The PRC's 17-point Agreement was signed in 1951 .
 During the early 1950s, PRC officials implemented a number of measures that brought Tibetan autonomy into question .
 modernization efforts included land reform, heavy industrialization, the introduction of secular education, the opening of Tibet through construction of nationwide communication networks, and the purge of anti-PRC officials . These modernization efforts include land reform .
 Tibetans found these measures antithetical to their traditional practices of feudalism and socioeconomic simplicity and threatening to Tibetan homogeneity . Tibetans find these measures antithetical to their traditional practices .
 Tibetans responded with a series of anti-Chinese revolts, transforming the Tibet question into an interethnic dispute between Tibetans and the Han Chinese . Tibetans, who considered themselves a unique race, responded to the situation with anti-China revolts .
 The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency capitalized on Tibetan disaffection to advance American strategic interests . Meanwhile, the United States Central Intelligence .
 In early 1956, the CIA began to provide military training to Tibetan rebels . The Tibetan rebels were trained by the CIA .
 In autumn 1957, the CIA launched a covert operation by air-dropping into Tibet U.S.-trained Tibetan rebels along with American-made weapons and radios . The operation was part of a covert effort by the CIA .
 This Tibetan-CIA operation led to a full-scale rebellion in Lhasa in March 1959 . The Tibetan government-led Tibetan rebels rebelled against the CIA in 1959 .
 Chinese leaders deployed 40,000 troops to put down the rebellion . Nearly 8,700 Tibetan deaths and the exile of the Dalai Lama to India . The Dalai Lama was exiled to India after the uprising .
 To resolve the Tibet question, the PRC named the tenth Panchen Lama as Tibet’s acting head . Tibet is preparing Tibet as an autonomous administrative administrative region .
 In 1965, the PRC replaced Tibet’s theocracy with a Chinese Communist administration, making it an Autonomous Region . Tibet is now an autonomous region under Communist rule .
 Dalai Lama and 80,000 followers settled in northern India, where they founded the Government of Tibet in Exile at Dharamsala . With CIA assistance, the Dalai Lama was aided by the CIA .
 The Dalai Lama internationalized the Tibet question by appealing to the UN . He secured two Tibet resolutions in 1961 and 1965 denouncing the PRC’s violation of human rights in the March 1959 rebellion .
 Since then, the Dalai Lama has pursued an active posture in international affairs . He championed Tibet’s independence and self-determination, human rights, and peace and freedom .
 After 1959, the United States reversed its previous indifference to the Tibet question and publicly supported Tibetan independence . The U.S. changed its attitude to Tibet after 1959 .
 The CIA remained active in Tibet, chiefly in intelligence gathering, especially concerning the PRC’s nuclear program in the neighboring Xinjiang Province . The PRC's nuclear program is located in Xinjiang .
 In Tibet, the anti-Chinese movement continued after the 1959 rebellion, and the PRC has responded with periodic crackdowns . The PRC responded to the 1959 uprising with a series of crackdowns on Tibet .
 This triggered a massive exodus of Tibetans to India, Nepal, and Bhutan . Tibetans are now living in India, Bhutan and Nepal . The Tibetans have moved to Bhutan, Nepal and India in search of their homeland .
 The CIA diminished its assistance to Tibetan rebels beginning in 1969 . To facilitate the Sino-American rapprochement, the CIA diminished assistance to the rebels .
 In 1978, the United States recognized Tibet as part of China, thus reducing the issue to an internal Chinese affair . Shortly before the establishment of formal Sino-American diplomatic relations, the U.S. government recognized Tibet in 1978 .
 Tibet has implemented a number of reforms to modernize Tibet, intending to win Tibetans’ approval by raising their living standards . On the one hand, the government wants to raise living standards by raising the living standards of Tibetans . Tibetans are expected to approve the reforms by raising
 To curb Tibetan rebels, the PRC allowed a certain degree of religious freedom while also relocating huge numbers of Han Chinese to Tibet . The PRC intended to keep Tibetans under control through assimilation .
 The Tibetan cause attracted support and publicity from a number of international celebrities, such as Richard Gere . Gere is the American movie star who supports Tibetan refugees .
 In the 1990s, a dispute over which of two young boys was the rightful candidate to succeed as Panchen Lama, the second most influential Tibetan Buddhist figure, damaged Sino-Tibetan relations . In the 90s, the dispute over who of two boys was to succeed
 The PRC signaled its willingness to resolve the Tibet question with the Tibetan government-in-exile . On the other hand, the PRC said it would be willing to work with the Tibet government in China .
 Negotiations between the PRC and the Dalai Lama’s exiled government began in 1979 but broke off in 1988 due to irreconcilable differences . The Dalai Lama's exiled government has been in talks with the Chinese government .
 Beijing continues to force denunciation of the Dalai Lama as a spiritual leader, a human rights fighter, and the peace envoy . The Dalai Lama has been accused of human rights violations in China .
 He was described as an exleader of Tibetan Buddhism under the wing of the anti-China forces in the West . His government-in-exile is illegal since it has gone far to betray China and the Tibetan people .
 Chinese government has accused Dalai Lama of being the linchpin of alleged plots to separate Tibet from China . The Dalai Lama has been accused of leading a series of plots against China .
 In June 2003, Chinese authorities arrested three Tibetans in the region’s capital, Lhasa, for alleged separatist activities . Three Tibetans were arrested in June 2003 .
 Many believed the arrests came amidst tighter restrictions on civil liberties put in place leading up to the Dalai Lama’s birthday, as happens every year . The Dalai Lama's birthday is the anniversary of his birth .
 The 2003 circular warned residents against burning incense, hanging prayer flags, and visiting temples or monasteries .
 In early 2007, seven Tibetan teenagers (ages between 14 and 16) were arrested because they wrote “anti-governmental” slogans on the walls of a village police station . The teenagers were arrested for writing ‘anti-government’ slogans .
 Their slogans include calling for the return of the Dalai Lama and a free Tibet . Their slogans included calling for a return to Tibet . The Dalai Lama has been exiled from Tibet .
 The overall level of repression of religious freedom in the Tibetan Autonomous Region remains high . Tibetans are not allowed to exercise their freedom of expression .
 Many Tibetan Buddhists have been arrested, detained without public trial, and tortured for expressing their views or organizing activities without government permission . Tibetans have been detained, tortured and killed for expressing views . Many Tibetans are now living in exile in China .
 On September 30, 2006, Chinese border patrol troops opened fire on 70 Tibetans who tried to cross the border into Nepal . The incident took place in Tibet, China's capital, Tibet .
 A 17-year-old Buddhist nun, Kelsang Nmtso, died, and several others were wounded . Several people were wounded in the attack, including a Buddhist nun .
 On March 14, the protest in Lhasa turned violent between Tibetans and non-Tibetan groups and between protesters and police . Protesters and police clashed with Tibetans, non-tibetans and police officers .
 More than 5,000 demonstrators, mostly ethnic Tibetans and Buddhist monks, marched down the streets in Gansu Province on March 15 .
 By March 18, according to the Tibetan government-inexile, 19 Tibetan demonstrators were shot dead by police . 19 Tibetan protesters were killed by police in March .
 The demonstrations also took place in the northwestern province of Qinghai and the western province of Sichuan . Demonstrators also took places in Qinghai, Qinghai .
 Tibetan monks and police clashed in Sichuan, China, on March 16 . There are claims that police shot between 13 and 20 protesters and at least one policeman was killed .
 The “3-14 Riots” and the crackdown on Tibet shocked the international community, including the athletes who were ready to come to Beijing for the 2008 Olympic Games in August . The crackdown shocked the world, including Olympic athletes .
 Western countries and international organizations called for a boycott of the event . Some Western countries have called for the event to be banned .
 Dalai Lama says Chinese people should not be blamed for the situation in his homeland . Dalai Lama reiterated that he was against any boycott because Chinese people shouldn't be blamed . The Dalai Lama also said he is against a boycott of China .
 The Olympic torch was lit in Greece on March 24, 2008 . The torch relay faced Tibet protestors throughout its journey across the globe . Tibet protestors faced the torch relay .
 Lhasa Intermediate Court sentenced 30 Tibetans to three years to life in prison for their participation in the 3-14 Riots . 30 Tibetians were sentenced to three-year-to-life prison terms for participating in the riots .
 China executed four Tibetans in 2009 for their involvement in the 3-14 Riots . Four Tibetans were executed in connection with their involvement with the riots .
 Authorities in the northwestern province of Qinghai sentenced Dhondup Wangchen, a Tibetan filmmaker, six years in prison in 2009 . Wangchen was sentenced in December 2009 for six years .
 Tibet remained unresolved in the early twenty-first century . Tibet remains unresolved in Tibet .
 Tributary System was a form for conducting diplomatic and trade relations between imperial China and other states from the first century to the nineteenth century . The tributary system was used to conduct diplomatic relations with imperial China .
 Under this system, exchanges of gifts between foreign rulers and the Chinese emperor were carried out . The system was used to exchange gifts with foreign rulers .
 Foreigners had to send their representatives to China to present their tributes to the Chinese emperors . They were rewarded with gifts from the Chinese emperor, such as priceless porcelain and silk .
 The tributary system indicated that the Chinese emperor and the Middle Kingdom were superior to their trading partners . Tributary systems indicated that China was superior to its trade partners .
 The Chinese emperor recognized foreigners’ authority and sovereignty . Under this system, the Chinese emperor accepted foreigners' authority .
 The foreign rulers, adopting a posture of subjugation, recognized the supremacy of Chinese civilization . He confirmed them in office legitimately, and the foreign rulers accepted them .
 The system helped establish the diplomatic relationship between China and other countries . It also helped to promote large-scale commerce and trade between Chinese and foreign nations . The system was used to establish diplomatic relations with other nations .
 Chinese emperors made sure that gifts they paid to other states were known as gifts, not tributes . What foreigners contributed to the Chinese emperor was tribute, while what foreigners contributed was tribute .
 All diplomatic and trade missions were construed in the context of a tributary relationship . Therefore, all diplomatic, trade missions should be construed in a context of the relationship between countries .
 Chinese regarded the tributary system as equivalent to the familial relation of sons looking after their parents by devoting part of their wealth, assets, or goods to them .
 There were many tribute states to the Chinese-established empires throughout Chinese history, including neighboring countries, such as Japan, Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia, Borneo, Indonesia, and South Asia, and central Asia .
 Korea and Vietnam were placed higher than others, including Japan, the Ryukyus, Siam, the Burmese kingdoms, and others . Under such a system, a position hierarchy was clear .
 Imperial China began to receive tribute from the kingdoms under the influence of Confucian civilization . Imperial China was given tribute by the kingdoms in China .
 During the Han dynasty, the various tribes of Japan had already established tributary relationships with China by the first century . The various tribes had established the tributaries relationships with .
 The southern Xiongnu in western China entered the tributary system established by the Han emperors . They resettled along with large numbers of Chinese immigrants in frontier regions . The Xiongnans entered the system when they were settled in frontier areas .
 Economically reliant on the Han people, they were obliged to provide military forces at the frontiers under a rigid tributary system with greater direct imperial administration . The Han people were economically reliant on their people .
 The tributary relationship between Korea and China was established during the age of the Three Kingdoms of Korea in the fourth and fifth centuries . Tributary relations between China and Korea were established in the early years .
 Chinese were defeated by the Japanese in the first Sino-Japanese War of 1894-1895 . This relationship did not come to an end until the Japanese were defeated in the Sino War .
 Slaves from tributary countries were sent to Tang China by various groups, the Cambodians sent albinos, the Uighurs sent Turkic Karluks, the Japanese sent Ainu, and Turkish and Tibetan girls were also sent to China .
 Under the Ming dynasty (1368-1644), countries that attempted to establish political, economic, and cultural relationships with the powerful Chinese empire had to enter the tribute system . Countries that tried to establish diplomatic ties with China had to pay tribute .
 Tribute was often paid for practical objectives, instead of only as a sign of devotion to the Chinese emperor . Thus, tribute was often payed for practical purposes, not only for devotion .
 Many tributes paid consisted of native products such as elephants from Siam and eunuchs and virgin girls from Korea, Annam, or the Ryukyu Islands .
 Ming emperors authorized Zheng He’s overseas expeditions carrying goods to build tribute relationships between the Ming dynasty and newly discovered kingdoms in Southeast Asia, south Asia, and eastern Africa in the fifteenth century .
 The Chinese tributary system, with its burdensome, ritualistic mannerisms, continued until the Qing dynasty . European merchants began arriving in China in 18th century .
 Confucian culture placed a greater reward on noneconomic functions rather than extra profit . The Chinese preferred to continue their ancient customs even when Western merchants began to arrive at the China coast .
 The Europeans complained that they could not trade with Chinese merchants in such a way . Westerners were used to the free market and free trade system, and the imperial Chinese customs to control trade were not productive .
 The Europeans were not pleased with the Chinese tributary system . The Chinese government refused to compromise with the Europeans because the Chinese were not interested in trading with other people .
 The Europeans used military means to force the Qing government to open China’s door to trade with the West in the First Opium War of 1839-1842 . The Qing government was forced to open the door to the West to trade .
 Confucian-Mencian Paradigm; Han Dynasty; Ming Dynasty; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Silk Route; Sino-Japanese War; Song Dynasty; Tang Dynasty; Tibet; Xiongnu . China's first century of civilization began in ancient China .
 The normalization of U.S.-PRC relations involved the ongoing efforts of the United States and the People’s Republic of China to improve diplomatic ties between their two nations .
 After decades of Cold War mistrust and resentment, the two sides came together to form a common bond against the USSR . The two sides formally established diplomatic and trade relations with each other .
 China was thrust into a bitter civil war following the surrender of Japan after World War II . China's civil war began in 1945 after Japan's surrender .
 The United States supported Jiang Jieshi during the Chinese Civil War in 1946-1949 . The U.S. lent considerable assistance to the Nationalist government in China .
 The Communists eventually defeated Jiang and forced the GMD to retreat to the island of Taiwan . The GMD was forced to retreat .
 The U.S. refused to recognize the newly established communist PRC and instead only kept diplomatic relations with the ROC government in Taiwan . Afterwards, the United States refused recognition of the newly-established communist PRChina .
 Chinese military confrontations against the United Stales during the Korean War, and the ensuing Taiwan Strait Crises in 1954-1955 and 1958, exacerbated the relationship between the U.S. and the PRC .
 China and the Soviet Union began vying for influence on the North Vietnamese side . Eventually North Vietnam chose to accept help from the Soviets rather than the Chinese .
 Earlier in the 1950s, the Soviet Union under Nikita Khrushchev undertook deStalinization and reformist actions that ran counter to the PRC's practices .
 This caused China to denounce the Soviet Union’s policies and, coupled with the rejection of Chinese aid in Vietnam in favor of Soviet aid, caused the two Communist powers to grow further apart . This led to China to reject Soviet aid to Vietnam and reject it .
 In 1969, tensions between the USSR and PRC reached an all-time high as they engaged in a series of clashes along China’s northern border . The USSR and the PRC engaged in clashes along the border .
 War seemed imminent between the two nuclear powers for a time, and Mao began to worry about his country’s future security . Mao worried about the future of his country's future security.
 The Asian Communist nation, also in the midst of its tumultuous Cultural Revolution, found itself increasingly isolated diplomatically with few major friends in the international arena .
 The PRC began to take steps to shore up its own position internationally . By the late 1960s, it appeared open to approaching its old bitter enemy, the United States .
 Under previous U.S. administrations, a uniform foreign policy was in place to deal with Communist nations, under the theory that all Communist states were the same . Under previous administrations, such a uniform policy was put in place .
 This theory proved to be untrue, as the split between the PRC and USSR illustrated . The PRC split between China and the USSR was a major factor in the Soviet Union's success .
 Henry Kissinger proposed the idea that the U.S. could deal with China differently . Kissinger used the relationship as an opportunity to unbalance its key enemy, the Soviet Union . Kissinger was the president of the United States during the Nixon administration .
 Zhou Enlai agreed to speak with his American counterparts in an effort to negotiate a better relationship . Mao Zedong's blessing from Mao Zedock allowed Zhou to speak to the U.S. under the influence of Mao . Zhou's visit comes amid tensions between the two major Communist powers
 A period known as Rapprochement began, with both sides considering the possibilities of establishing bilateral relations with one another . Both sides now consider the possibility to establish bilateral relations .
 In April 1971, Japan played host to an international ping-pong tournament . The tournament was held in April 1971 .
 The Chinese participated in the sporting event in an effort to engage other nations of the world . The Chinese, in an attempt to engage the world, participated .
 Glen Cowan inadvertently stepped onto the Chinese team’s bus after practices were over . Cowan was a member of the American ping-pong team in Nagoya, Japan .
 One of the Chinese players, Zhuang Zedong, realized Glen’s mistake and helped him get back to his own team . Glen's mistake was a mistake .
 The American player was treated with hospitality during his ride with the opposing players . He formed a friendship with them and formed a bond with them .
 The Chinese team invited him to visit the PRC as a token of goodwill . The Communist government got wind of this, they used it as a diplomatic maneuver and extended an invitation to the American team .
 With relations becoming increasingly amicable, the time was rapidly approaching for an official diplomatic visit between the two nations .
 Henry Kissinger was on a diplomatic trip to Pakistan in July 1971 . Kissinger was the U.S. national security advisor on the trip .
 The mission was actually an attempt to open relations between the two governments . Kissinger engaged in discussions with his Chinese counterpart, Premier Zhou Enlai . Kissinger's visit to China was part of a diplomatic effort to open diplomatic relations .
 On February 21, 1972, Nixon made his way to China and held high-level meetings with Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai . Nixon was accompanied by Kissinger and several other advisors .
 The meetings were fruitful, and on February 28, the two parties released the Shanghai Communique . The two parties have been in talks since February 28 .
 The U.S. and the PRC endorsed further contact between the two nations in the form of diplomatic and cultural exchanges . Both sides disavowed the pursuit of hegemony in the Asian-Pacific region .
 Both sides expressed interest in conducting bilateral trade and remained committed to keeping contact with each other via the sending of officials .
 Relations continued to improve between the two nations, with an official liaison office set up in both the U.S. and the PRC in 1973 .
 In 1978, on the advice of National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski, the U.S. withdrew from the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict in the Middle East .
 A joint communique was released on December 15, 1978, whereby the United States and the PRC agreed to formally recognize each other on January 1, 1979, and establish formal diplomatic relations . The U.S. and PRC established formal diplomatic ties in 1979 .
 The United States also agreed to recognize the Communist government as the sole government of China . The U.S. formally adopted the One-China policy, which formally recognizes China's Communist government .
 Both sides reaffirmed their belief that normalization of relations between the two countries would be in the best interests of both the Chinese and American peoples, and would lead to peace in Asia .
 What followed was an unprecedented increase in trade relations and further diplomatic contact between the two nations . The two nations had unprecedented diplomatic relations .
 The strategy of rapprochement appeared successful, and the USSR became agitated over the two enemies coming together . The strategy was successful, but the USSR was agitated over it .
 The Soviets engaged the United States in several treaties, namely the SALT (Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty) treaties, to encourage peaceful limitations and disarmament of strategic weapons in an effort to reduce military tensions . The Soviets then engaged the U.S. in several treaty agreements .
 Relations between the U.S. and the PRC improved throughout the 1980s but encountered a serious problem in 1989 with Deng Xiaoping’s heavyhanded response to the Tiananmen Square protests . The PRC was heavily criticized for its heavyhanded handling of the protests .
 In 1991, the USSR collapsed, and relations with Russia changed to a more cautious approach . Relations between Russia and the U.S. became more cautious after the collapse .
 Relations between the U.S. and China continue to play an important part of global foreign policy . With no single enemy to unite against, relations between the two countries continue to be important . With the PRC emerging as a major economic power, relations remain important for the United States .
 The unequal treaties were a series of agreements signed between Western imperialist powers with the Qing dynasty of China in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . Unequal Treaties were signed between imperialist powers and Chinese rulers .
 The treaties greatly diminished the Republic of China’s influence and power within its own borders . The treaties were signed by the Chinese government in 1949 .
 Because of the unequal status of the two sides who signed the treaty, the agreement would often do much harm to the sovereignty and national interest of China . The agreement would harm China's sovereignty, China says .
 The usual content of the unequal treaties included ceding territory, paying indemnities, concessions, extraterritoriality, doing business and opening trading ports, providing most favored nation status .
 The Treaty of Nanjing symbolized the beginning of China’s semicolonial status . Because of the failure of the First Opium War, China signed the first of the unequal treaties with Great Britain . The treaty symbolized China's semi-colonial status .
 The signing of the unequal treaties was considered an attempt by the West to open China to its exports, thereby expanding Western markets . China signed unequal treaties with the West .
 Qing China underwent the Self-Strengthening movement from 1860 to the early 1900s . It was an attempt to increase China’s power to compete with Western nations . From 1860 to 1900s, Qing China attempted to increase its power in China .
 The attempt failed and imperialist countries continued to take away sovereignty from China through wars and unequal treaties . China's sovereignty was taken away by imperialist countries through wars, unequal treaties.
 The French-Chinese War , the First Sino-Japanese War and the Eight foreign armies’ invasion of China brought another Treaty of Tianjin (1885, with France), the Treaty of Shimonoseki , and the Boxer Protocol . The Boxer protocol and other unequal
 From 1919 to 1949, China endured a series of large strikes and assemblies . From 1919-1949, China experienced a number of large strike and assembly strikes .
 The May Fourth movement was an eruption of the Chinese people’s nationalism and democratic resolution, and this resulted in the refusal to sign the Treaty of Versailles at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 .
 After the GMD government of the Republic of China was established in Nanjing in 1927, movements to regain sovereignty and revise treaties were carried out .
 During World War II, some Western countries abolished the existing unequal treaties and abandoned their priorities in China voluntarily . The treaties were abolished during the Second World War .
 Boxer Rebellion; China, People’s Republic of . China, Republic of; Eight Foreign Armies Invasion of China; Guomindang; Li Hongzhang; Nanjing, Treaty of . Nanjing Treaty of; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Qing
 It was the second time for the GMD-CCP coalition after their first cooperation took place in 1925-1927 in the Northern Expedition against warlords .
 Incident began Japan’s aggression in four provinces of northeast China . The incident began Japan's aggression in China .
 On December 12, 1936, the Xi’an Incident occurred, and Jiang was arrested by a couple of his generals and their troops at Xi'an . Jiang's arrest was the result of a coup by the Chinese government .
 The Red Army, then located in the northwest and numbering 46,000 men, became the Eighth Route Army of the National army in August 1937 . Zhu De as commander, Peng Dehuai as deputy commander, and Ye Jianying (Yeh Chien-ying) as chief of
 As Mao Zedong did in Jinggangshan , they conducted a guerrilla campaign in the mountains behind the Japanese lines . The Chinese government conducted guerrilla operations behind the lines .
 On November 7, the Japanese Tenth Army successfully landed at Hangzhou Bay . The Japanese army landed in Hangzhou, China .
 The GMD government was forced to move its capital to Chongqing, Sichuan Province . GMD had to relocate its capital from Sichwan Province . The government has been forced to relocate the capital to Sichu Province .
 Jiang lost 1 million GMD troops from July 1937 to November 1938 . 250,730 Japanese soldiers were eliminated from China .
 GMD Army withdrew to China’s southwest and northwest to conserve troops when Chiang removed the seat of his government from Nanjing to Chongqing, Sichuan, in 1939-1940 .
 By 1941, the GMD had lost the coastal and other port cities that once had been their bases of power . The GMD was losing control of many of its bases in the coastal cities .
 In south China, the New Fourth Army moved north and south of the Yangtze and established bases in southern Jiangsu and also north of the river .
 In order to establish a grassroots united front behind the Japanese lines, the CCP modified their land reform policy, supporting small landlords and wealthy peasants, and cooperating with Chiang’s troops in guerrilla warfare, in a more nationalistic rather than Communist policy .
 Chinese officers and soldiers devoted themselves to increasing production . To overcome the shortage of food and supply, the Chinese officers devoted themselves .
 Jiang and his GMD government engaged in the Allied Forces’ China-Burma-India Theater operations . GMD sent the elite GMD troops to India and Burma in 1941-1945 .
 The United States was primarily interested in building up China’s military strength . Burma would be a chief route for these supplies to reach China; indeed. The U.S. wanted to build up China's military strength, and Burma was a focus .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt (1882— 1945) saw China taking its rightful place as a major world power at war’s end . FDR saw China becoming a major power at the war's end .
 The Chinese people, after eight years of bitter struggle under the leadership of the united front, finally won victory in the Anti-Japanese War . China's anti-Japanese war was won by the Chinese people .
 Total military deaths of the GMD Army were 2. million men, and that of the Communist forces were 600,000 men . Total military death of GMD army was 2 million men .
 Jiang invited Mao Zedong, chairman of the CCP, for peace talks in Chongqing, in August 1945 . In August 1945, Jiang invited the head of the Communist Party to the city . Jiang was the leader of the Chinese Communist Party of China's Communist Party Party .
 Mao accepted the invitation and headed a delegation that included Zhou and Wang Ruofei . Mao accepted it and headed the delegation . Zhou was the only person to accept the invitation from Mao .
 U.S. ambassador Patrick Hurley personally escorted Mao from Yan’an to Chongqing for negotiations with Jiang to avoid a collapse of the CCP-GMD coalition .
 The Chongqing Talks lasted 43 days, but agreement was never reached on the basic issues of the national government and army . Agreement was reached after 43 days of talks between China's military and government .
 The negotiations failed, and the two parties resumed their military conflicts in China . Since both sides had different political agendas, the negotiations failed .
 After the United Front collapsed in late 1945, the Chinese Civil War broke out in June 1946 . After the war broke out, China's civil war began in 1946 .
 Wang was a general of the People’s Liberation Army . Wang was vice chairman of the CCP and a Standing Committee member of the Politburo of the Central Committee. Wang was also a standing committee member of China's Communist Party Central Committee .
 Wang Dongxing was born into a poor peasant family in Yiyang County, central Jiangxi Province, in 1916 . He was the son of a poor Chinese peasant family .
 He participated in the Long March of 1934-1935 and later became the political commissar of the field hospital of the Second Red Army . He was a member of the Red Army's Long March in 1934-35 .
 During the Anti-Japanese War of 1937— 1945, he was deputy director of the Political Division of the Public Health Department of the Eighth Route Army . During the war of 1937-1945, he served as deputy director .
 He was political commissar of the Bethune International Peace Hospital . Then he became the political commissar of the hospital in Bethune . He is also a political commissionar for the hospital .
 Wang was the deputy chief of staff of the General Office of the CCP Central Committee . During the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949, Wang was a key figure in the Chinese civil war . Wang was one of the leaders of the Chinese Communist Party .
 Wang also served as the deputy director of the General Office of the Secretariat of the Central Committee . Wang was the chief of the Security Department of the . Central . Committee chief of Security Department .
 He participated in several battles during the CCP defense against the Guomindang’s (GMD, or Kuomintang, KMT; the Chinese Nationalists) offensive campaign .
 He made evacuation plans and relocated the top CCP leaders such as Mao Zedong, Zhou Enlai, and Ren Bishi during the CCP defense . He moved the top leaders of the Chinese Communist Party during the defense .
 Wang was appointed chief of the Security Department of the PRC State Council in 1949 . Wang was also deputy director of the Eighth Bureau of the Ministry of Public Security, and vice minister of Public Safety .
 Wang Dongxing began to command the security force inside Zhongnanhai (the “Middle and Southern Seas” a palace of the emperors and empresses within the Forbidden City in the center of Beijing which became the home of Mao, Zhou, and other top CCP
 Wang was commander of the 8341 troops, an elite force of the Beijing Military Region . During the Cultural Revolution of 1966-1976, Wang was also the commander of Beijing's elite troops . Wang was a member of China's elite military force .
 He was elected representative of the Third, Fifth, Eighth, Ninth, Tenth, Tenth and Eleventh, and Twelfth National People’s Congress .
 Wang played a critical role in their arrests as the director of the Security Bureau of the Central Committee . Wang was also the head of the General Office of the Communist Party of China . Wang is accused of playing a role in the arrests of the pair .
 Wang encouraged Hua and Ye to make the final decision to arrest the Gang of Four, which turned around China’s fortunes . Wang said the Gang's arrest was the key to turning around the country's fortunes .
 Without Wang’s help and efforts, China might have languished further under the rigid centrally planned economic and political system, Wang says . Wang's efforts to improve China's economy and politics have been successful, he says .
 In August 1977, at the Eleventh National Conference of the CCP, he was elected member of the Standing Committee of the Politburo and Vice Chairman of the Party . He reached the peak of his political life at the end of his career .
 Wang Dongxing was criticized at the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee . Due to his Maoist views as well as many concurrent positions he held, he was criticized for his views .
 He was released from the director’s position in the General Office of the Central Committee .
 Wang Jingwei was head of a puppet government of Japan in Nanjing in 1940 during the Anti-Japanese War of 1937-1945 . He became head of the puppet government during the anti-Japanese war of 1937 .
 Wang Jingwei was born in Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, on May 4, 1883 . He studied law in Tokyo in his youth . His avocation was politics .
 Sun spent the period from 1912 to 1917 in exile after Sun’s movement collapsed . He then spent that period in exile from 1912-1917 .
 Wang attempted to form his own government, but he failed and eventually mended fences with Jiang in a show of unity following the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931 . Wang's government was formed in response to the invasion of Japan in 1931, but failed .
 He resigned and left China in 1935 to recover from an assassination attempt . Disillusioned, he quit China in 1936 .
 He returned following the outbreak of the Anti-Japanese War in 1937, but he quickly grew pessimistic about China’s military prospects . He returned to China in 1938, but was pessimistic about its military prospects in China .
 Wang fled to Japanese-occupied China after failing to persuade Jiang to make peace with Japan . Nationalist agents made another attempt on his life to kill him . Wang was killed in 1941 .
 In March 1940, the Japanese army installed him as head of the puppet Reorganized Nationalist government in Nanjing . He was head of a puppet government in China's capital .
 Wang’s hopes of presenting himself as a credible alternative to Jiang were ultimately doomed by the harsh reality of the Japanese military domination . Wang's hopes for a credible successor to Jiang ended in defeat .
 He died in Nagoya, Japan, on November 10, 1944, while undergoing treatment .
 Similar to the Nanjing Treaty, the treaty allowed U.S. citizens and vessels to enter either of the five treaty ports including Guangzhou (Canton), Xiamen (Xiamen , Fuzhou , Ningbo, and Shanghai .
 The opium trade was interdicted on behalf of China and violators would be subject to Chinese law without any protection from the United States . The accord was yet considered one of the unequal treaties signed by China with foreign powers .
 Under the settlement, U.S. citizens were free to trade with other merchants, to construct hospitals and churches, and to learn Chinese from local people, which was previously forbidden for foreigners .
 Americans enjoyed a fixed tariff, extraterritoriality, and most favored nation provisions by which the U.S. was entitled to secure additional advantages or privileges yielded by China to any other nations . In like manner, Americans were also entitled to the most favorable nation provisions .
 The Wangxia Treaty contained an article allowing renegotiation of the convention at its expiration 12 years later, which later led to disputes between China and foreign powers, and finally caused the outbreak of the Second Opium War in 1856 .
 Biographies glorified Ward as an agent of the emergent American empire, until imperialism itself became suspect . That heroic view derived from turn-of-thecentury biographies that glorified him .
 Ward’s story is often re-told, but legends obscure the facts of his life . Ward's story is one of the best known stories in the world .
 At 16, Ward sailed with relatives to Hong Kong, and then spent a year in military school in Vermont . Ward spent the year in Vermont, where he was sent to military school . Ward: "I'm not scared of the future, but I'm scared of it"
 Ward sailed with his father to San Francisco, and then returned to Hong Kong on the clipper Black Warrior in January 1860 . Ward sailed in San Francisco on the Black Warrior from San Francisco .
 He served on the paddlewheel steamtug Confucius under “Admiral” Gough, whom the Chinese commissioned to suppress pirates . Gough was commissioned by the Chinese to fight pirates .
 Taiping rebels broke the siege of Nanjing and swarmed eastward toward Shanghai in 1860 . That same spring of 1860, the rebels broke Nanjing's siege of the city . The rebels were able to break the siege .
 Mandarin officials (like Taotai Wu-Hsu) and Chinese merchants (likeYangFang, aka banker Takee) contracted with Ward and Burgevine to form a mercenary force to wrest Songjing from Taiping control .
 The Americans’ first band of rowdy Europeans failed to recover Songjing, but their second attack using 83 Filipino sailors from the Confucius successfully reclaimed the walled city from 4,000 rebels on July 4, 1860 .
 Shanghai’s Europeans were initially unaware of the Americans’ victory at Songjing . Later they decried it as antagonizing the rebels into attacking their settlements .
 The Europeans and their Foreign-Rifle Corps were repulsed while mounting the city walls . Nevertheless, the two Americans immediately attempted to duplicate their success at the nearby rebel stronghold of Qingpu .
 Ward was shot through the roof of his mouth and spent over six months recuperating . Ward spent six months recovering after being shot in the mouth . Ward was injured in the attack .
 Burgevine originated the idea of using Western officers to train a corps of Chinese soldiers . Ward was debilitated after being injured by the wounds of his injuries .
 The spring of 1861 was perhaps the most misunderstood period of Ward in China due to deliberate misrepresentations made by Edward Forrester, who joined Ward and Burgevine as their third-in-command . The spring 1861 was a period of confusion over Ward's role in China .
 Commander Hire arrested and held Ward aboard HMS Urgent for inducing British sailors to desert, luring them away with high wages to train the Chinese . In April, acting on the orders of Vice Admiral Sir James Hope, he held Ward .
 Ward evaded a trial before the United States Consul at Shanghai by disavowing his American citizenship and claiming to be a Chinese national . Usually it claimed that Ward . evaded . a trial by disassociating himself with the U.S. Consul .
 His patron Taotai Wu explicitly asserted that Ward was not a Chinese citizen . Meanwhile, he was not allowed to be Chinese citizens .
 Ward was supposedly arrested and imprisoned by Admiral Hope aboard his flagship HMS Chesapeake . In May, Ward was again supposedly arrested . Admiral Hope allegedly arrested Ward and imprisoned him aboard his ship .
 Ward allegedly jumped from the warship’s window into the Shanghai River and escaped . In one of his most celebrated adventures, under cover of darkness, under . cover of . darkness, he escaped from the . warship into the . Shanghai River . Ward is believed to have escaped
 Hope was in Japan at the time, and the Chesapeake was in Hong Kong . Forrester fabricated the entire story, however, since Hope was not there at that time .
 Ward's ship-jump had become confused with the arrest of Burgevine, who was subsequently released by the United States Consul for insufficient evidence . Ward’s ship-jumping had become . confused with Burgevin’ arrest .
 For the remainder of 1861, Ward and Burgevine ceased ‘crimping’ Western officers for their Chinese Foreign Legion and concentrated instead on training their native recruits .
 Eventually, the impasse between Ward and Hope was resolved, and Hope agreed to limited assistance in their campaigns against the Taiping . Hope and Ward were finally able to reach an agreement .
 In early February, they took many rebel stockades at Dongguao east of Shanghai, and then returned to Songjing to recover Kwanfulin . They took many of the stockades in early February .
 By February 21, with some artillery support from the British and French navies, the battle was over . The battle began on February 21 with the British, French and French on board .
 Ward and Burgevine next achieved a major victory by recapturing the rebel headquarters at Kajow on the Pudong Peninsula . Burgevin and Ward recaptured the rebel HQ on the island of China .
 For those three conquests the Emperor conferred on Ward’s force the lofty name of the EverVictorious Army . Both Ward and Burgevine were promoted to the fourth of eight ranks of military Mandarins .
 Burgevine was seriously wounded by a shot through his pelvis, which sidelined him for several months . The very next week they retook Xiaotang, but Burgevin was seriously injured .
 For this additional accomplishment, again both Americans were promoted to third military rank .
 Ward married banker Takee’s daughter Changmei during early March . Ward is wealthy from economic ventures and wealthy from his economic ventures .
 Ward rescued local Green Banner General from a snare at Zhejing . Ward alone was promoted to the second military rank .
 A key to their victories was the use of a fleet of small steamships like Willamette and Kajow that could rapidly navigate inland creeks .
 Takee and Ward jointly owned Tahwah, which, when not on campaign, was available for commercial hire . Takee, Ward and Ward even jointly owned the town .
 At Lungchu-an , Admiral Hope was wounded in the leg; and at Nanjow French rear admiral Protet was killed . At Nanjou, Admiral Hope and Admiral Protet were killed .
 In April, the new viceroy, Li Hongzhang, arrived in the region with his Xiang Army . The Xiang Army arrived in April with his new army .
 Futai Li was jealous of Ward’s Ever-Victorious Army and suspicious of both of its sponsors Takee and Wu . Li was suspicious of the army's sponsorship by both of them . Ward was the first member of the ever-victorious Army .
 Li ordered Ward to Zhejing Province to quell the Taiping disturbance there . Once the 30-mile radius was pacified, Li orders Ward to return to China's capital .
 Ward was ceremoniously buried at his headquarters in Songjing . Later a temple was erected in his honor . Ward was the founder of the Songjing National League of China .
 Forrester had stolen Ward’s account book and had taken Chinese money to build war-steamers in America that he never delivered . The disputes about the Ward estate were not resolved until the Boxer Indemnity of 1901 . Ward's brother Henry took Chinese money from China
 Boxer Rebellion; Ever-Victorious Army; Hong Kong; Li Hongzhang; Qing Dynasty; Small Sword Society; Taiping Rebellion . Hong Kong and Hong Kong are the most famous Chinese cities .
 It was a great breakthrough in Chinese history, ended 2,000 years of monarchy and building the first republic in Asian history . It was the first republican republic in Asia history, ending the monarchy .
 Sun Yat-sen and other revolutionaries negotiated with Yuan and offered him the presidency of the new republic . Yuan was the first president of the Chinese revolutionary state of China .
 Yuan tried to establish his own dictatorship through his personal network in the New Army . Yuan, however, tried to set up himself as a dictator . Yuan's network in New Army is a network of his personal networks .
 Yuan’s monarchy confronted the revolutionaries until his death in 1916 . As the father of the Chinese warlords, Yuan was confronted by the revolutionaries . Yuan died in 1916 at the age of 92 .
 After Yuan’s death, from 1916 to 1927, the country entered the Warlord Period, in which military commanders of different armies controlled one or two provinces or regions . The period lasted between 1916 and 1927 .
 Seven or eight major warlord armies divided the country and waged wars against each other . Among them, 7 or 8 major warlords waged war on each other in Afghanistan .
 The 1911 Revolution failed to turn China into a truly independent and democratic country . The Warlord Period demonstrated that the 1911 revolution failed to make China independent .
 Sun’s struggle for democracy, or his ‘second revolution,” against the warlords failed each time . After the termination of the 1911 Revolution, the 1911 revolution was terminated . Sun's struggles for democracy have failed to have success .
 Most Western powers rejected or ignored his idea, but the Soviet Union was willing to help him build a revolutionary army . The Soviet Union helped him build an army in the 1930s .
 In December 1921, Hendricus Sneevliet Maring , representative of the Soviet Union, secretly met Sun in Guilin . In December 21, 1921, a Soviet Union representative secretly met the Chinese leader .
 The Soviets requested that the GMD allow the CCP members to join them as individuals . The Soviets, however, requested that it be allowed as individuals, but the request was not granted .
 The CCP, meanwhile, would maintain its own independence, politically and ideologically . The CCP would maintain their own independence politically and politically .
 Sun was preparing a northern expedition against the warlords at Guangzhou . He was preparing to unify the Republic of China . Sun was interested .
 The party congress enacted a new constitution and agreed that Communists could join the GMD as individuals . Communists were allowed to join the party as individuals in the party congress .
 On June 16, the Whampoa Military Academy was founded in Guangzhou with the assistance of the Soviet Union . Jiang Jieshi was the commandant at the academy .
 On July 1, 1925, three-and-a-half months after Sun died in Beijing, the GMD government formally came into existence in Guangzhou under the leadership of Jiang Jiang .
 Nationalist Revolution Army was established with five armies and Jiang as its commander in chief . On August 26, 1925, Jiang was the commander of the army . Jiang was one of the first Chinese leaders to take over the country .
 A GMD party representative/political commissar and a political department were established at army, divisional, and regimental levels following the Soviet model . The GMD had a party representative and political department at the highest level .
 Jiang issued a “Declaration on the Northern Expedition” and launched the punitive expedition against the warlords . Wu Peifu (Wu P’eifu) and Sun Chuanfang (Sun Ch’uan-fang) were two of the
 Jiang renamed the National Revolutionary Army the Northern Expeditionary Army . It had eight infantry armies with approximately 100,000 men . Jiang renamed it the Northern expeditionary army .
 The main battlefields of Jiang’s Northern Expedition were Hunan and Hubei . Hunan was the main battlefield of Jiang's Northern Expedition .
 They quickly took Changsha and Yuezhou, and destroyed Wu’s main forces in Hunan . They quickly moved to Changsha, and then took the capital city of Changsha .
 In September-October, Jiang captured the triple city of Wuhan/Wuchang, the capital city of Hubei Province, and decisively won the battle of Hunan/Hubei . Jiang captured Wuchang/Wuhan in September/October . Jiang decisively
 In less than six months, the NEA overthrew the two most powerful warlords . The NEA has overthrew both warlords in less than a year .
 The others either surrendered or joined Jiang’s forces, which increased from 8 eight armies, 100,000 men in 1926 to 40 armies, 700,000 in 1927 . The other half of the men were either surrendering or joining Jiang's forces .
 The Nationalist territory expanded from the southwestern coast to the Yangtze valley along the eastern coast, covering half of China . The territory covered half of the country .
 In mid-December, the GMD National Government and the Central Executive Committee moved from Guangzhou to Wuhan, central Hubei Province . GMD national government and the . Central Executive . Committee moved to Hubeic Province in December .
 During the Eastern Zhou dynasty, China experienced many years of ferocious warfare aimed at expansion and annexation among the states . Warring States Period was a period in ancient China during the Zhou dynasty .
 During the Spring and Autumn Period of the Eastern Zhou dynasty, the newly emerged landlord class took over power in the various states and established the feudal system . The landlord class established a feudal system in China .
 After a long period of civil wars, only seven states survived the Warring States Period . Only seven states survive the period .
 The seven states that checked and balanced one another were Qi, Chu, Yan, Han, Zhao, Wei, and Qin . Qi was the first state to check and balance one another .
 Social disorder and endless warfare required solutions during the Warring States Period . Continuing social disorder required solutions to the social disorder during the period .
 To cope with the situation and win the civil wars, each state initiated its own set of reforms . The civil wars were fought in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The earliest reform was carried out in the state of Wei by Li Kui to improve farming by constructing a new irrigation system . The reform was made in Wei state of China in the 1930s .
 Ximen Bao channeled the water of the Zhang River for irrigation in Wei, China . The Zhang River has helped agricultural production in his state .
 Other states developed their domestic trade, which promoted the handcrafting industry and urban development noticeably .
 Cities became more and more prosperous such as Linzi in the state of Qi, Handan in the . state of Zhao, Luoyang in . Zhou, Zhou, Ying in the states of Zhou, Chu, and Ji in . Yan . Cities become more prosperous in China .
 They were all populous and famous cities during the Warring States Period . They were also populous cities . During the period of the period, they were all famous cities .
 In Linzi, capital of Qi, there were royal palaces, markets, and commercial streets crowded with wagons, horses and pedestrians .
 The city, covering an area of eight square miles, had, among other things, six iron-melting factories, nine copper-making factories, and factories making bone articles .
 Metal coins were used for trade and exchanges, and each of the states had its own currency . Metal coins used for trading and exchanges .
 Each school presented its own writings, propagating its own beliefs while criticizing the beliefs of others . The students presented their own writings .
 A native of Lu, he advocated “universal love” and “honoring of the virtuous,” all of which reflected the wish of small landowners and farmers at that time .
 Daode Jing developed elementary dialectics . The former is known as Daode . It is known for its elementary dialectic .
 Mencius (372289 BC) was a principal representative of Confucianism during the Warring States Period . Mencius was a major figure in Chinese culture during the period of Chinese culture .
 He considered himself the master’s ideological descendant and advocated “the kingly way” and ‘the policy of benevolence’ He advised rulers to win the hearts of their subjects so as to secure their own rule .
 Han Fei was a native of Han. and his ideas could be found in a book entitled Han Fei Zi . His ideas were found in Han. Fei Zi, a book about Han Fei .
 He opposed such concepts as the heavenly mandate and questioned the existence of spirits . He opposed the concept of the divine mandate .
 He advocated the concentration of all power in the hands of the sovereign and rule by law . He was a representative of the Legalist school .
 As for the school of military science, its principal representatives were Sun Wu and Su Bin during this period . Su Bin and Sun Wu were the principal representatives .
 Sun Zi and Sun Bin wrote Military Science of Sun Zi . The former wrote Military . Science of . Sun Zi was the author of two military science books .
 Both expressed thoughts on military strategy and tactics that were contained in their elements of dialectics . Both expressed their views on military strategies and tactics .
 Qin adopted Legalism as the ruling ideology during the Warring States Period . Qin accepted the proposals of Lord Shang Yang for political, economic, and military reforms . Qin was one of the seven states during the period .
 Qin government abolished the well-field system and legally recognized private ownership of land . The Qin government legalized private land ownership, which could be bought or sold . The well field system was abolished in 2010 .
 It promoted tilling and weaving so as as to increase the production of essentials .
 It abolished privileges enjoyed by hereditary aristocrats, and granted land and titles to those who had distinguished themselves on the battlefield . It also abolished privileges .
 It also stated that all officials must be appointed by the central government . All officials must have been appointed by central government, the government said .
 Qin state became rich and strong, and it became possible for Qin to unify the country . As a result of carrying out such reforms, the Qin state of China became rich, strong and rich . Qin state is now unifying China .
 Ying Zheng, king of Qin, embarked on a dramatic conquest of other kingdoms . Ying Zheng was one of China's most successful monarchs .
 Having drafted a massive infantry army, he had an efficient military machine led by strong commanders . He drafted an efficient army in order to win control of the country .
 Instead of using chariots, his army possessed cavalry, superior iron weapons, and crossbows, all comparatively new developments at the time . Instead of being used chariots he had cavalry, he had superior iron and cross-bows .
 His attacks on others, especially siege battles, became much more forceful and merciless . His attacks became more forceful, merciless and merciless, he said .
 He successively annexed and terminated Han, Zhao, Wei, Chu, Yan, and Qi . He succeededively annexed, terminated, and annexed, Han and Zhao .
 Art of War, The', Confucian-Mencian Paradigm; Lord Shang; Qin Dynasty; Qin Shi Huangdi, Emperor; Sun Zi; Terra-Cotta Army; Zhou Dynasty . Art of war, The'Confucian' Mencian' Paradigm
 The Han dynasty replaced the Qin dynasty, which was China’s first imperial dynasty . Han was the first Chinese dynasty to be ruled out of China .
 The entire imperial system was support by peasants and landowners, who suffered onerous corvee, taxation, and military duties . The system was supported by peasants, landowners .
 Qin's brutal oppression and ruthless exploitation gave the peasants no choice but to resist . Qin’s brutal oppression forced the peasants to resist against him . The peasants were forced to take action against Qin in order to protect themselves .
 The capital of the new regime was Chang’an , Shaanxi Province, and the regime has been referred to by historians as Western Han .
 As the first Western Han emperor, Liu Bang was known by his imperial appellation Emperor Gaozu of Han . Liu Bang is known as Liu Bang, known as the first Han emperor .
 The new regime followed the example of its predecessor Qin by adopting the system of “Three Dukes and Nine Secretaries of State” for the central government . The system of prefectures and counties for the country as a whole was adopted by the new regime .
 The Qin regime awarded many with the titles of dukes or princes, who received fiefs for support . Even its laws were similar to those of the Qin regime .
 In due course, these dukedoms and principalities became powerful in their own right; they were virtually independent kingdoms . The dukeoms, principalities and duchmats became powerful enough to become powerful .
 The governor supervised the work of district magistrates under his jurisdiction . The governor, in turn, supervised the district magistrate work .
 Salt making, iron smelting, and coinage were declared governmental monopolies . The concentration of power in the hands of the central government was further strengthened . Salt making was declared a governmental monopoly .
 The Western Han began to conquer territory outside the Great Wall . Meanwhile, the Western Han continued to conquer the territory outside .
 Han emperors maintained a large expeditionary army for China’s new central position in Asia . They also improved weaponry and equipment, and also improved weapons and equipment .
 The Chinese soldiers began to wear armor made of lamellar in which overlapping leather or metal plates were sewn onto a cloth . The armor is made of overlapping leather and metal plates .
 The successful military expeditions and territorial expansion convinced the Western Han emperors and the people that they were superior in civilization and institution . The Western Han people were convinced that they would be superior in society .
 During the later period of the Western Han, aristocrats, high officials, and big landowners competed with one another in seizing more and more land for themselves .
 As they took over much of the rich farmland, the peasants were left with very little . The peasants were forced to leave them with little .
 Landless landless either became homeless refugees or sold themselves as slaves . Landless either sold themselves to the landless or were forced to live as slaves. The landless became refugees or were sold as slaves or were homeless refugees .
 As social contradiction deepens, peasant uprisings became more frequent . As social contradictions deepened, peasants took to the streets to take advantage .
 In 6 AD, Wang Mang, a relative of the royal house, usurped power and replaced Emperor Pingdi as sovereign . Wang Mang usurped the throne in 6 AD and replaced Pingdi .
 The new regime did not solve the social conflicts between the rich and poor, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: 'New regime didn't solve social conflicts' Mandela: "The new regime is not a solution to the problems of the rich"
 All this merely increased the people’s sense of insecurity and the instability of society as a whole . All this simply increased the . people's sense of . insecurity . The . people in the country are more insecure than ever before, writes CNN.com .
 As social crisis built up to a climax, peasant uprisings of major proportions erupted . The peasant uprising was a major event in the 1930s and 1940s .
 In 25 AD, Liu Xiu declared himself emperor and re-established the Han regime . He was a powerful landlord who had wormed his way into the ranks of the peasant insurgents . Liu Xu became the emperor in 25 AD .
 Great Wall; Han Dynasty; Han Wudi, Emperor; Qin Dynasty; Qin Shi Huangdi, Emperor . Great Wall: Great Wall . Qin Wudi; Qin Sh Huangdi; Rebellion Led by Chen Sheng; Terra-Cotta Army . Warring States Period .
 The Warring States Period (474221 BC) undeniably served as an impetus to a golden age of Chinese military writing .
 Some of these writings were unfortunately lost to the unrelenting march of time . Some of them were lost to time .
 Scholars are speculating about the unique characteristics of Chinese warfare . Nevertheless, this has not stopped scholars from speculating and formulating theories .
 Europeans wrote of and analyzed China’s warfare in the early nineteenth century . In the early 1900s, Europeans were writing of and analyzing China's warfare .
 China has a long tradition of writing about war . Most works of military history are about councils of war and are written by civilian officials and Confucian scholars .
 Confucianism considers use of military force a failure of leadership in an ideal society . The concept of the nonviolent resolution of affairs is based on Confucanism, which considers military force failure to leadership .
 This approach to warfare stands in contrast to the Western view that warfare and the military are an important and integral part of society . It stands in stark contrast to Western view of the importance of warfare and military in society . The U.S. military is a major source of conflict in Afghanistan
 The Chinese orientation to defensive warfare was principally a matter of geography, says historian . The Chinese orientated to defence warfare was largely a geography issue .
 The frontiers of the West were essentially the seas and oceans surrounding Europe and America, China’s frontier was Inner Asia . Whereas the frontiers . of the . West were . essentially the . seas and . oceans around Europe and the . oceans surrounding the . Europe .
 The military aim of China throughout most of its history was the prevention of incursions from the northern continent from groups such as the Mongols and Manchus . China's military aim was to prevent incursion from the north from invading northern Europe .
 The third element of the Chinese Way of Warfare centers on the establishment of a bureaucraticbased society . The bureaucrats generally held sway over the military .
 John Keegan considers the Oriental form of war contrary to the West because it was characterized by caution, delay, and avoidance of direct conflict . Keegan says the Oriental war was characterized as caution and delay rather than conflict .
 Alastair Iain Johnston explores the various Chinese approaches and concepts of war . Iain explores the Chinese approach to war in a bid to win back power in China .
 Much of Chinese military history has been lost and that what remains is fragmentary at best . Much of China's military history is lost, says historian .
 Confucian paradigm tended to be less violent and thus emphasized the defensive more than offensive . Confucians tend to emphasize the defensive, not the offensive, more than the offensive .
 The “para helium paradigm” favored the offensive strategies more than did Confucianism, and stressed being prepared for war . The ‘parahelium’ paradigm’s favored offensive strategies, and emphasized being prepared .
 Victor Davis Hanson and Geoffrey Parker conclude that there may be a NonWestern Way of War . They attempt to prove that there is a Western War of War by focusing on what they see as a primarily ‘Western’ phenomenon to explain why the West has won .
 For Parker, the tools necessary for Western ascendency lie in what he calls five principal foundations, including superior technology, discipline, total victory via unconditional surrender, innovation, and finance . Parker: Technology, discipline and total victory are key to Western ascendence .
 Hanson seeks to place the context of the Western Way of War with internal cultural factors . Hanson: "Western Way" is the result of a culture of war in the West .
 Hanson disagrees with Parker’s thesis regarding the inevitable rise of the Western military . Hanson is suspicious of what he sees as technological determinism . Hanson: "Technological determinism"
 Hanson says superiority of Western war technology has never been a constant and therefore should not be seen as such . Hanson: "Western war technology is never a constant"
 What has been a constant, if at times just barely so, is the Western concept of freedom, individualism, and civic militarism . The Western concept has been constant for decades, but it has been just barely barely so .
 Hanson: While a comprehensive and holistic set of Chinese principles exist to deal with war, they do not describe a separate, distinct, and mutually exclusive “way of war” as defined by Hanson . They state that, while a comprehensive . and holistic . set of . Chinese principles
 They contend that the Chinese invented or adopted many of the supposed Western ways of warfare . They say they have adopted or adopted some of the ideas of the Western way of war .
 Like Westerners, the Chinese placed emphasis on strict discipline to include the publication of drill manuals and related instructions . Drill manuals were published around the world in China .
 Art of War, The ; Confucian-Mencian Paradigm; Guerrilla Warfare; Manchus; Mongols; Mao Zedong; Sun Zi; Warring States Period .
 Popularly known as Whampoa Military Academy, it marked the commencement of the Nationalist army as well as modern Chinese defense forces .
 Sun Yat-sen’s struggles for democracy, or his “second revolution,” against the warlords failed each time . After the 1911 Revolution, Sun Yats-sen tried to win over warlords . His struggles failed to achieve democracy .
 The party congress enacted a new constitution and agreed that Communists might join the GMD as individuals . Communists might also be allowed to join as individuals, the party congress agreed .
 The coalition government received both political and military advisors from the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was a key ally of the government .
 Soviet military advisors suggested to Sun that a military academy and revolutionary armed force be established . After the congress, Sun proposed to establish a revolutionary military academy .
 On June 16, 1924, Whampoa Military Academy was founded with the assistance of the Soviet Union . Jiang Jieshi was the commandant of the academy .
 Sun and Jiang began to build a military center in Guangzhou with the cadets including GMD and CCP members, college students, and revolted warlord officers and soldiers . Thereafter, Sun started to build the military center .
 He adopted a dual commanding system, or commander-political commissar system, from the Russian Red Army .
 On October 7, 1924, the first Russian ship arrived in Guangzhou with weapons and training equipment for Whampoa’s first class of cadets . The ship was the first ship from Russia to arrive in China .
 The New Army of the Qing dynasty had been trained by German officers and adopted the German military system . It adopted the military system of the New Army .
 After the 1911 Revolution, many German instructors stayed in China, training the warlord troops and helping them get new arms from European countries . Many German instructors remained in China .
 Jiang studied in a military academy in Japan in 1908-1910 . The modernization of the Japanese military between 1868 and 1912 attracted many Chinese officers . Jiang was one of the first Chinese officers to study in Japan .
 Japan's attempt to obtain German and Russian colonial and territorial occupations in east and northeast China threatened China’s sovereignty and independence . After World War I, however, Japan tried to get German and . Russian colonial . occupations in . east and . northeast China .
 The Soviet system was accepted in 1924 at Whampoa as a model to establish the new Nationalist army .
 Jiang became the first superintendent of Whampoa Military Academy . Sun sent Jiang and a military delegation to Moscow in 1924 to study the Soviet military system for four months .
 CCP trained Communist officers from 1924 to 1927 at Whampoa Military Academy . Though different in ideological and political agendas from the GMD, the CCP successfully implemented their policies and trained officers .
 CCP cadets studied Russian military curriculum side-by-side with GMD cadets . CCP students studied the Russian curriculum side by side with the GMD students .
 Wang Jingwei (18831944) was elected as chair and Borodin as senior advisor in the new government in July . In July, Wang Jing Wei was elected to chair of China's new government . Borodins was also elected to senior advisor .
 Jiang reorganized all the military units under the national government into the National Revolutionary Army (NRA, Guomin Geming Jun) Jiang is the commander in chief of the army . Jiang is Jiang's first commander in charge .
 The student soldiers of Whampoa Military Academy became the First Army . At that time, he had five armies, and the student soldiers were students .
 On July 1, 1926, Commander General Jiang Jieshi issued a “Declaration on the Northern Expedition” and so launched the punitive expedition against the northern warlords . Wu Peifu and Sun Chuanfang were two of the five major warlords, two of
 Chiang renamed the NRA the “Northern Expeditionary Army’s . The NRA had eight infantry armies, approximately 100,000 men . It was renamed the Northern Expeditionary .
 In less than six months, the NEA overthrew the two most powerful warlords, Wu and Sun Chuanfang . The NEA ousted both warlords in less than 6 months .
 After the completion of the Northern Expedition, the Army Officer Academy moved to Nanjing, the capital city of the Republic of China, in 1928 .
 The White Lotus Rebellion was one of the largest peasant rebellions during the Qing dynasty . The revolt occurred in China during the last quarter of the eighteenth century .
 The White Lotus Rebellion was notable for the long-standing cult that promoted it . It took place in central China rather than among the minority populations of outlying provinces .
 The origins of the White Lotus Society lay with a Buddhist cult of the thirteenth century . The society's origins lay with Buddhist cults of the 13th century .
 In 1774, a martial arts and herbal healing expert named Wang Lun led a group of rebels against the Qing dynasty . Wang Lun was a member of a group that led to the overthrow of the Chinese dynasty .
 Other participants in his forces included barge-pullers, coolies, and other urban people who worked along the Grand Canal that connected Nanjing and Beijing .
 Wang Lun called on the “Eternal Venerable Mother” goddess, an important deity in traditional folk Buddhism . Wang Lun calls on the goddess, which is important in folk Buddhism, to appear in China .
 His ideology was millenarian, calling attention to catastrophe on earth rather than advocating such political goals as land reform or help for the poor . He called attention to disaster on earth not political goals .
 He was able to convince his followers that he was immune to Qing reprisals, however, and in the early days of his revolt, it seemed true . The revolt was the first of its kind in China .
 His forces capture several cities, including Linqing, an important city on the Grand Canal . His forces captured several cities in the region .
 A massive response from the imperial Qing armies soon crushed Wang Lun’s following, however, slaughtering them along with their families . Wang Lun's following was slaughtered by the Qing armies, but a massive response was soon followed .
 Wang Lun’s defeat did not put an end to disorder in Shandong . The government did not do anything about the underlying causes of the discontent, the government says .
 For the most part, the rebellion consisted of sporadic anti-Qing violence by roving bands using guerrilla tactics . The rebellion was based on sporadic violence against the government .
 By this time, the government forces had become riddled with corruption and could not defeat the movement . The movement lasted until 1804, but by this time it had been riddled by corruption .
 Banner System; Grand Canal; Kangxi, Emperor; Manchus; Ming Dynasty; Qing Dynasty; Qianlong, Emperor . Kangxi: Kangxi; Manchu; Manchi; Ming; Qing; Qing .
 White terrors came into effect to squelch mass movements by wiping out and purging radical leaders from the mainland and Taiwan . White terrors squelch were used to wipe out radical leaders from the mainland and Taiwan .
 Jiang Jieshi effectively controlled the government of the Republic of China by 1927 by becoming the generalissimo (equivalent to president of China) He ruled with an iron fist, eradicating all of his opponents by instilling him as a precommunist .
 Jiang ruled Taiwan until his death in 1975 . He led the Northern Expedition to unify the country under one ruler .
 Jiang’s aim was not focused on warlords or warlords in China, but rather his ‘allies,” the Communists . Jiang was allied with his army on his march in Shanghai in 1927, where he betrayed them .
 He armed gangsters, suiting them up in Guomindang uniforms and launching a surprise attack on the worker’s militia that was on strike . The attack was a surprise strike on the workers’ militia .
 The incidents of large-scale killings in Shanghai led to the period of white terror, in which 12,000 Communists were killed within three weeks . These incidents were the first large scale killings to take place in Shanghai .
 The greatest amount of killing happened in the countryside of China, taking millions of lives . Millions of people were killed in villages among the rural regions .
 The white terror continued through the Chinese Civil War . It killed Communists, leftists and democrats . It also killed leftists and leftists .
 On February 28, 1947, the ‘228 Incident’ happened, in which the antigovemment protest in Taiwan surged and the white terror of the Guomindang violently suppressed the uprising . 10,000 to 30,000 of the protestors were killed by the white
 The martial law of the white terror lasted from May 19, 1949, to July 15, 1987, a little over 38 years . Martial law lasted between 1949 and 1987, when it was imposed by the government .
 During this time, approximately 140,000 Taiwanese were incarcerated and/or executed for their opposition to the Guomindang . During this period, 140,00 were incarcerated or executed for opposing beliefs .
 Many of the victims of the white terror in Taiwan were Chinese who often came unaccompanied to the island . They were considered more disposable than the local Taiwanese .
 Until the lifting of martial law, discussing the white terror and other incidents such as the ‘228 Incident’ was not tolerated . Until now, discussion of the '228 Incident' was not allowed to be discussed .
 In 1995, an official apology by ROC president Lee Teng-hui was presented, and an official public memorial was constructed . Eventually, in 1995, a public memorial has been constructed .
 Xia was originally thought to have been a purely mythological dynasty that survived only through oral history . The Xia was thought to be the first Chinese dynasty to survive .
 Excavations at the city of Yanshi in China have uncovered remains of what may have been the Xia capital . However, excavations have not revealed what was known as the Xia .
 When Pangu died, there were a series of rulers who taught the Chinese people important ideas . The Chinese people were taught important ideas by Pangu's descendants .
 The first ruler, Fu Xi, taught the Chinese people about marriage and how to domesticate animals . Fu Xi taught the people how to get married and domesticate pets . The Chinese people are now living in China .
 The second ruler, Shen Nong, taught them about trade, agriculture, and medicine . The first ruler taught them trade and agriculture .
 Huangdi, as the third ruler, helped invent the calendar, the written language, and ceramics . Huangdi also helped invented the calendar and the writing language . He is believed to have invented the world's first calendar .
 Shun passed his ruling power to Yu, the founder of the Xia dynasty, the first of the three dynasties of ancient China . Eventually, Shun's ruling power passed over to Yu . Yu was the first person to pass over to Shun .
 Yu was known for his removal of the water that covered China during a great flood . According to legend, Yu removed water from the water covered China . Yu was also known for removing water from China during the great floods .
 He was also the first Chinese ruler to make his rule hereditary . In that way, he created the first dynasty of China .
 With the foundation of the Xia dynasty, China’s mythic prehistory and traditional history started to merge . The Xia dynasty was one of China's most successful dynastates .
 Allegedly, the end of the Xia dynasty came when the last ruler, Jie, instituted a violent rule at the behest of his cruel wife . The Xia dynasty is believed to have been ruled by Jie .
 Tang's misrule prompted a rebellion led by Tang, who went on to found the Shang dynasty . That rebellion led to Tang's death, which led to the death of the Chinese emperor .
 The center of the Xia dynasty was supposedly located near present-day Yanshi, China . The Xia dynasty is said to have been located in the area of present-modern Yansh .
 In 1959, excavations at Erlitou in the city of Yanshi found evidence to suggest that it was indeed the capital of the Xia dynasty .
 The Xia may have stemmed from the Neolithic Longshan culture . The excavation uncovered remains of a palace, tombs, and pottery that suggested the Xia may be from the Longshans culture .
 Scientific dating of the objects found at the Yanshi site corroborates those dates . The objects are believed to have been found in China .
 Xia has not been universally accepted as a historical dynasty . Nevertheless, the Xia has been accepted as one of the Xia dynasts .
 Jiang stubbornly refused to declare war on Japan . Under mounting pressure, Jiang has remained defiant .
 The Xi’an Incident of December 1936 in Shaanxi Province precipitated the Xi'an Incident . The incident was the result of a dispute between Chinese and Chinese leaders in 1936 .
 Jiang flew to Xi’an to discuss with Zhang Xueliang (Chang Hsueh-liang) and Yang Hucheng (Yang Huch’eng) commanders of the northeastern and northwestern Armies . The last “extermination campaign” against
 Zhang seized the opportunity to try to persuade Jiang to cooperate with the Chinese Communists in establishing a united front against the Japanese . Zhang seized this opportunity to . try to convince Jiang that . cooperating with the . Chinese Communists .
 Zhang marched his army to Lintong (Lint’ung), west of Xi’an, where Jiang’s villa was located, and kidnapped Jiang . Yang seized all Jiang's establishments and personnel in Xi'an, while Zhang seized Jiang's businesses and personnel
 Zhang took Jiang back to Xi’an, where he was held in detention, and then invited the Chinese Communists to visit to negotiate for a united front against the Japanese . Zhang invited the Communist Party of China to visit China to negotiate with the Japanese to negotiate .
 Madam Jiang Soong Meiling traveled from Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, to represent her husband in negotiations with Zhou Zhou .
 Jiang finally gave his verbal agreement on Christmas Eve to Zhang's proposal for ending the civil war and forming a united front to resist the Japanese invasion . Zhang’s proposal was based on his proposal .
 Jiang was released on December 25, and he flew back to Nanjing, immediately beginning work on a united front for the forthcoming Anti-Japanese War . Jiang was freed and immediately began work for the anti-Japanese war .
 Zhang, who accompanied Jiang back to Nanjing, was arrested by Jiang’s agents . Zhang was tried on charges of insubordination, and sentenced by a military court to a 10-year prison term. Zhang was sentenced to 10 years in prison .
 On January 4, 1937, Jiang granted him amnesty and placed him under the National Military Council’s close surveillance, a facesaving measure . Jiang granted the former Chinese president amnesty and put him under close surveillance .
 Jiang relieved Yang all of his military posts, and he still held him in detention at year's end . The next day he relieved Yang of all his posts, Jiang relieved him of his posts . Jiang still held Yang in detention .
 Despite the sacrifice by the individuals involved in the coup, their action was widely appreciated as a pivotal point in the bitter anti-Japanese resistance effort of the Chinese . Despite the sacrifices, the coup was seen as a crucial point in anti-Japan resistance efforts .
 The army was locally organized by Zeng Guofan , a Qing official, and centered in the Yangzi River valley . It was centered in China's Yangzi Valley .
 It encompassed much of south and central China in the 1850s1860s to fight against the Taiping Rebellion . It was fought against Taiping . The Chinese government was formed in the early 1900s .
 Many peasants joined the Taiping when the peasant army defeated the Qing army from the west to the east along the Yangzi River and took over half of the country . The Taiping was the first Chinese revolution to break out of China .
 An acute awareness of the corruption and lack of discipline that had crippled Qing’s imperial armies convinced Zeng Guofan, Li Hongzhang, and other officials that locally recruited and locally subsidized troops led by members of the provincial gentry would confront the Taiping forces far more
 Recent successes by such gentry-led local troops against the Taipings showed the system could work . The system could be used by local gentry troops in the future, experts say .
 Zeng was reluctant to communicate to the emperor the scope of his recruiting and training operations once they were in full swing . Yet regional armies had challenged the imperial state so often in the past .
 Hunanese army was led by local degree-holders chosen for their ability and loyalty . First battles were waged not against seasoned Taipings but against local bandits who posed a constant problem in imperial China .
 Zeng also instilled Confucian ideology to counter the Taiping ideology . Zeng instilled discipline in his troops to counter Taiping . He also instill Confucan ideology .
 Zeng’s Hunanese troops met with defeat in their first clashes with the Taipings . Zeng and his troops were defeated in the first clashes, but victories soon followed .
 Wuchang was a strategically important port city on the Yangzi River that imperial troops had failed to take . The Xiang army, commanded by Lo Zenan and Jiang Zhongyuan, recaptured the city on October 14, 1854 .
 In May 1860, Zeng was made governor-general of Jiangnan and Jiangxi . He was imperial commissioner for suppression of the Taipings in south China . Zeng died in 1881 .
 Never before had a Chinese official been trusted by a Manchu emperor with such farreaching military powers . The Chinese official was trusted by the Manchu .
 Zeng controlled an army of 120,000 soldiers, led by experienced commanders hand-picked by Zeng . Zeng's army was once the largest in China's history, with more than 100,000 troops .
 Zeng Guoquan, Guofan’s younger brother, led the successful siege of Anqing, which marked the beginning of the end for the Taipings .
 Internal strife had decimated the Taiping leadership holed up in Nanjing . Appalling internal strife led to Taiping leaders being decimated .
 Nanjing was taken in July 1864 and virtually all of its defenders slaughtered . After a siege that lasted more than two years, the city was taken by the Chinese army .
 The Taiping rebellion was truly terminated with the recapture of Nanjing . It took two more years to eradicate the remaining Taiping resistance, but the rebellion was terminated .
 Xiang army became one of the main strengths of the Qing military thereafter . The Xiang army was one of China's main military strengths .
 Ever-Victorious Army; Hong Xiuquan; Li Hongzhang; Manchus; Qing Dynasty; Small Sword Society; Taiping Rebellion; Ward, Frederick Townsend; Zeng Guofan; Zuo Zongtang. Ever-victorious Army .
 Xiao Jinguang (Hsiao Ch’inkuang) Grand general of the People’s Liberation Army . one of the most experienced Chinese Communist military political leaders, and the founder of the Chinese navy .
 Xiao Jinguang was born on January 4, 1903, in Changsha, provincial capital of Hunan . Xiao was born in China's Changsha province .
 He joined the Chinese Communist Youth League in 1920 and went to the Soviet Union to study military science and technology in 1921 . He went to China in 1921 to study in Soviet Union .
 Xiao Jinguang participated in the Northern Expedition in 1926-1927 as the CCP representative in the Sixth Division, Second Army, National Revolutionary Army . Xiao returned to China in 1924 and was a member of the Communist Party .
 Xiao was chief of staff of the Twelfth Red Army, president of the Central Military Political Academy, and political commissar of the Fifth Red Army . When he returned in 1930, Xiao was appointed Chief of Staff of the . Twelfth . Red Army Chief of staff, political comm
 From 1933, he became the commander and political commissar of the Eleventh Red Army and then the Seventh Red Army . He was also the commander of the Third Red Army in the Soviet Union .
 He also served as an instructor at the Red Army College and director of the Political Department of the college .
 During the Long March, in January 1935, he became the chief of staff of the Third Red Army . He was also the Chief of Staff of the Second Red Army in the 1930s .
 After Red Army forces arrived in Shaanxi Province, he was appointed commander of the Twenty-Ninth Army . He was appointed as commander of Twenty-ninth Army after Red Army arrived .
 Xiao served as commander of the Garrison Force of the Eighth Route Army in Shaanxi Province during the Anti-Japanese War of 1937-1945 . Xiao served in the anti-Japanese war of the 1930s-1940s .
 Xiao was deputy commander of the Northeast Democratic Army during the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949 . Xiao was chief of staff of Nanman Regional Command during the war . Xiao also served in China during the Second World War .
 In May 1948, he became the commander of the First Column under the Northeast Field Command . He was also the commander in May 1948 . He is credited with leading the Soviet Union in Afghanistan .
 In 1949, he was the commander of the Twelfth Army Group under the command of the Northeast Field Army . He was then commander of Hunan Provincial Command . In 1949 he was in charge of the Hunan provincial Command .
 Xiao Jinguang was the first commander of the PLA’s new navy in 1949 . Mao Zedong appointed Xiao as the first president of the First Navy Academy . Xiao was also the president of China's first Navy Academy.
 In 1950, Xiao held meetings and set a detailed guideline for naval construction . Xiao set an example of naval construction in China's first naval base .
 His plan was to build a light model naval force with a robust capability of modern defense and offence . His plan to build the force was to 'build a light-model naval force'
 He also designed the organizational structure for the naval establishment to absorb many young intellectuals and technicians, and employ former GMD naval personnel, and transform PLA infantry units into the navy .
 Three-year construction plan worked successfully for the Chinese Navy . Chinese Navy spent three years building new ships .
 The highly mobile Xiongnu mounted warriors posed a serious threat to the Qin dynasty and the Han dynasty . They undertook major military campaigns and elaborate defensive measures to secure borders .
 The Xiongnu had a nomadic, horse-based culture organized around loosely connected tribes . The nomadic culture was organized by loosely connected groups .
 Through that confederacy, Xiongnu rulers could coordinate hundreds of thousands of mounted warriors over a 1,500mile frontier they shared with China . The Xionmu rulers were in control of hundreds of thousand mounted warriors . They were able to coordinate hundreds thousands of warriors .
 The wall only slowed the Xiongnu down, and they continued their destructive invasions . The wall didn't stop them from invading the world .
 Around the end of the second century BC, after unsuccessful military campaigns to end the Xiongnu incursions, the rulers of the Han dynasty tried appeasement by offering gifts and pacts .
 The Chinese could find few allies to help fight the Xiongnu . The massive military expeditions, along with the money and manpower used to build and defend new walls, gates, and watchtowers, put the Han treasury on strain .
 The Chinese often overwhelmingly outnumbered the Xiongnu forces in battle . The nomads’ skill on horseback and their lack of dependence on long, tenuous supply lines made decisive Chinese victories almost impossible .
 The power of the Xiongnu was eventually destroyed, not by military defeat but by internal conflicts . The power was ultimately destroyed by internal conflict .
 One large group went west, and another large faction, whose leader submitted to the Han as a vassal, settled in China . Another large faction submitted to Han, and one went west . One large faction went west and another part of China settled in .
 Xiongnu posed little threat to the Chinese over the next few hundred years . The Xiongnans posed . little threat . over the years .
 After the fifth century, references to the Xiongnu in Chinese history end, but their influence on China had been profound . The Xionnu had been a major influence in China .
 Largely due to the threat the Xiongnu posed, the Great Wall was improved and expanded throughout the Qin and Han dynasties . The Great Wall is one of China's most impressive achievements in the history .
 Han expeditions to find allies to fight the Xiongnu expanded Chinese knowledge of the world to the north and to the west .
 Information about other civilizations and riches to accrue in the west spurred the Silk Road . The Silk Road was a booming trade route that stretched from China into the Mediterranean world .
 Great Wall; Han Dynasty; Han Wudi, Emperor; Manchuria; Mongols; Qin Dynasty; Silk Road . Great Wall: Han . Han .
 Yongxing Island is the major island of 1.5 square kilometers, where the Hainan Provincial Government of the PRC has an administrative office . Yongxings Island is a major island where the provincial government of the province has an office .
 The South Vietnamese government had occupied some of the islands in the South China Sea before the military conflict with China . South Vietnam had occupied the islands before the conflict .
 In September 1973, the South Vietnamese government declared Nanwei and Taiping along with 10 other islands as part of their country’s territory, aiming to secure the abundant oil resources in the area . The islands were declared part of Vietnam's territory in 1973 .
 On January 15, 1974, the South Vietnamese navy sent one of their destroyers to the waters around Xisha Yongle Island . The incident occurred in the wake of the Vietnam War .
 On January 16, the destroyer shelled Ganquan Island, driving Chinese fishing boats out of the area . The destroyer also shelled the island in an effort to drive fishing boats from the area.
 On January 17, the Vietnamese sent another destroyer to transport some soldiers to occupy the Ganquan and Jinyin Islands . The Vietnamese national flag was removed from the Chinese national flag on the island .
 China’s defense minister and vice chairman of the Central Military Commission of the PRC, Ye Jianying, instructed the navy to be on alert and ready for the Xisha Island Defensive Campaign .
 Chinese government took measures to deal with the situation in order to maintain sovereignty and protect fishing production . The Chinese government has taken measures to protect fishing .
 The fishing boats in the area continued their fishing business but paid close attention to the South Vietnamese activities . At the same time, the Chinese navy deployed two hunting submarines .
 The Chinese strategy was not to fire the first shot, but if the South Vietnam fired first, the Chinese retaliation would be furious . China's strategy was to avoid firing first, not firing first . South Vietnam is a major ally of China in the region of Vietnam .
 Wei Mingsen, deputy commander of the Yulin PLA Naval Base, was appointed commander for the Xisha Island Defense Campaign . He was appointed by the Chinese government to lead the campaign .
 On January 17, the two Chinese hunting submarines transported some militias to Jinqin and Chenhang Islands . The two vessels transported militias to the islands .
 The Chinese navy warned the Vietnamese immediately, causing them to leave . The incident was the first time they had been warned to leave the country .
 On January 18, the two Vietnamese destroyers returned and fired on the Chinese fishing boats eight times . One of the boats was destroyed at the north side of Lingyang Reef . The two destroyers fired on one of the fishing boats at the .
 Su Zhenhua (1912— 1979), deputy commander of the Chinese Navy, briefed the meeting and proposed a retaliation plan . Su Zhanhua proposed a retaliatory plan for the attack .
 Based on this guideline, the Chinese navy was prepared for the campaign . The Chinese navy said it was prepared to take part in the operation .
 The submarines weighed anchor to meet the South Vietnamese ships with full speed . The submarines were able to make it to the ships in full speed.
 The Vietnamese ships turned around when they saw the Chinese were prepared . The Chinese ships were preparing to attack the Vietnamese ships .
 Around 10:22 A.M., four Vietnamese ships shelled the Chinese ships, and the Chinese shelled back . The Chinese ships were attacked by the Vietnamese ships .
 Ye Jianying, Deng Xiaoping, and Su Zhenhua reported to Mao Zedong that China should regain control of the islands occupied by the South Vietnamese . Mao agreed, and Mao agreed .
 Chinese army successfully landed on Ganquan, Shanhu, and Jinyin Islands and occupied them . After the successful naval campaign at sea, the Chinese army landed on the islands .
 Xu Xiangqian followed in his father’s footsteps and became a teacher . Born in Wutai, Shanxi Province, to a small landowning family on November 8, 1901 .
 Xu was assigned to work in the labor movement in Quangzhou, China, after the split between the GMD and the CCP in 1927 . After the split, the CCP assigned Xu to work as a labor organizer in the city .
 Xu was among those who created the ill-fated Fourth Division of the Red Army, which was annihilated in the GMD assault on the Hailufeng Soviet in early 1928 . Xu was one of the leaders of the Quangzhou Commune when it was destroyed and driven from
 Xu fled to the city of Shanghai and then to a Communist guerrilla base in rural Hubei . Xu fled the city, Shanghai, and then moved to a communist guerrilla base . Xu was a member of the Communist Party of China's Guangxi Communist Party .
 He was one of the earliest Communist military men to arrive at the Eyuwan (O-yuwan) Soviet along the borders of Hubei, Henan, and Anhui Provinces .
 Xu’s Fourth Front Red Army reeled across western China during the Long March until it arrived in northwestern Shaanxi Province in mid-1937 . The Second Sino-Japanese War (or the Anti-Japanese war of 1937-1945) began .
 Communists immediately reorganized their units into the Eighth Route Army . Communists reorganized the army into a new army .
 Xu was sent into Shandong to coordinate the activities of several guerrilla units, which became known as the First Column . Xu was later sent to coordinate activities of guerrilla units . Xu died in 1945 in the hands of a Chinese army in the Second World War .
 Xu left the front lines in 1941 and for the next year was without an assignment . Because of poor health, Xu left his job in 1941 . Xu was without a job for more than a year after leaving the front .
 He is reported to have been president of the Anti-Japanese Military and Political College in 1945 . He was also reported to be president of Anti-Japan military and political college .
 Xu led Communist forces in combat against GMD troops in Shanxi . During the Chinese Civil War of 19461949, Xu led . Xu was a member of the Communist Party of China .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, he reemerged as a prominent political figure . He was one of the 10 marshals of the People’s Republic in 1955 .
 Chinese troops achieved a couple of battle victories during the campaign . The Chinese troops were able to achieve a few battle victories .
 At the beginning of the Anti-Japanese War of 1937-1945, the Japanese, armed with modern technology and superior naval and air forces, had by the end of 1937 occupied northern China .
 The GMD army, on the other hand, was weakened by inner factions and poor coordination, which only worsened the military disasters by late 1937 . GMD Army, however, suffered a series of military disasters .
 The capital city of Nanjing fell into Japanese hands in December 1937, only days after Jiang Jieshi (1887— 1975) and the Nationalist government evacuated the city . Nanjing was the first city to be taken over by the Japanese government .
 Nanjing Massacre followed the fall of the city and lasted for almost seven weeks . Nanjing massacre lasted for seven weeks after fall of Nanjing . Massacre followed fall of Chinese capital and lasted seven weeks.
 Terror and destruction reigned in the city, convincing civilians that the Japanese had launched a race war against China and they would be killed simply because they were Chinese .
 The Japanese army relied heavily on railways to transport troops and ammunition to advance the war . The railways were used by the Japanese army in the Second World War .
 Occupying Xuzhou would enable them to control Jin-Pu and Long-Hai railways . Occupying the city would allow them to take control of Jin Pu, Long Hai railways. Occupying Xinhua would give them control of the railways .
 After the seizure of Nanjing, the Japanese planned to connect northern China with the lower Yangzi region through Jin-Pu railway line . The Japanese planned for the westward advancement to Wuhan and Zhengzhou in preparation for the advancement of the line .
 The Japanese were determined to encircle Xuzhou with a coordinated attack from north and south . The Japanese had hoped to surround the city with coordinated attacks from north, south .
 The Japanese North China Army was under the command of Generals Itagaki Seishiro, Nishio Toshizo, and Isogai Rensuke . The North China army was under command .
 The Japanese southern troops were the Central China Expeditionary Army under the command of General Hata Shunroku . The Central China expeditionary Army was under the control of General Shunrroku in China .
 The defense of Xuzhou was closely connected with the defense of Wuhan, China . On the Chinese side, the defense was closely linked with the defence of Xuhan .
 The GMD high command quickly coordinated in a new fashion with great determination to resist the seemingly unstoppable Japanese . Recognizing the strategic importance of Xuzhou, the GMD . high command rapidly coordinated .
 General Han Fuqu gave up Shandong Province without a shot and further abandoned his army, making the defense of Nanjing impossible . The GMD military leadership court-martialed and executed General Fuqu, who gave up .
 The collective decision to execute Han was widely believed to be deciding factor for a coordinated resistance on the high military level . Han's execution was widely thought to be a deciding factor in the resistance .
 In early January 1938, the GMD concentrated large units of troops in defensive positions along the east-west Long-Hai railway line . The GMD was responsible for the creation of the Great Depression .
 General Li Zongren, former military leader of Guangxi Province, was appointed as the field commander in charge . Li is the former commander of the military in Guangxi province .
 Other GMD commanders, such as Zhang Zizhong, Tang Enbo, Sun Lianzhong, Bai Chongxi and Wang Mingzhang, were all stationed in important positions .
 The preparation of the Xuzhou campaign gained broad support from Chinese civilians, including students, college professors, journalists, writers, and farmers .
 Xie Bingying and Hu Lanqi, veterans of the Northern Expedition, organized Women’s Service Corps to offer auxiliary support for the Nationalist army . Xie Bingbing and Hu . Lanqi organized Women's Service Corps .
 Their presence was a great boost to Chinese patriotism, and was widely reported in the wartime China press . Their presence in China was reported widely in the war press .
 Chinese and Japanese armies fought fiercely for villages and towns in north and northeast Xuzhou . Both sides claimed victories in the battle .
 In March, it seemed that the situation was favorable to the Chinese army, especially with the victory at Taierzhuang, a village 13 miles northeast of Xuzhou, China .
 Three Japanese divisions were beaten and forced to retreat with casualties of 20,000 . In this battle, three Japanese divisions lost and were forced to withdraw .
 The Japanese seized Taierzhuang and Xuzhou eventually by the end of May . In the process, they lost valuable time and their morale was shaken .
 Chinese effectiveness and success proved that the enemy was not invincible as the Japanese had claimed . The Chinese were successful in the battle against Japan .
 Wuhan demonstrated Chinese determination for a collected action of resistance . The action was a great boost to the Chinese defense of the city in the following months .
 Strategically, it tied down the Japanese army and delayed their plan to attack Wuhan and Taiyuan . The move delayed their plans to attack the cities of Taiyou and Wang and Wai .
 The Xuzhou campaign was a brutal example of human sufferings caused by modern warfare . The campaign was one of the most brutal examples of modern warfare in history .
 The Nationalist army only had very limited military medical service available when the open hostilities broke out in July 1937 . The army relied almost completely on the understaffed China Red Cross for medical care .
 Medical personnel were unable to meet the huge needs generated from the brutal wars . Lacking proper training and often inexperienced, medical personnel were often unable to cope .
 It usually took four to six days to transport the wounded to a surgery table in the field hospital located in Zhengzhou, China .
 There was no reason to be optimistic about the survival chances of wounded soldiers in the front of the war . There is no reason for optimism about the chances of surviving wounded soldiers .
 Many died on the battlefield or on the transportation route . Many died painful deaths on the battleground or on transportation route. Many died in the process of transportation .
 Much terror and destruction was brought on to the populations during the war . Much of the destruction was caused by the war in Afghanistan .
 First, a huge number of ordinary civilians were forced to flee their homes . First, they fled their homes. Second, they are forced to live with their families.
 Those who chose to stay were bombed indiscriminately by Japanese air forces . Those who stayed in the camp were bombed by the Japanese .
 After the retreat of the Nationalist army, the Japanese launched retaliatory massacres against local residents . The Japanese launched a retaliatory massacre against locals .
 Men were killed, and an unknown number of women were raped and murdered . Men and women were killed and raped . An unknown number were murdered .
 The Chinese Nationalist army broke the dikes of the Yellow River hoping to stop the march of the Japanese army . The dikes were dikes to prevent the Japanese invasion .
 Millions of Chinese lost their homes and became refugees . As a result of this desperate action, millions of Chinese have been forced to flee .
 Even today, the number of people who died from the manmade disaster remains unknown .
 The breaking of the dike succeeded in forcing the Japanese army to change their plans, but it only delayed the attack . The dike was the only thing that delayed the Japanese attack .
 Wuhan fell in October 1938 after a fierce battle on the part of Chinese defensive troops . The city was captured by the Chinese government in 1938 .
 Chongqing remained the wartime capital until the end of the war in August 1945 . The Nationalist government was once again forced to relocate to Chongquing . Chongqong was the Nationalist's wartime capital .
 Anti-Japanese War; Guomindang; Jiang Jieshi; Nanjing, Rape of; Nationalist Army; Northern Expedition; Taierzhuang, Battle of Taierhhuang . Nanjing was Nanjing's first capital city; China's second largest city
 On October 19, 1935, Mao Zedong and the First Front Red Army completed the Long March when they arrived at the CCP-controlled area in the Shaanxi -Gansu region . The Long March was completed by the CCP Central Committee .
 Moscow eventually located the CCP Central Committee in Shaanxi and resumed their telegraph communication, which they had lost since October 1934 at the beginning of the Long March . By July 1936, Moscow had located the Communist Party's Central Committee .
 Yan'an became the command center for the Chinese Communist revolution through the Anti-Japanese War in 1937-1945 and the Chinese Civil War in 1946-1949 . Yan’an was the center of the Communist revolution in China during the Chinese anti-Japanese war .
 CCP established the political and military coalition, or the United Front, with the GMD in 1936 . Red Army reorganized the Red Army into the National Eighth Route Army and New Fourth Army, totaling 60,000 troops .
 The CCP high command reorganized its forces into the People's Liberation Army in 1949 . The People’s Liberation Army won the Chinese Civil War . The CCP won the war with the Chinese Communist Party .
 The CCP celebrated Yan’an as the birthplace of the Communist revolution . After the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, the CCP celebrated the birth of the Chinese revolution .
 In January 1937, the Anti-Japanese Military Political College at Yan’an was established . Lin Biao (Lin Piao) was the president of the college . Liu Bocheng was the vice-president of the school .
 Mao and other leaders visited the university frequently and gave lectures to the officer-students . Mao's lectures were often held at the university .
 By 1939, the university had 10 branch campuses all over the base regions . The university had ten branch campuses .
 Some European and American journalists and doctors also arrived at Yan’an . Anna Louise Strong and Edgar Snow are among those who arrived .
 Mao interviewed Mao and wrote a book about the CCP and Yan’an entitled Red Star over China . The latter interviewed Mao himself and wrote about Yan'an and the CCP .
 Many of them participated in the opening up of wilderness for crop cultivation, the raising of hogs, and the making of cloth at Yan’an . Many of the people participated in opening up wilderness for crops and hogs .
 The most difficult logistical problems for the bases were resolved by 1943 . After that, the bases continued to expand .
 On July 22, 1944, the first team of the “American Observation Group’s” arrived in Yan'an . The first team arrived in China in 1944 .
 By the spring of 1945, Yan’an had 19 CCP-controlled regions, or the “liberated areas,” with a total population of 95 million . The CCP had control of 19 regions with 95 million people .
 To win final victory over Japan and prepare for the decisive victory of the Chinese revolution, the CCP convened in Yan’an its Seventh National Congress .
 U.S. ambassador Patrick Hurley proposed joint postwar government in 1944 . Before WWII ended, to avoid collapse of the CCP-GMD coalition, United States ambassador visited Yan’an and proposed a joint government .
 Jiang Jieshi invited Mao for peace talks in Chongqing for 43 days in August 1945 . Jiang invited Mao to stay in Chongquing, China .
 The two parties resumed their military conflicts in north China . Since both sides had a different political agenda, the negotiations failed .
 Jiang changed his war strategy from broad assaults to attacking key targets . In the Chinese Civil War, from March 1947 to August 1948, he changed his strategy . Jiang's war strategy was to attack key targets rather than broad assaults .
 CCP strategic offensive began from August 1948 to October 1949 . When GMD offensive slowed down, the CCP offensive began . When the GMD Offensive slowed down .
 Southern Song army won the decisive battle . Under the command of Yue Fei, Yue Fei won the battle . Yue Fei led the army to victory .
 The northern Jin dynasty, the Jurchens, began to attack the Northern Song dynasty in 1125 . The Jurchens attacked the northern Song dynasty before attacking the Jin dynasty .
 The Song emperor lost the war in 1127, and the Northern Song dynasty collapsed . The Song dynasty was ruled by the Song dynasty until 1127 .
 In May 1139, the Jin army under the command of Wanyan Zongbi (known as Wu Shu), invaded the south . The Jin army invaded the southern kingdom of China .
 Emperor Gaozong of the Southern Song ordered Yue Fei to defend the strategic point of Huainan . Yue Fei was the first person to defend a strategic point in China's history .
 Wanyan Zongbi, however, did not attack Huainan, but retreated to Kaifeng, China . He did not return to Huainen, though, but instead retreated to the city .
 Yue Fei thought the best chance to destroy Jin’s army was at that moment . Yue Fei said he wanted to kill Jin's army at that time .
 He ordered his infantry troops to attack the Jin’s garrison at Zhongyuan and occupied Zhengzhou . Zhengzhou was the first city to be occupied by the Chinese army .
 Yue Fei ordered Liang Xing to cross the Yellow River, to assemble peasants loyal to the emperor and attack Beizhou County . Liang's death was the first time Liang had crossed the river . Liang was killed by Yue Fei's soldiers . Liang died in the fall .
 Wanyan Zongbi launched a surprise attack at Yancheng, where only a few Song troops were stationed . Noticing that Yue Fei’s forces were scattered, the attack was a surprise .
 On July 8, 1139, Wanyan Zongbi led 15,000 cavalry and 100,000 infantry troops to the north of Yancheng .
 Yue Fei ordered his son Yue Yun, who commanded light-horsemen, to attack the enemy center . Yue Fei was killed by Yue Yun's son Yue Yue Yun . Yue Yun commanded light horsemen to attack enemy center.
 Central troops were the Jin’s most experienced troops, called Iron Soldiers . They wore iron armor . The central troops were known as Iron Soldiers because of their armor .
 On both sides of the Iron Soldiers were the Jin’s cavalry . In addition, on both sides, the Jin's cavalry also fought for Jin .
 Yue Fei knew that although the Iron Soldiers were well equipped from head to toe, they were not flexible . Yue Fei also knew that, although they were well armed, they would not be flexible .
 Yue Fei ordered his Beiwei and Youyi cavalry units to attack the enemy cavalry followed by the infantry, who were equipped with Mazha swords and axes . Yue Fei's Beiwei, Youyi and Beiwei cavalry units attacked .
 Thousands of Jin soldiers were killed in the battle, leaving their bodies littering the ground . The battle was the first of its kind in China, killing thousands of soldiers .
 Following his defeat at Yancheng, 14 days later, the Jin army attacked Yingchang Fu . 14 days after his defeat, he was attacked by his army . The Jin army was defeated by the army .
 Yue Fei again ordered his son Yue Yun to lead the Beiwei cavalry with its supporting infantry to aid the local commander Wang Gui at Yingchang Fu . Yue Yun led the Beywei cavalry to aid Wang . Yue Fei ordered Yue Yun again to lead his son to help Wang
 At the subsequent Battle of Yingchang, the Song troops gained another victory by using similar tactics . The Song troops used similar tactics to win the battle .
 Emperor Gaozong of Song was looking for a peace negotiation and unwilling to allow Yue Fei to press on his advance . Yue Fei's advance was halted by the Emperor of Song, who was unwilling to stop it .
 The emperor sent out 12 gold orders recalling the troops under the command of Yue Fei . Thus, the emperor sent them out .
 Yue Fei was jailed and then poisoned in 1142 . When his army retreated back to the south, Yue Fei's army retreated . Yue Fei died of his injuries .
 Song emperor signed a peace treaty, the Shaoxing Peace Accord, with the Jin dynasty . That year, he signed a treaty with the Song dynasty . The treaty was signed by the Song emperor, who died in 2011 .
 Song Dynasty; Song, Song, Fortified Cities; Song-Mongol War; Yuan Dynasty; Yue Fei . Song Dynasty: Song Fortified City . Song, Yue Fei: Yue Fei. Yue Fei, Song Dynasty .
 Yang was bom in July 1907 in Shuangjiang, Tongnan County, Chongqing, Sichuan Province . Yang was born in 1907 and died in July 1908 .
 In spring 1926, he went to Shanghai and prepared the first and second armed uprisings among the manufacturing workers to cooperate with the GMD-led Northern Expedition against the local warlords . He was the leader of the Northern Expedition .
 Yang Shangkun started his military career in the Chinese Red Army in 1931 . He returned to China in 1931 and went on to serve in the Red Army . Shangkun died in 1953 .
 He was one of the most influential Communist leaders in China during the 1980s and 1990s . He served as president of China and commanding the People's Liberation Army .
 He and Peng Dehuai led their Third Army as the vanguard of the Red Army’s Long March of 1934-1935 . He led their third Army .
 The Third Army started the Long March on October 17, 1934, from Jiangxi Soviet. The Long March was started by the Third Army . The march was the first of its kind in China .
 In January 1935, Yang Shangkun attended the Zunyi Conference and supported Mao Zedong’s leadership and strategy . Shangkun was a member of the Communist Party of China .
 That August, he was promoted to deputy director of the General Political Department of the Red Army . He was promoted in the summer of that year .
 Mao and Zhang Guotao split during the political crisis of the Red Army during the Long March . Zhang was a commissar general of the Chinese army . Mao was a leader of the Communist Party of China .
 Ye Jianying fled Zhang's headquarters to Mao’s camp with maps and code books . Yang and another officer also fled with some important documents from Zhang's HQ with important documents .
 They had to hide during the day and travel at night in order to escape Zhang’s search cavalry . Zhang had the search cavalry. They hid during the night and traveled at night to escape the search .
 Eventually, they made it to Mao’s headquarters with these important documents . The documents were taken from Zhang's headquarters .
 Yang Shangkun was deputy secretary of the CCP North China Bureau during the Anti-Japanese War of 19371945 . He worked with Liu Shaoqi (1898— 1969) behind the Japanese lines .
 Yang became secretary of the North China Bureau in 1939 . He worked with Zhu De and Peng Dehuai to cooperate with the military operations of the Eighth Route Army . Yang was involved in the Hundred Regiments Campaign in 1940-41 .
 Zhou Enlai is the deputy secretary of the Central Committee of the CCP and director of the General Office of the CMC . That year, he became the . deputy secretary . of the . Central Committee . of China .
 Yang Shangkun was one of a handful of leaders who worked closely with Mao Zedong at Zhongnanhai . After the founding of the PRC in 1949 until the mid-1960s, he was a leader of the Communist Party of China .
 As the director of the Central Committee General Office, he oversaw most important party activities and military affairs . As a member of the Communist Party he oversaw party activities .
 He lost Mao's favor when he voiced his opposition to Mao’s policy . He supported Liu Shaoqi and Deng in their attempt to salvage China from the depths of the Great Leap Forward movement . Mao's policy was unpopular with the Chinese leader .
 Yang Shangkun was demoted during the Cultural Revolution and criticized by the Red Guards . As a result of his demotion, he was criticized for his role in the revolution .
 In 1982, he was appointed to the party’s powerful Politburo of the Central Committee . In 1982 he became one of the party's most powerful members .
 Yang’s friendship with Deng Xiaoping has strengthened his support for economic reform . This experience only strengthened Yang's support for China's economic reform as well as his friendship with Xiaoping .
 Yang was far less enthusiastic about political reform than other reformers, Yang said . Yang was a leader of China's pro-democracy movement in the 1980s and 1990s .
 His attitude of aggressive support for Chinese economic reform and conservative stand against political reform at the same time fit perfectly with Deng’s view . However, his attitude of support for reform and opposition to political reform earned him further trust, he says .
 Yang Shangkun was appointed the president of the People's Republic of China in 1988 . He was the first Chinese president to take office in the country's history . Shangkun is the current president of China .
 In practice, the state and party leaders still deferred to paramount leader Deng . Deng still leads the party .
 In October 1992 and March 1993, Yang Shangkun followed Deng’s call to eliminate the party leaders’ lifelong tenure . Yang Shang Kun followed Deng's call for eliminating party leaders' lifelong tenure in China . The party leaders were abolished in March 1993 .
 He withdrew from his position in the Politburo, vice chairman of the CMS, and president of China . He withdraws from his post as president of the country .
 Ye played an instrumental role in the political and military affairs of both the party and government . Ye played a key role in both the military and political affairs of the Chinese government .
 Ye is the only member of the CCP political-military elite officially identified as a member of a Hakka minority group . Ye is also the only person in the party to be identified as an ethnic Hakka ethnic minority member .
 Ye Jianying was born on April 28, 1897, in Meizhou County, Guangdong (Kwangtung) Province, China . He was born in 1897, and died in 1949 .
 Ye helped guard Sun during Chen Jiongming’s revolt against the Nationalists in 1922 . Ye personally helped guard the Sun during the revolt . Ye was a member of the Nationalist Party in China .
 Ye became assistant director of the Teaching Department at the Whampoa Military Academy in 1924 . Ye was assistant director at the Academy after the Nationalists defeated Chen and formed an alliance with the CCP .
 During Jiang Jieshi’s Northern Expedition, he assumed command of the Second Division . He rose to become chief of staff of the Fourth Army .
 The Comintern ordered the CCP to incite a revolution in Guangdong . After the Nationalist army recaptured the city, the Comintern .
 Most of the Chinese Communist generals, including Ye, opposed this plan . Ye is one of the most prominent members of the Communist Party in China . Ye was the leader of the pro-democracy movement .
 Communists were driven out of the city two days later . However, the results were disastrous and the Communist Party was driven out .
 Ye Jianying escaped the recriminations that followed and went to Moscow to study military science for the next five years . Ye went on to graduate in Moscow, Russia, where he studied military science .
 Ye returned to China in 1932 and became chief of staff of Zhang Guotao’s (Ch’ang Kuoo-tao) Fourth Front Army . Ye was the first Chinese officer to return to China . Ye died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 After the collapse of the Jiangxi Soviet in 1934, the Fourth Front Army moved from west Hunan Province to Sichuan (Szechwan) Province . The Fourth Front army was based in Hunan .
 They bore the brunt of the Nationalist attention and did not reach the relative safety of Sichuan to reunite with the Fourth Front Army until July 1935 . They did not return to safety until July 1936 .
 The joy of reunion was short-lived as a strategic debate and power struggle ensued between Mao and Zhang . Mao was Mao's successor, Zhang's wife, and Mao's daughter .
 Mao had eliminated many of his rivals earlier at Zunyi . Zhang had a larger force and had sufficient credentials and seniority to challenge Mao for leadership of the party . Mao had already eliminated many rivals earlier .
 Mao believed that north Shaanxi Province was the safest location for a new base . Zhang wanted to move northwest to try to establish contact with the Soviet Union . Mao believed northwest was the best place to establish a base . Mao wanted to establish contacts with Soviet Union, Zhang said .
 Mao had positioned himself and his allies within the Politburo and the Central Committee . Eventually, Zhang gained control of the army, but Mao's allies had positioned him within the party . Zhang gained controlled of army but Mao positioned himself within the Party .
 Mao departed with 11,000 members of the First Front Army on September 10 . Mao was forced to leave behind those that had been integrated into the Fourth Front Army . Mao had been forced to abandon those that were integrated .
 Ye defected to the First Front Army, taking maps and an alleged telegram proving Zhang’s intent to use force to bring Mao and the Central Committee into line . Ye took maps and a telegram from Zhang to prove his intent to force Mao and Central Committee .
 Mao later proclaimed that Ye had saved the party and the Red Army . He praised him for being cautious like Zhu Ge and keeping his head at important movements like Lu Duan . Mao later praised Ye for his actions .
 Ye became chief of staff of both the North Shaanxi Revolutionary Military Committee and the First Front Army . Ye is also the head of the first Front Army in Yan’an . Ye has been in Yan'an since 2011 .
 After the formation of the Second United Front with the Nationalist forces and the transformation of the Communist forces in Shaanxi, Ye retained his position as chief of staff .
 Ye returned to Chongqing after World War II and was active in the peace talks . Ye was also active in postwar peace talks between China and the Soviet Union .
 One of his key accomplishments was facilitating the movement of Communist forces in his home province of Guangdong to north China . His key accomplishments were facilitating the . movement of . Communist forces .
 In February 1947, with the civil war expanding and hopes of peace evaporated, hopes of hope evaporated . The civil war ended in February 1947 with the death toll rising .
 First task was to evacuate the CCP’s critical apparatus, cadre, and personnel before Nationalist forces seized the capital . He was immediately designated secretary of the Central Committee’�s Rear Committee .
 In July 1947, Ye moved his command to Xibaipo, Hebei Province to establish the temporary headquarters of the Central Tasks Committee, which was responsible for day-to-day business . Ye was born in July 1947 .
 Ye became mayor of Beiping after the Beiping garrison surrendered in February 1949 . He began preparing it to become the new capital of the Communist regime . Ye was mayor of the city in 1949 .
 One of his first tasks was restoring the city name back to the more prestigious title of “Northern Capital,” or Beijing . Beijing is now known as “Bean’s Northern Capital”
 Ye returned to his native home in south China to assume the highest political and military offices therein . Ye oversaw the initial transition of Beijing and handed off his duties to Nie Rongzhen . Ye is currently in charge of the military in China .
 During the first half of the 1950s, he was secretary of the South Central Bureau, commander of the . South China Military District, mayor of Guangzhou, and chairman of the Guangdong People’s Government .
 Ye soon lost these positions during the height of the Anti-Rightist Campaign, possibly due to his opposition to radical land reform in south China .
 Ye returned to Beijing in 1954 to become director of the PLA Military Equipment Supervision Department . Ye was director of China's military equipment supervision department in 1954 . Ye is credited with saving the country from poverty .
 The next year he was appointed Inspector General of Training and elevated to the rank of marshal . He was promoted to the position of inspector general of training in 2010 .
 Ye became the first president and political commissar of the PLA’s Academy of Military Science in 1958 . Ye was first president of the academy in 1958, and is now a senior PLA commander . Ye is a member of the National Communist Party of China's People's Party of
 In 1961 he was given control over a committee dedicated to military training and science . A year later, he was elected to the Central Military Commission (also known as the Military Affairs Commission), and in 1961 he became control of the committee .
 In these positions, he made strides toward modernizing, streamlining, and professionalizing the PLA . Lin Biao’s “red” reforms and the Cultural Revolution of 1966-1976 set the army back decades .
 Ye and other major military figures, including Chen Yi and Xu Xiangqian (Hsu Hsiangch’ian) launched an attack against the Central Cultural Revolution Leading Group, at the time led by Chen Boda and Jiang Qing (Chiang Ch’ing) Chen
 Mao defused the February Adverse Current by purging and marginalizing most of its participants . Mao was able to defuse the attack by removing most of the participants from the group . The February Current was deemed the "February Current"
 Ye escaped serious punishment, unlike Chen and Tan, who were public criticized and forced into semiretirement . Ye was able to escape serious punishment .
 After Lin Biao’s failed coup in 1971, Ye assumed responsibility for the day-to-day activities of the CMC . Ye became vice chairman of the Central Committee two years later . Ye was vice-chairman of the Communist Party Central Committee .
 Mao likely chose Ye for these senior posts in order to maintain some stability and professional leadership after the chaos of the Cultural Revolution . Mao was likely to have chosen Ye to keep some stability after the chaotic period .
 He also believed that Ye could work with the new party leadership, which would later be known as the Gang of Four . Ye believed that the new leadership would later become known as Gang of 4 .
 Ye’s act was highly symbolic, as it demonstrated his intent to not support the new regime with military backing . Ye said: “I’m not going to support [the new regime] in Syria. I’ll not be supporting [the regime] with
 In September, not long after Mao’s death, Hua secretly called on Ye and others to dispose of the Gang of Four . In September he secretly called for the Gang to be disposed of the gang .
 After securing the loyalty of key PLA Ye Ting | S17 units in the capital, the PLA is now in charge of the S17 . Ye-Ting: "S17 units are now in control of the capital. They are not only in China, but also in the
 Ye played a primary role in planning the arrest of the Gang of Four on October 6 . Ye also played a role in helping plan the arrest .
 Throughout the rest of the 1970s, he supported and helped elevate Deng Xiaoping to peacefully and gradually wrest power from Hua . Hua was the leader of China's first state-run state of the country .
 Ye remained a key political driving force throughout Deng’s reforms in the early 1980s . Ye was a key driving force in the 1980s, leading Deng's reforms in China . Ye is now a key figure in China's democracy .
 He continued to assume a number of prestigious titles in the 1980s . He was vice chairman of the CCP until that position was abolished in 1982 .
 Ye Ting was the commander of the New Fourth Army during the Anti-Japanese War of 1937-1946 . He was a Chinese Communist general . He fought against Japan in the anti-Japanese war of the same period .
 He was assigned to command and train what later became the Independent Regiment, an attachment of the GMD National Revolutionary Army’s Fourth Army . Recruited many CCP members and Communists graduated from the Whampoa Military Academy .
 After the GMD-CCP split in mid-1927, Ye fled and participated in the two abortive Communist uprisings in Nanchang, Jiangxi , and Guangzhou, Guangdong, in August and December, respectively .
 Ye’s appointment owed much to his connections with both the Nationalist and Chinese Communist military leaders during the 1920s . Ye was appointed by the Chinese Communist Party and Nationalist military leaders .
 After the Japanese took Xuzhou, Jiangsu, Ye’s forces operated behind Japanese lines north of the Yangzi River in May . Ye‘s forces operate behind Japanese forces north of Yangzi river in May.
 Ye’s rapid extension of operations in the Jiangsu-Anhui area and his victories over the Japanese mopping-up campaigns in southern Anhui in 1939 and 1940 aroused Nationalist suspicions .
 GMD leaders feared growing CCP power that might undermine its rule after the war . GMD leader feared growing power might undermine GMD rule after war .
 The situation culminated in the New Fourth Army Incident, also known as the Southern Anhui Incident, of January 1941 . The incident was the first Chinese invasion of China in 1941 .
 Ye was charged with insubordination to military orders and imprisoned for the remainder of the war until March 4, 1946 . He was set free as a result of repeated demands by the Chinese Communists . Ye was released in 1946 .
 Ye requested reinstatement of his CCP membership, which was immediately granted . Ye was released from prison after his release from his prison sentence .
 Ye’s plane crashed in northwest Shaanxi Province, on April 8, 1946, and he was killed . On the way from Chongqing , Sichuan Province, to the Communist base in Yan’an Province, China, was killed.
 Yijiangshan, a half-square-mile islet, belongs to the Dachen Island Group, which is about 20 miles off the coast of Zhejiang Province in southeast China .
 Yijiangshan, seven miles north of the Dachen, was the target of a landing campaign of the People’s Liberation Army during the First Taiwan Strait Crisis .
 On December 16, PLA field commanders met at Ningbo to discuss the Yijiangshan landing . They sent a request to the Central Military Commission for approval . The landing request is expected to be approved .
 Front commander Zhang Aiping, front commander, decided to launch landing of Yijiangshan on January 18 . General Chen Geng was deputy chief of the General Staff in charge of operations . The landing took place in the early hours of January 18, 2014 .
 The high command continually tried to avoid any conflict with the American forces in order to continue the civil war on Taiwan without disturbing the international Cold War .
 On January 18, 1955, the PLA front command launched the Yijiangshan landings . The landings took place in Yijangshan, China, on January 18 .
 Zhang’s 10,000-men attacking forces had overwhelming numerical superiority . Zhang‘s 10.000-man attacking forces were overwhelmed by numerical superiority. Zhang's 10,500-man attack forces were outnumbered by 10,800 men .
 54 bombers and 18 fighters raided key GMD positions, headquarters, and defense works at both Yijiangshan and Dachen . At 8:00 A.M. to begin the attack, 54 bombers, 18 fighters attacked .
 Coastal artillery at Toumenshan began a two-hour bombardment of Yijiangshan . Then, at 12:20 P.M., coastal artillery began to bombardardard .
 Second Battalion, 180th Regiment landed first on the south side of the island . First Battalion, 178th Regiment, landed on the east, followed by the Second and Third Battalions .
 By 2:00 A.M. the PLA had annihilated all remaining GMD pockets of resistance . The next morning, the PLA destroyed all remaining pockets of GMD resistance .
 The Navy lost one landing craft sunk and had 21 ships damaged . The Air Force suffered no losses except eight bombers and fighters damaged .
 The GMD command on the Dachens was badly shaken by the Yijiangshan’s loss . GMD commands on the Chinese side of the border .
 Eisenhower administration persuaded Jiang Jieshi to withdraw his troops from the Dachens with American assistance . The Eisenhower administration, for example, persuaded Jiang to withdraw with American help .
 Between February 8 and 12, the Seventh Fleet helped the GMD evacuate some 25,000 military and 18,000 civilian personnel from the Dachen Islands . The Seventh Fleet was involved in the evacuation of 25,500 military personnel . The GMD evacuated the islands .
 Nanjishan Island was evacuated on February 22 after the U.S. would not assist in the defense of the island . The island was evacuated after the GMD was informed that the United States would not aid the defense, it was also evacuated .
 By February 26, all of the East China Sea offshore islands along the Zhejiang coast were under PLA control . The islands were under control of by February 26 .
 Genghis Khan (Chinggis or Chengiz Khan) established the most powerful medieval military system of the time, which dazzled their Chinese opponents . Kublai’s grandfather and the Mongol leaders established the . most powerful . medieval system .
 Mongol army used ferocious terror tactics, sparing cities that offered no resistance but often massacring all inhabitants of those that did . The Mongol army often massacred those who did not offer resistance .
 Genghis Khan unified different Mongolian tribes through warfare to become one country called Yeke Mongghol Ulus . In 1206, Genghi Khan unified the Mongghi tribes to be one country .
 After Genghis Khan established the Yeke Mongghol Ulus, he constantly led his army in campaigns to enlarge his territory . The army was constantly involved in expanding its territory .
 He conquered the Kara-Khitan Khanate in 1218, exterminated the Khwarezm-Shah dynasty in 1219, and even expanded to Eastern Europe . He conquered and exterminated several European dynastates, including the Khwarzan-shah dynasty .
 Yeke Mongghol Ulus continued his predecessor’s expansion . After Genghis Khan‘s death, Yeke was the first Mongol ruler to conquer the world .
 Mongol army conquered Jin dynasty in 1234 . Kublai Khan conquered the Jin dynasty . The Mongol army defeated the Chinese dynasty .
 Kublai cavalryman even fought to the heart of Europe in 1241, conquered Tibet in 1246, extinguished the Dali dynasty in 1253, extinguished Dali in 1254 . He even fought in Europe and conquered Tibet, conquered China and Tibet .
 Kublai Khan announced that he was the emperor of Yuan in 1271, formally establishing the Yuan dynasty . In 1271 he announced he was Emperor of Yuan .
 Yuan finished its expedition of unification in 1279 after conquering South Song . Yuan conquered South Song and finished its unification of the country . Yuan was victorious in South Song after conquering the Song .
 The unification of China by the Yuan ended the political division that began during the last years of the Tang dynasty . The unification ended political division between the two sides .
 In the central government, the administration included both Mongols and Chinese in the Central Secretariat . The Privy Council and Censorate were in charge of military affairs and supervision of officials .
 Provincial and county administrations were also inclusive in a dual system . Locally, both provincial and county governments were inclusive in the system .
 Tibet region was organized as an administrative unit directly under the control of the central government . For the first time in Chinese history, the Tibet region has been organized as a unit under central government control . Tibet is now an administrative administrative unit under control of China's government .
 The links between the various minorities were strengthened, and the links along the border helped economic and cultural development . The links were strengthened by the links between minorities .
 Mongol domination over Eastern Europe and central Asia made Eurasian trade possible and profitable . Because of Mongol domination, it was possible to trade in Europe and Asia .
 He engaged in trade and also worked in the local government during the Mongols’ Yuan dynasty . He was also involved in the Yuan dynasty's local government .
 Mongol rulers forcibly took over large amount of land from Chinese peasants and distributed them among garrison troops and temples . To maintain a large army and support their military campaigns, the Mongol rulers .
 In addition to taxes, taxes, in terms of produce as well as labor service, were extremely heavy . In addition, taxes on produce and labor service were extremely high .
 Mongol rulers also appropriated peasants’ horses for military purposes . The Mongol rulers used horses to carry out their military operations .
 The highest class belonged to the Mongols; followed in order by the Semu people, including Xia people and the Uygurs in the northwest and those who had migrated to China from central Asia .
 The purpose of this division was to prevent people of the other nationalities from forming a united front against the Mongols . People of the different nationalities were not able to form a unified front against Mongols.
 Cruel oppression by the Mongols precipitated resistance on the part of all peoples . Cruel oppression led to resistance against all peoples, including the Mongolians .
 In 1351, the “Red Turban Army” rose up in Yingzhou, Anhui (Anhwei) Province, China . peasants in many other places favorably responded to peasants .
 One of the peasant forces captured Dadu, overthrew the Mongol regime, and established the Ming dynasty in 1368 . Dadu was captured by peasant forces .
 Genghis Khan; Kublai Khan; Ming Dynasty; Mongols; Silk Road; Song Dynasty; Song, Fortified Cities; Song-Mongol War; Tibet; Yue Fei; Zhu Yuanzhang, Emperor .
 Yuan Shikai was a Chinese military reformer, Qing dynasty official, and president of the first Chinese republic . He was also known as the founder of the Qing dynasty, and the president of China's first republic .
 Yuan Shikai was born in Xiangcheng on September 16, 1859 . He gained early diplomatic and military experience in Korea and in Shandong Province . He impressed foreigners by vigorously attacking Boxer rebels in 1900 .
 Yuan's quest for power and awareness of China’s weakness led him to a cautious, even accomodationist foreign policy, avoiding confrontation and accepting foreign loans secured by economic concessions . Yuan: "China's weakness is its weakness. It is its vulnerability"
 When war diverted Western attention, Japan advanced at China’s expense, it was at the expense of the young republic . Prior to 1914, countervailing imperialist aspirations and some foreign sympathy for Yuan's administrative reform efforts usually prevented any one power from asserting too much pressure .
 Yuan declared nonbelligerency in July 1914, seeking British support to neutralize China . Yuan sought British support for neutralizing China in order to achieve non-involvement .
 Japan immediately pressured Yuan to exempt German-dominated Shandong from non-belligerency . Japan also demanded that the Chinese government exempt itself from nonbelligerecy .
 Tokyo delivered the Twenty-One Demands that would have given Japan considerable influence over China in 1915 . The demands included enjoining the Chinese to strict secrecy and enjoining them to secrecy .
 Yuan played his limited diplomatic cards skillfully, leaking the demands to Westerners and dragging out negotiations . Yuan played the diplomacy skillfully and dragged out negotiations.
 He feared stoking popular nationalism that might have unified the nation against imperialism only to unleash greater Japanese aggression or even consume his own government . But he feared it might have unleashed greater aggression or consume his government .
 Beijing won modest support from Washington and London, where both governments feared Japan’s demarche threatened their own Asian interests . Beijing won the support of Washington, London and Washington .
 Yuan diluted Tokyo's demands somewhat but accepted Japan’s ultimatum in May 1915, earning widespread condemnation for his capitulation . Yuan was widely criticized for accepting the ultimatatation .
 Yuan attempted to revive a monarchical government, creating even more protests and defections from former allies . Yuan's final year of his life was spent trying to revive the monarchy . Yuan died at age 81 .
 China, Republic of China of; Guomindang; New Army; Qing Dynasty; Qing dynasty; Sun Yat-sen; Warlord Period. Beiyang Army; Boxer Rebellion; . Boxer . Rebellion; Chinese, Chinese people; Chinese people: Chinese people,
 Anglo-Chinese Diplomacy in the Careers of Sir John Jordan and Yuan Shih-kai, 1906-1920 .
 He was falsely accused of treason but was hailed as a national hero in subsequent centuries . He was wrongly accused of being a traitor but later hailed as national hero . He died in 17th century in France .
 Yue Fei was born in 1103 in Tangyin, central Henan Province, probably into a poor family . Yue Fei is one of China's most famous women .
 Before long, he was named commander in chief of the Southern Song forces .
 Jurchen tribes established the Jin dynasty in northern China in 1115 . They completed their conquest of the Northern Song dynasty in 1127 . The Jin dynasty was established in 1114 .
 The Southern Song dynasty was weak and seemed doomed to be conquered in what became known as the Song-Jin Wars . The Song dynasty died out of control in China in the early years of the Song dynasty .
 Yue Fei met the invasion head-on and frustrated the Jin cavalry in the rugged hills where he chose to engage the enemy . Yue Fei fought the Jin army in the mountains .
 Yue Fei coordinated his land campaigns with the Song navy and recaptured all Song territory south of the Yangzi River . He chased the Jin north of the River as far as Luoyang .
 Yue Fei commanded the Song army and defeated the Jin’s invading army led by Wanyan Zongbi at Yancheng in 1139 . In 1139, Yue Fei was the leader of the Song Army and commanded the Jin's invading army .
 On July 8, 1139, Wanyan Zongbi led 15,000 cavalry and 100,000 infantry troops to the north of Yancheng . Wongbi and Zongxian led the troops .
 Yue Yun led a group of light-horsemen to strike hard at the enemy center . Yue Yun leads the light horsemen to attack the enemy's center .
 The central troops were the Jin’s most experienced troops, called Iron Soldiers . They wore iron armor . They were called the Iron Soldiers because of their iron armor.
 He ordered his Beiwei and Youyi cavalry units to attack the enemy cavalry followed by the infantry, who were equipped with Mazha swords and axes . Thus, he ordered his Bebewei, Youyi and Beiwei cavalry units .
 Some of them wished to continue the war and push the Jin farther north, others wished to accommodate the Jin and make peace . Others wished to make peace with the Jin .
 Yue Fei led the group who wanted to keep fighting, and his main political opposition came from Emperor Gaozong’s prime minister, Qin Hui, who headed the peace effort group . Yue Fei was the leader of a group that wanted to continue fighting .
 Emperor Gaozong was also looking for a peace negotiation and unwilling to allow Yue Fei to press on his advance . Yue Fei was also unwilling to let his advance into the city .
 The emperor sent out 12 gold (most urgent) orders recalling the troops under the command of Yue Fei . Thus, the emperor sent them out .
 Yue Fei was jailed and then poisoned on trumped-up charges in 1142 . When his army retreated to the south, Yue Fei's army retreated . Yue Fei died on the side of the border .
 In 1162, the new emperor, Xiao Zong, rehabilitated Yue Fei’s reputation and ordered a magnificent tomb and temple built in Hangzhou to honor him . Yue Fei's reputation was restored in 1162 and his tomb was built in the city .
 The temple, which still stands, includes cast-iron statues of Qin Hui, his wife, and two other conspirators . All four bound as prisoners and kneeling in submission to the man they murdered . The temple still stands .
 Mongols are Mongols; Mongols, Cavalry of; Song Dynasty; Song, Fortified Cities; SongMongol War; Yancheng, Battle of; Yuan Dynasty. Mongols .
 Zeng rose through the civil service examination system to earn the jinshi degree in 1838 . Born on November 26, 1811, in Xiangxiang, Hunan Province, to a family of modest means, Zeng .
 Zeng had been exposed to the movement known as the School of Statecraft while a student at the famous Yuelu Academy in Shanhua, Hunan . He was exposed to a number of concerned scholarofficials .
 Unlike later reformers, Zeng never lost faith in the imperial system ruled by the Qing . Reforms he championed sought to harmonize the imperial state with a changing world .
 The period of Zeng’s fairly routine duties in Beijing also saw the forming of personal habits that permitted him to achieve the great successes of his later career . Zeng's Beijing job saw him form the foundation for his later success .
 From his thirties on, Zeng imposed on himself a strict, even ascetic, moral and physical discipline . Zeng is known for his strict and ascetic lifestyle .
 He became famous for his personal rectitude, sincerity, assiduity, selflessness, and most interestingly, an almost obsessive tendency to self-criticism . He was known for his own rectitude and sincerity .
 Zeng kept a diary in which he recorded all of his failings, reproached himself, and outlined the path to self-improvement . Zeng's diary was a diary that he kept to record all his failings .
 Zeng Guofan was appointed sub-chancellor of the Grand Secretariat (an outer-court body subsidiary to the powerful grand secretaries who advised the emperor) and vice president of the Board of Rites . He had begun a systematic study of the most important of China’
 By 1850, he had turned his attention to geography and the closely related issue of China’s armies . By 1850 he had focused his attention on geography and China's armies .
 Zeng submitted to the emperor a memorial describing the nation’s military weaknesses and a set of recommendations . On April 10, 1851, Zeng was deeply worried by the outbreak of the Taiping Rebellion .
 By late 1852, when Zeng received the command to organize troops in Hunan to face the Taipings, the growing rebellion had begun what was to become a series of military successes against China’s imperial army .
 Local gentry troops led by members of provincial gentry would confront Taiping forces far more vigorously than had the Qing banner armies and Green Standard Army .
 On October 14, 1854, the Xiang Army, commanded by Lo Zenan and Jiang Zhongyuan, recaptured the city of Wuchang (in Hubei Province), a strategically important port city on the Yangzi River that imperial troops had failed to take .
 Zeng and the Taiping had captured Nanjing (Nanking) and renamed it Tianjing . Meanwhile, the Taipings had captured Nanking, and it was there that the final conflict would take place . The Taiping renamed Nanjing Tianjing after capturing Nanking .
 Much of Zhejiang was under Taiping control by 1860 . After a series of battles along the Yangzi, much of the region was under control .
 Three armies closed around Nanjing from different directions, eradicating Taiping resistance along the way . Meanwhile, Zeng Guofan’s organization had never been stronger, and inexorably his three armies .
 Even as he was making war against the Taipings, Zeng was involved in a number of important reforms . Zeng became a leader of China in the 1930s .
 Self-Strengthening movement that was expanding among intellectuals hoped to make China a stronger state by introducing a number of institutional changes based on Western examples . Self-strengthening is a movement that aims to make the country stronger .
 Zeng's belief in the importance of technical improvement led him to set up the Jiangnan Arsenal in Shanghai in 1865 . In 1862, Zeng tried to construct a steamship without much engineering expertise .
 The arsenal not only manufactured firearms but also built ships and sponsored the translation of modern Western books . The latter constituted a truly crucial innovation, since the arsenal also manufactured ships and books .
 Zeng was deeply involved in the reconstruction of Jiangsu, Jiangxi, and Anhui, all of which had suffered greatly during the Taiping Rebellion . During a short respite from military responsibilities, Zeng took up the duties of governor-general . Zeng became governor-
 Zeng initiated a program aimed ultimately at severing the connection between the rebels and the local population of hilly north China . Ordered in May 1865 to take over the battle against a loose affiliation of bandits and good-for-nothings .
 Zeng recommended that Li Hongzhang replace him . But official criticism, difficulty establishing authority over his officers, and slow progress combined to frustrate him .
 In 1867, Zeng was made grand secretary; the following year he was governorgeneral of Zhili . In 1871, he was transferred to his old post as governor-general of Jiangnan, Jiangsu, and Anhui .
 Zeng’s last significant public action was the drafting of a joint memorial with his longtime colleague Li Hongzhang . Zeng's last significant action was drafting a jointly memorial with Li .
 Two scholar-generals urged the emperor to arrange for groups of young scholars to be sent abroad . China sorely needed to resist and compete with increasingly predatory foreign powers, they said .
 The memorial was sent on August 18, 1871, and the following year, a group of Chinese students sailed for the United States . The memorial is sent to the U.S. and was sent in 1871 .
 Zeng did not live long enough to hear news of the embarkation, dying on March 12, 1872 . Zeng died long before he could hear the news .
 In many regards, Zeng represented the last of a traditionally revered species, the civil servant . Civil servant held in one hand the scholar’s writing brush and in the other a sword . Zeng was a civil servant who held both writing and sword .
 It is a peculiarity of Chinese history that many of the great military leaders who defended the imperium utterly lacked practical training of a military officer .
 He established regulations for printing businesses in important Yangzi River cities . Not only did he have a printing press set up in his military headquarters in 1864, he also patronized celebrated scholars .
 It is clear that Zeng also inspired, by his triumphant example, the growth of local military satrapies . Zeng was quite innocently, undermined the dynasty for which he worked and fought for so many years .
 Confucian-Mencian Paradigm; Hong Xiuquan; Li Hongzhang; Nian Rebellion; Qing Dynasty; Self-Strengthening Movement; Sino-French War . Taiping Rebellion; Taiping rebellion; Xiang Army; Zuo Zongt
 Zhang was born in Pingxiang County, Jiangxi Province, in November 1897 . Zhang was the first person to be born in China to Chinese people .
 Zhang was involved in the May Fourth movement in 1919 . Zhang was a valuable student leader forming the student Marxist movement . Zhang became a valuable leader in the student movement .
 Zhang became the CCP’s top party official at the first National Congress of the CCP in 1921 in Shanghai . Zhang was the leader of the Communist Party of China .
 He was elected a member of the Central Bureau of the CCP and began organizing the work of professional revolutionaries . He is now a leading figure in the CCP .
 He became the director of Secretariat of the China Labor Union and the chief editor of Labor Weekly . After his time in congress, he became the head of the Chinese Labor Union .
 Zhang participated in the Congress of the Peoples and of Revolutionary Organizations of the Far East . Zhang attended ECCI meetings in the Soviet Union in 1922 . Zhang was a member of the Communist Party of China .
 He organized the Peking-Hankow railroad workers’ strike, which was one of the first strikes by a large-scale union . He organized a strike in the first strike by the first union .
 Zhang headed the Yangzi Region Bureau and sat in the Politburo through the Fifth Congress . At the Fourth CCP National Congress in 1925, he was one of the organizing leaders of the Nanchang Uprising . He was later removed on August 7, 1927 following the defeat of the
 He was able to regain his official positions at the Sixth CCP National Congress in Moscow in 1928 . He was elected a junior member of the ECCI, using the name Zhang Biao . In 1928 he was elected to a junior membership of the Communist Party .
 Zhang was known for his opposition to Moscow’s policy of joining and/or allying with the Guomindang . Zhang was also known for opposing Moscow's policy to join or ally with the Chinese .
 Staying in Moscow gave Zhang a different perspective, and by December 1930, he made friends with Wang Ming’s Twenty-eight Bolsheviks . Zhang stayed in Moscow for three years .
 Some still believe that it was Zhang, not Mao, who led the Communists to victory in CCP’s Agrarian Revolutionary War (19271937) over the GMD army . Zhang led the Communist Party to victory .
 Zhang was put in command of the base in Eyuwan in April 1931 . Zhang was the representative of the Central Committee under Wang Ming . Zhang became a representative of Wang Ming's Central Committee .
 Eyuwan’s association with the ‘traitor’ Zhang Guotao explains history gaps of the revolution . Eyuwon’t beamed with the 'traitor' Zhang Guoto explains the history gaps in the revolution.
 Zhang's assignment in Eyuwan was to aid the Shanghai leadership’s efforts to centralize the scattered rural bases . Zhang was assigned to help centralize Shanghai's rural bases, which are scattered across China .
 Zhang denied that he carried out Moscow’s line or opposed Communists in the area . Zhang denies that he carries out Moscow's line or that he opposed Communists .
 In 1932, he organized the Fourth Red Army and became the head of the Sichuan (Szechwan) Soviet . In 1932 he became the leader of the Chinese Communist Party .
 At the second congress of the Chinese soviets in January 1934, he was reelected vice president under Mao . He was re-elected Vice President of China under Mao in 1934 .
 At the Seventh Comintern Congress, he was elected to the ECCI along with Mao Zedong . He was elected along with the Communist Party of China's Second Party Party .
 Zhang and Mao united the Fourth and First Armies respectively in Sichuan on June 13, 1935 . Mao and Zhang had come into conflict during the Long March in 1934-1935 . Mao had come to conflict with Zhang during Long March .
 Mao headed to the north with 8,000 troops to northwestern Shaanxi and Gansu Provinces . Zhang returned to southwestern Sichuan with 11,000 soldiers . Mao returned to the southwest of China with troops .
 Zhang Guotao and his supporters came under siege by Mao Zedong in 1937 . Zhang's supporters were killed by the Communist Party of China's Second Party .
 He was often humiliated by Mao, becoming an easy target, and was too proud to ally himself with Wang Ming . Wang Ming was acting as the Comintern’s representative in China .
 Zhang opposed Mao at two Politburo meetings in 1937 . Zhang fell from power and defected to the Guomindang in 1938 .
 After the defeat of the Guomindang in 1949, he went into exile after the Chinese Communist victory, first to Hong Kong and then to Canada with his wife in December 1968 .
 Zhang served as squad leader, platoon leader, and deputy company political instructor of the Fifth Company, Thirty-Sixth Regiment, Twelfth Division in 1947-1948 . Zhang served in the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949 . Zhang was a member of the Thirty-sixth
 He was regimental staff officer and chief of the communication section of the Thirty-Sixth Regiment in northeast China from 1948 to 1950 . Then he became regimental . staff officer . He was chief of communication section . section of Thirty-sixth Regiment .
 Zhang became the head of the Operation Section of the 369th Regiment, 123rd Division, Forty-First Army, in 1950-1956 . Zhang was also the staff member of the 40th Army Headquarters of the Chinese army .
 In 1956-1958, he served as deputy commander and chief of staff of the 368th Regiment . In 1958-1960, he was the top commander of the 369th Regiment in the Army .
 From 1961 to 1962, he was deputy commander of the 367th Regiment, 123rd Division, Forty-First Army . He was also deputy commander in 1961-62 .
 He became chief of the Operation Department of the Guangzhou Military Region Command in 1966-1968 . Then he became commander of the 127th Division, Forty-Third Army, in 1968-1978 .
 Zhang was commander of the 127th Division when the Sino-Vietnam Border War broke out in 1979 . Zhang was deputy commander of China's Forty-Third Army in Vietnam .
 He led his division into Vietnam, and it had the best performance among all the PLA troops, he said . He said .
 He was awarded the Third-Class Liberation Medal and achieved Great Honors five times . He was also awarded the Order of Mer Mer Meritania .
 Zhang had moved up from a squad leader to a regiment, division, and army commander . Zhang had been a career soldier, moving up to become a regiment and division commander .
 He was soon promoted to deputy commander of the Wuhan Military Region in 1982-1985 . He was also deputy commander  of the Guangzhou Military Region and Guangzhou .
 He was appointed commander of the Guangzhou Military Region in 1987-1990 . He was made lieutenant general in September 1988 . He is now a senior commander of China's military region .
 Zhang became a member of the Secretariat of the Fifteenth CCP Central Committee in 1997 . In 1997, Zhang became an official in the Communist Party of China's Central Committee . Zhang is now a leading member of its Politburo .
 Zhang was the sole senior military representative at the changeover ceremonies in July 1997 . In July 1997, when Hong Kong was turned over to China, he was the only senior representative .
 Zhang and other generals became interested in flexing military muscle in order to get more budgetary allocations . Ideologues could capitalize on the strait crisis to reconstruct a nationalism employed as a new ideological base for legitimization; and the preparation for an expected or unexpected action in the .
 Zhang Xueliang (Chang Hsueh-liang) was a Chinese warlord in Manchuria (northeast China) and Nationalist general . He was a Nationalist General in China .
 Zhang graduated from Fengtian (the old name of Liaoning) Military Academy in 1920 . Joined his father’s army, resisting the growth of Japanese and Russian influences in Manchuria .
 In June 1929, the elder Marshal Zhang was assassinated, allegedly by the Japanese Guandong army . Zhang was killed in June 1929 by Japanese forces in China .
 The younger General Zhang became commander in chief of the Northeast Peace Preservation Forces . Zhang is the son of former Chinese President Mao Zedong . He is now the leader of China's Northeast Peace Protection Forces .
 Zhang-Jiang relationship developed strains after Mukden Incident of September 1931 in Liaoning . Zhang and Jiang's relationship became strained after the Mukden incident in September 1931 . Zhang's relationship with Jiang became strained in the 1930s .
 Zhang led his Northeastern Army out of Manchuria . Jiang’s nonresistance policy toward the Japanese advance led him to lead the army out .
 In January 1933, he engaged the Japanese along the Great Wall, defending Rehe province . Rehe is an old province of today’s northeast Hebei, southwest Liaoning, and southeast Inner Mongolia .
 Zhang resigned his military posts and went abroad on an inspection tour . Zhang was held responsible for the loss of Rehe in March . Zhang resigned from his posts in March and went on tour abroad .
 Zhang and Chinese Communist leader Zhou Enlai agreed on an anti-Japanese united front in mid-1936 . Li Kenong and Ye Jianying were the two liaisons behind the anti-Japan united front .
 Jiang remained the chief obstacle, which precipitated the Xi’an Incident of December 1936 . Jiang remained a chief obstacle to the Chinese government, which led to the Xi'an Incident .
 Jiang went to Xi’an to discuss the last anti-Chinese Communist campaign . Jiang visited China in early December to discuss anti-China campaign against the government .
 Zhang kidnapped Jiang on December 12 . Zhang, in cooperation with Shaanxi’s pacification commissioner, Yang Hucheng, kidnapped Jiang . Zhang was unable to convince Jiang to drop this plan, Zhang said .
 Zhang was arrested for insubordination and put under the National Military Council’s strict surveillance, thereby ending his public life . On arrival in China, Zhang was put under strict surveillance . Zhang died in 2011 at the age of 65 .
 In November 1946, he was taken to Taiwan and held in detention until 1991, when he went to the U.S. He was held in Taiwan until 1991 when he returned to the United States .
 They settled in the Wei River valley as vassals of the Shang but eventually grew stronger than their rulers . They settled there in Wei River Valley but became stronger than the Shang .
 Around 1122 BC, they fought and defeated the Shang and built a capital near Xi’an at Haojing in Shaanxi Province . They built the capital near the Shang capital near modem Xi'an .
 They quickly won the allegiance of other city-states, which had been dissatisfied with Shang rule . The Shang dynasty is one of the most powerful cities in the world .
 Zhou claimed they had a Tian Ming, or a mandate of heaven to rule . They called their emperor the son of heaven . The Zhou improved their position by claiming that they had the Tian Ming .
 The Zhou emperors lost power during that time as their feudal vassals began to realize that the empire was not all-powerful . The Zhou empire was ruled by the Zhou dynasty .
 Zhou rulers adopted some of the cultural styles of their Shang predecessors . They employed Shang artisans and adopted the Shang writing method . The Zhou rulers were the first to adopt some of these styles .
 They introduced a feudal form of government, presenting land to those who became their vassals . The land was presented to those people who became vassal .
 Under the Shang, property had passed from brother to brother, but now it passed from father to son . Property had passed between father and son .
 The Zhou adopted unique religious practices, including banning human sacrifice and worshipping the sun and stars . The Zhou banned human sacrifice, and worshipped the sun .
 Bronze work and agriculture flourished during the Zhou dynasty . Bronze work, agriculture, and trade flourished during this period .
 Warring States Period was also the classical age of Chinese philosophy, sometimes called the Hundred Schools of Thought Period . Though it was violent and unstable, the period was also a classical age for philosophy .
 Confucianism, Taoism, and Legalism all developed as philosophies . Sun Zi’s book The Art of War, a tactical maneuvering guide, appeared around that time . Confucanism and Taoism were developed in China as philosophies.
 Art of War, The', Confucian-Mencian Paradigm; Muye, Battle of; Qin Dynasty; Qin Shi Huangdi, Emperor; Shang Dynasty; Sun Zi; Warring States Period . Art of war, The. Art of . War, Art of
 Zhou Enlai was born in Huai’an, Jiangsu Province, on March 5, 1898, and adopted by his relatives . He received private education of traditional literature as a child . He was educated in traditional literature .
 In 1911, he studied in a secondary school in Shenyang, Liaoning Province, accepting the republican ideas . He accepted republican ideas in 1911, accepted the idea .
 Zhou learned Marxism-Leninism and the Russian Revolution during his education in Japan in 1918-1919 . Zhou was born in Tokyo, Japan, in 1918—1919, and died in 1919 .
 He traveled to France in 1920 on a work-study basis and joined the CCP the following year . The CCP was founded in 1920 .
 Zhou became a Chinese Communist leader as a student activist in 1920-1921 . Zhou was a member of the Communist Party in China . Zhou became the leader of China's Communist Party Party in 1921 .
 Zhou was appointed by Jiang Jieshi (1887— 1975) as director of the Political Department of the Whampoa Military Academy in 1924-1925 . Zhou was director of Political Department at the academy . Zhou died in 1975 .
 He became a member of the Central Military Commission of the CCP in 1926 . He was one of the first members of the Communist Party's Central Military Council .
 The CCP-GMD alliance broke down in April 1927 when the GMD purged the Communists from its ranks, precipitating a power struggle that lasted for two decades . The GMD was purged from the Communist Party in 1927 .
 Zhou launched the Nanchang Uprising to revolt against the GMD on August 1, 1927, which established the Communist armed forces . Zhou joined the other CCP military leaders and launched the revolt . Zhou was secretary of the CCP Field Committee .
 It was the beginning of the CCP’s Agrarian Revolutionary War and is celebrated as the birthday of the Chinese armed forces . The anniversary of the war is celebrated in China .
 Zhou was elected to the CCP Political Bureau in 1928 . Zhou became secretary-general in charge of military affairs o the Central Bureau in 1931 . Zhou was also secretary general of the Communist Party Central Bureau of China in 1931.
 Zhou became Mao Zedong's chief supporter when he emerged as the top leader, Zhou became his closest colleague . Zhou was Zhou's closest ally during Mao's rise as China's top leader . Zhou became Zhou's most powerful ally when he became Mao's chief backer .
 Together they led the Red Army in the historic Long March of 1934—1935 . The Red Army led the Soviet Union in the Long March .
 Zhou took on the vice chairmanship of both the Central Committee and CMC, making him second only to Mao in rank . Zhou had accepted a position he had accepted as early as 1935 . Zhou was second only Mao to be second only in rank behind him in China .
 They developed Communist forces through World War II through the Second United Front with Jiang Jieshi’s GMD in 1937-1945 . They developed . Communist forces .
 After the Pearl Harbor Attack in 1941, he initiated official contact with the United States government . He initiated the dispatch of the Dixie Mission to the CCP Headquarters at Yan'an .
 Zhou participated in talks with GMD with George C Marshall . Marshall was sent by President Harry S Truman to mediate a settlement between the two parties . When WWII was over, Zhou took part in the talks .
 Zhou served as the acting chief of the PLA’s General Staff during the Chinese Civil War of 1946-1949 . Zhou returned to Yan’an in 1947 and served in China during the war . Zhou was the head of the Chinese Army's General Staff at the time of
 Zhou supported Mao’s decision to lean to one side in the Cold War and supported the Soviet Union . When the CCP defeated the GMD in the summer of 1949, Zhou supported the USSR . Zhou was a member of the Communist Party of China .
 Zhou became the first Chinese premier and concurrently the first PRC foreign minister in 1949 . Zhou was also the first foreign minister of the Chinese Communist Party of China . Zhou is the current leader of the country's largest state-run government .
 Zhou’s responsibilities were wide-ranging, including the restructuring of the political system, the drafting of the constitution, the implementation of mass socialization, and the launching of economic reforms such as the five-year plans and collectivization . Zhou's responsibilities included the restructuring .
 In January 1950, he visited Moscow and secured the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance . The treaty also promised Soviet aid to modernize the PRC’s economy and military .
 These ties were meant not to place China in a subordinate position of dependence, but to construct a relationship conducive to their similar global and regional interests . These ties are meant to not be placed in a subservent position, says China's ambassador .
 Zhou always fully supported Mao despite occasional differences with Mao on matters such as intervention in the Korean War and the Great Leap Forward economic program . Zhou always supported Mao's policies, including intervention in Korean War .
 Mao supported Mao’s decision to enter the Korean War in October 1950 . Despite reservations as to the PRC's military readiness, he eventually supported Mao's decision . Mao wanted to prove PRC’S faithfulness to the socialist bloc .
 The conflict strengthened the two countries’ relationship by forcing increased military cooperation . The conflict forced increased cooperation between the countries .
 During the new Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev’s first state visit in 1954, it seemed these policies had achieved their goals . The two countries signed a declaration reiterating the equality of their relationship .
 Zhou survived the Cultural Revolution of 1966-1976, during which many senior party and government officials were purged or imprisoned . Zhou's loyalty, together with Zhou’s own popularity, enabled him to remain in office and survive . Zhou was one of the most popular leaders in China to
 Zhou's political longevity led to some consistency in the country’s foreign policy, particularly during the Cultural Revolution and the Sino-Soviet split in the same era . Zhou was a strong leader in China during the 1970s and 1980s .
 In his capacity as premier, he spent much of his time abroad, boosting the PRC’s international standing . The PRC has a strong reputation in China .
 His diplomatic approach was flexible and pragmatic with the developing world . His diplomacy was pragmatic and pragmatic, he said .
 Zhou's interest in the developing world became readily apparent in 1953 . Zhou’s interest in developing world was readily apparent .
 He perceived alignment with Asian and African nations as another path to elevating the PRC’s image abroad . The PRC's relationship with African nations has been strained in recent years .
 His approach to the developing world, termed the “Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence,” was first publicized at the Bandung Conference in April 1955 .
 Conference participants pledged to uphold and promote the Bandung Spirit . These became part of the so-called 'Bandung Spirit' of the conference .
 Zhou remained the chief architect of the PRC’s foreign policy while at the same time holding the position as premier of the State Council and senior member of the Politburo . Zhou's foreign minister post was technically transferred to Chen Yi in April 1958 .
 Zhou’s policy toward the developing world soon paid off, as Khrushchev advocated peaceful coexistence with the West . But Sino-Soviet relations began to deteriorate .
 By 1963, Sino-Soviet solidarity had all but disappeared, and over the next decade led to several instances of armed confrontation . Mao attacked Khrushchev’s revisionism, and by 1963, by 1963 the solidarity between China and the Soviet Union was all but dead . Mao
 Zhou looked to the developing world to redress the loss of the PRC’s erstwhile ally . The onset of the Cultural Revolution prevented him from forging closer ties with the Asian-African bloc .
 Zhou survived the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976, when most of the old leaders were purged and Liu Shaoqi (Liu Shao-ch’i) was president of the PRC, died in prison . Zhou survived from 1966-1976 .
 He tried to make compromises between radical idealists and conservative pragmatists . Exploiting his undisputed role as the chief administrator in the government .
 Zhou had to accept the injustices and impracticalities of Mao’s measures to disrupt the party apparatus and government bureaucracy . Zhou could not stop the revolutionary fever, however, and had to . accept the . injustices . of Mao's measures .
 With his acquiescence, extremists jailed or executed many conservatives, they distorted China’s foreign affairs with mindless zealotry and xenophobia, says Yang . Yang: “Extremists have distorted China's foreign affairs and distorted its foreign affairs"
 PRC’s early alliance with the Soviet Union inevitably meant an anti-U.S. stance . The PRC had a strong anti-US alliance with Russia .
 Zhou demanded that Jiang’s GMD representative to the UN be unseated and replaced with a PRC representative . Zhou had demanded that the PRC’D representative be replaced by a Chinese representative in the U.S.
 Jiang’s GMD still retained and to which the United States was still attached . The second issue was the island of Taiwan, which Jiang still retained . The U.S. still attached to Taiwan .
 Zhou frequently reiterated the PRC’s sovereignty over Taiwan and harshly criticized U.S. policies toward Taiwan . Zhou also harshly criticized the United States policies .
 Zhou never excluded the possibility of maintaining unofficial communications with the U.S. Zhou says he has never excluded possibility of U.N. communications with U.K. Zhou: "It's not a secret"
 His position bore fruit after the mid-1950s, when the PRC found itself increasingly isolated diplomatically .
 Zhou initiated what later became the Sino-American Ambassadorial Talks, first held in August 1958 . The talks provided the first direct channel for U.S.-PRC communications . Zhou initiated the talks at the Bandung Conference .
 Zhou did not abandon the hope of reaching an understanding with the United States with a view toward breaking his nation's diplomatic isolation resulting from the Sino-Soviet split and the Cultural Revolution .
 In late 1969, he proposed to Mao a normalization of Sino-American relations . The Chinese leader proposed to the Mao in late 1969 .
 He negotiated an end to the ban on the transfer of U.S. dollars to China and Chinese exports into the United States . He also negotiated a deal to end a ban on United States dollars transferring to China .
 Zhou met Nixon at the Beijing airport in February 1972 . Zhou attended the Mao-Nixon top summit in Beijing . In February 1972, Zhou met Mao at the airport .
 Zhou signed the Shanghai Communique, which normalized PRC-U.S. relations after 23 years of hostility . A week later, Zhou signed a Shanghai communique, normalized relations with the United States . Zhou's visit to China normalized relations between the two countries .
 This top-level summit laid the foundation for the formal establishment of the Sino-American diplomatic relationship, which was completed in 1979 . The summit paved the way for the diplomatic relations between China and the United States .
 Zhou met the Japanese prime minister Tanaka Kakuei in September 1972 to establish diplomatic relations . In September 1972, Zhou met Japan's prime minister in Beijing . Zhou became the first Chinese president to visit Japan in 1972 .
 Though diagnosed with cancer in 1973, he continued to meet U.S. officials . He was diagnosed in 1973 .
 He talked with President Gerald Ford during his state visit to Beijing in 1975 . President Ford visited Beijing during his visit to China .
 Zhou made important domestic policy changes at the Fourth National People’s Congress in 1975 . Zhou emphasized the economic development and the nation's modernization . Zhou became the first Chinese leader to make significant changes to China's policy .
 His death triggered mourning demonstrations that contributed to the overthrow of the Gang of Four . Deng Xiaoping succeeded Mao following his death later that year and replaced him with the more pragmatic Deng Xiaopi .
 Landless, his father worked as a field hand for a landlord in the village . His father worked in the field as a farmer .
 Five of the family’s 13 children died of starvation and illness during childhood . Five of them were children who died of malnutrition and illness .
 His uncle borrowed money from his uncle to send him to school in a nearby town from 1892 to 1904 . His uncle used the money to pay for the school he attended .
 At 19, he passed the Qing dynasty (16441912) county and provincial examinations . At 19 he enrolled in the regional school where some of the teachers had recently returned from studying in Japan .
 Zhu learned the Japanese language, about the Meiji Restoration, and reforming ideas from 1906 to 1908 . Zhu learned from 1906-19191918 .
 After his graduation, he returned to Yilong for financial reasons and taught physical education at an elementary school for one year . He also taught physical ed at the elementary school .
 He was frustrated by social problems in his isolated hometown under the Qing regime . But he was also frustrated by the social problems under the regime .
 He joined the Tongmenghui (the United League) after he enrolled in the Yunnan Infantry Academy in November 1909 . He was the first Chinese to join the United League .
 Zhu obtained the rank of second lieutenant, then captain in December, and major in 1912 . Zhu became a major at the end of the Chinese Revolution of 1911 . Zhu died in 1912 at the age of 25 .
 After the 1911 Revolution, he served as a company, battalion, regiment, and brigade commander in the warlord army of Yunnan . He served in Yunnan after the 1911 revolution .
 He studied The Art of War so well that he could recite the entire book and used it in strategic decision and battle planning during the Warlord Period . Soon he was known as the Chinese Napoleon .
 In 1916-1921, he became a victim of warlord politics and military plots, which forced him to resign from his post and leave Yunnan . He was forced to quit Yunnan in 1921 .
 Zhu De went to Europe for further military study and joined the CCP in Berlin in November . Zhu De was born in September 1922 in China .
 German police did not return his passport after he was released from jail . The German police have not returned his passport to him .
 Zhu enrolled in a short training program for international Communist leaders upon his request . Zhu was in Moscow at the request of Moscow's Communist Party leaders .
 In August 1927, he joined Zhou Enlai and other Chinese Communists . He led the armed revolt of the GMD army after Jiang Jieshi purged the CCP in April .
 Zhu's units lost some of their men during their urban battles . Zhu’s units were lost during the fall of the fall . Zhu's troops were killed in the fall, but Zhu was able to hold on .
 Zhu and the remnants of the Nanchang rebellion fled to the countryside in early 1928 . Zhu and remnants of his troops fled the countryside . Zhu was the leader of the Nationalist Party of China .
 He joined Mao Zedong by bringing 10,000 men to the mountains in April . Then he joined his father's army in April, joining him in the mountains . He was the first Chinese leader to join the Communist Party of China .
 They made the mountains the Jinggangshan Revolutionary Base and laid some groundwork for the Communist army . They laid out the principle of the party’s absolute leadership over the army .
 Following the Jinggangshan model, other surviving units established their military bases in the rural and border regions across the country . CCP surviving units have established their bases in rural areas across China .
 Zhu and Mao had created a military center at Jinggangshan for the Communist revolution . Zhu had created the military center for the revolution . Mao and Zhu created the center in order to protect the Chinese revolution .
 From 1928 to 1930, the Red Army engaged in many battles against the GMD and warlord armies . The Red Army successfully defended its military bases, forming 10 armies, about 70,000 men .
 Zhu became the commander in chief of the Chinese Red Army in 1930 . Zhu was the commander of the First Army Group of the Red Army . In 1929, he was the . commander of . the First . Army Group .
 In 1930-1934, Jiang concentrated a large number of the GMD troops and launched five Encirclement Campaigns against the Red Army . Jiang concentrated large numbers of his troops in 1930-34 .
 Zhu and Mao broke out from Jiang’s encirclement and began the Long March from central Jiangxi Province to northwestern Shaanxi Province . The Red Army survived and established the Second CCP-GMD United Front in 1937-1945 against the Japanese invasion of China .
 Eighth Route Army marched to enemy-occupied territories, where they carried out guerrilla operations and established military and political bases . The divisions of the Eighth Route army marched to the enemy-held territories .
 The Eighth Route Army increased from 46,000 men in 1937, to 220,000 in 1939, and 500,000 people in 1940 . The Eighth route Army was the largest in the war's early years .
 By the end of World War II, the CCP’s regular army had grown to 1.27 million men . The CCP's regular army now has a total of 1.28 million men, according to reports .
 Zhu became the commander in chief of the PLA during the Chinese Civil War of 19461949 . Zhu worked with Mao at the PLA Headquarters at Yan’an and devised the victory for the CCP over the mainland .
 The PLA regular forces increased from 1 million men in June 1946 to 2 million in July 1947, to 2. million in June 1948, and to 5 million in October 1949 .
 He was elected vice chairman of the Central People’s Government in 1949 . He was vice chairman . Vice chairman of Chinese People's Revolutionary Military Committee .
 He was elected the first vice president chairman of the PRC in 1954-1959 . He was also vice chairman of CCP in 1956-1966 . He is the current leader of the Communist Party Party of China .
 In 1959, he was elected chairman of the National People's Congress until 1976 . He served as chairman until 1976, when he was succeeded by Mao Zedong .
 Zhu was dismissed from his position on the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress in 1976 . Zhu is a former member of the Communist Party of China's People's Liberationist Party .
 Zhou Enlai supported him and prevented him from being harmed or imprisoned . Zhou Zhou enlai protected him from harm or imprisonment, Zhou said . Zhou died at the age of 92 in 2009 .
 Zhu was reinstated as the chairman of the NPC Standing Committee in 1971 . Zhu was in charge of China's National Communist Party of China . Zhu is now a member of the National People's Union Party (NPC) Committee .
 Zhu Yuanzhang was bom into a poor peasant family in a village in Fengyang County, Anhui Province, on October 21, 1328 . He was born in a poor rural village in an area known as Fenyang County .
 Zhu began his ascent to power by establishing himself as a military leader who held his forces together by combining loyalty extending from him through his individual commanders and so on to each soldier . Zhu was a member of the Red Turbans, a Buddhist religious sect, a leader of the Buddhist sect
 Zhu immediately turned his attention to the Yuan regime in November of 1367 . The subsequent shift of warfare from the rivers and valleys of south China to the plains of north China and the steppe and deserts of Mongolia forced the dynasty to face a completely new style of warfare .
 Zhu Yuanzhang took the reign title Emperor Hongwu (Hungwu) on January 23,1368 . He immediately sought to create a military system that would not be a burden on society . He established the Ming dynasty in 1368 .
 Ming dynasty began due to the uprising and creation of a religious movement . The Ming dynasty was founded by the uprising of the 13th century .
 Zhu participated in the religious-led rebellion of the Red Turbans, in which Zhu participated, was successful in disrupting and ultimately toppling Yuan Empire . Zhu was the leader of a religious revolt against the Yuan dynasty .
 However, this religious group, although successful to some extent, still lacked the military control and organization needed to create and control a large and diverse area . However, the religious group still lacked military control .
 Zhu Yuanzhang not only experienced firsthand, but he was also well aware of, the imperfections and instability of weak military and political organizations . He was well aware that, as well as being well aware,, he had to deal with the flaws of the weak military .
 He saw these in his involvement during the Red Turban uprising and through his experiences with the Yuan dynasty as well as his experiences .
 His experiences and personal interactions with the Red Turban uprising, the Yuan resistance, and battles with the Mongols instilled in him the idea that a high level of military control and loyalty were key ingredients to Chinese unification and dominance .
 Zhu’s weak education and Buddhist background caused friction with Confucian gentry, resulting in an empire that placed a majority of the power and decisionmaking process into his hands or those of his sons . As imperial princes, Zhu replaced the generals who helped him create the empire .
 He had eliminated a number of government positions in order to assume a more central position in the decision-making process . The move was part of a plan to become a central role in the government .
 This included the dissemination of military control to a multitude of commissions in the hopes that this group of officials would keep one another in check . This group of commissions was meant to be kept in check by the military .
 Zhu’s military initiative had to come directly from the top and reflected his desire for control . This splintering of power meant that military initiative must come from top . Zhu's desire to control was reflected in his desire to take control of China .
 Early Ming views and practices with respect to economics, social policies, religion, and other ideologies were firmly controlled by the emperor himself . The emperor's belief in order and control encompassed all areas of Chinese life .
 He regulated religion, implemented mass transfers of people to invigorate agriculture in remote areas . He instilled a complex and vast mutual surveillance system to further limit power .
 Fear of political strife, coups, and external threats did as much to shape these economic and sociopolitical factors as they did in shaping weapons development and the control and organization of its armed forces .
 Emperor Hongwu maintained a large army, estimated at 1,198,442 regular soldiers in 1392 . The emperor's army was estimated to be at least 1,200,000 soldiers .
 The goal of outfitting half with firearms clearly shows the importance the emperor placed on these weapons . The goal was to outfit half the emperor with firearms .
 Ming would become the primary disseminator of firearms technology by the beginning of the sixteenth century and the world’s first gunpowder empire . As a result, the Ming became the world's first gun powder empire .
 Zhu Yuanzhang recognized that territorial expansion was limited by military capability . He took on more of a defensive approach, realistically being content with current geographic borders .
 Zhu realized that military force was the means to obtain political aims . His influence on China’s sociopolitical development shifted focus from expansion to regulation, control and stability .
 Zhu’s label of holder of the proclaimed Mandate of Heaven had to be won by military victories and force . Zhu had to win the title by force and military victories .
 His understanding that loose political control led to a weak and disloyal military would be reflected by future Ming policies, institutions, and military organization, he said .
 When Ming armies were successful, it was directly related to their ability to wage war as a means of achieving political aims . When the Ming armies won't be defeated, they were able to achieve political aims, says historian .
 Zhu Yuanzhang centralized social and institutional developments in China . He also centralized military matters at his sole discretion .
 Ming China’s military organization saw a series of practices that helped remove the potential of local leaders rising in power and strength . Out of personal experience and presumably out of fear for internal rebellions and coups, Ming China's military .
 Ming China knew that a strong military was needed to rule China and to continue its dominance in East Asia . Ming China wanted to continue to dominate the region . China knew it needed a strong army to rule the country .
 Jiang Jieshi concentrated 1 million GMD troops and launched his Fifth Encirclement Campaign against the Red Army . In the summer of 1933, the president of the Republic of China launched his 5-inch campaign .
 The Long March strived to save the Red Army by moving its main strength away from the GMD-controlled central region and to develop a new strategic initiative in remote region .
 Central Red Army suffered heavy casualties during its western movement due to the needed protection of the Central Committee and party administration, which traveled all the way with the army .
 Central Committee held an enlarged meeting at Zunyi, Guizhou Province, that criticized Wang Ming’s ‘left’ opportunism in military command and operations . Zuo Zongtang | S43 .
 Mao became a standing committee member of the Politburo at the meeting . Mao is emerging as one of the CCP leaders at the top . Mao has been a key figure in the Communist Party of China since his rise .
 The CCP became a more independent party and departed from Moscow’s total control . Thereafter, the CCP became an independent party .
 Mao, Zhou Enlai and Wang Jiaxiang appointed as the Red Army high command in charge of its organization and operation . The CCP appointed Mao as the highest-ranking officer of the army .
 Mao’s promotion prepared him as the undisputed leader at the top of the CCP party and military structure . Mao was promoted to the rank of the Communist Party of China's top military command .
 Zuo Zongtang (Tso Tsung-tang) was a key military and administrative official of the Qing dynasty (16441912) He extinguished the Taiping Rebellion and began the ‘SelfStrengthening movement’ to modernize China’s
 Zuo Zongtang was bom in 1812 in Xiangyin County, Hunan Province, where he was a sickly child . Zuo was born in Hunan province .
 His father could not afford to pay someone to teach his three sons the classics . Therefore he taught them himself himself .
 Zuo succeeded in the local civil service exams, but his parents’ deaths prevented him from taking the provincial exams . Zuo's parents died after he took the exams in 2011 .
 He bypassed the second level, by purchase, to sit for the metropolitan exams, which he repeatedly failed . The second level exam was by purchase and he bypassed by purchase .
 Zuo Zuo began reading Chinese books on geography, political economy, and farming . Discouraged by his prospects in the civil service, Zuo read Chinese books about geography .
 His industry and practical knowledge frequently impressed high officials who became his lifelong patrons, including Lo Ping-chang . He was known for his practical knowledge .
 When Zuo Zongtang became a military advisor for Hunan Province, it was widely reported that Lo was governor, but Zuo actually governed . Lo was reported to be the governor of Hunan province . Zuo was a military adviser to Zuo .
 Zuo was promoted to senior secretary of the Board of War with a peacock feather . By 1856, Zuo had been promoted to Senior Secretary of War . Zuo died in 1856 at the age of 92 .
 Zuo was commissioned to create the Chu Army of 5,000 soldiers, a smaller force than Zeng Guofan had . In 1860, when southern province Hunan was rife with Taiping rebels, Zuo created a smaller army . The Chu Army was created in 1860, and
 Zuo’s character was outspoken, dictatorial, and overbearing, which frequently alienated him from Zeng . Zuo often clashed with Zeng. Zuo's character was often overbearing .
 Zeng recognized Zuo’s usefulness, as when Zuo and his army drove the brigands out of Hunan and southwestern province Guangxi and into eastern province Zhejiang by late 1860 . Zeng and Zuo were able to drive brigands from Hunan to Guang
 Zuo had finally accomplished his first real military success at the age of 49, when most Chinese generals would have already hung up their armor . Zuo's first real success was his first major military success in China's history .
 For the next few years, he fought in southeastern Fujian Province against Shih Wang and Chuang Wang . The generalissimo of the rebels was also involved in the fight .
 Zuo was granted joint positions of military commander and governor of Zhejiang . By 1861, Zuo had been granted the joint positions . Zuo became a prominent leader in China's eastern province .
 Even repeated bouts of malaria could not forestall Zuo and his army for very long . Zuo's army could not be defeated by malaria . The Chinese were defeated by repeated malaria bouts .
 Zuo would not permit his men to scavenge food and supplies from the local populace . Contrary to the prevailing practices of Chinese armies, Zuo refused to allow his men scavenge from the locals .
 He repaired dikes, planted cotton, and erected woolen mills wherever he campaigned . He knew that the resuscitation of war-ravaged territories was ultimately more productive .
 Zuo would more often promote men of ability over men of learning . If men were strong and capable, it did not matter to him if they were illiterate, Zuo said .
 When Zeng’s brother finally penetrated the walls of the Taiping capital at Nanjing, Zeng announced that their leaders Hong Xiuquan (Hung Hsiuch’uan) and his son had been killed . Zeng's brother announced that his brother and his
 Zuo reported to Beijing that the Taiping prince had fled to Huzhou in Zuo’s domain . However, Zuo told Beijing that he had fled . The prince was reported to have fled to Zuo's domain, but was not killed .
 Zuo made the acquaintance at Huzhou of two Frenchmen who would occupy his next few years . Prosper Giquel and Paul d’Aiguebelle were among the two men he met in Huzou .
 The "foreign gun squad" began with a few steamers in 1864 . The Fuzhou Arsenal and Fuzzhou Dockyard was established in 1867 .
 Zuo was promoted to viceroy and governor general of Fujian and Zhejiang in 1866 . In 1866, Zuo became governor general and vice-regent general . Zuo died in 1881 .
 Zuo was called away to quell various religio-ethnic conflicts spreading through northern China . Zuo had been called away from quelling various religious conflicts .
 During the days of the Taiping, the Nian Rebellion had been festering along the northern borders of central provinces including Hubei , Anhui, and Jiangsu as well as the southern borders of eastern provinces such as Henan .
 After Nanjing fell, predatory guerrilla gangs of bandits became more active in those five regions . In Nanjing, China's capital, Nanjing is one of China's most populous cities .
 The great Manchu general Sangkolin was killed trying to pacify them, and they completely bedeviled Zeng Guofan . They completely bedevililed the Manchu .
 Both Li Hongzhang and Zuo Zongtang were dispatched with Western weapons . They reduced the Eastern and Western Nian armies to roving gangs in 1866 . The Western Nians were defeated by the Western armies .
 A few years earlier, Han Chinese in those provinces had formed anti-Taiping militias, which prompted the Hui to form their own protective anti-Han militia . The Hui formed their own militia after the Taiping militias were formed by Han .
 The Hui rebels wanted to establish a Muslim emirate comparable to the Taiping’s quasi-Christian empire . The Taiping was a quasi-Christine-influenced Muslim empire .
 Zuo first pacified Shensi, then laid siege to Jinji Fortress in Gansu, executed rebel leaders and “washing-off’s Muslims in 1871 . Zuo then executed the rebel leaders .
 Zuo then attacked Hezhou, where the Muslims capitulated and were spared in 1872 . Hezhou was spared by Zuo, who then attacked the Muslim city .
 Zuo drove further westward into Xinjiang, where his artillery pummeled the remote bastion of Soozhou into submission, and he executed its garrison in 1873 . Next, Zuo killed the garrison in Xinjiang and executed the garrison .
 For his victories against the Muslims, Zuo was made grand secretary in 1874 . Zuo won the title of grand secretary of the Chinese state of the Republic of China .
 Zuo Zuo was made First Marquis Kejing of the Second Class . He was recalled to Beijing to sit on the Grand Council . For those accomplishments, he was made a Marquis .
 Zuo was dispositionally illsuited for such an appointment, so he was granted leave to become viceroy of ‘LiangJiang’ at Nanjing . Zuo died at the age of 80 in 1881 .
 At almost 80 years old, Zuo donned his general’s armor to defend Fujian from the French fleet . Three years later, at almost 80, he again donned the armor to protect Fujian against the French .
 French bombarded Zuo’s beloved Fuzhou Arsenal and Dockyard in 1884 . A dispute had arisen over Indo-china, and to emphasize their supremacy .
 Zuo Zongtang ‘faded away’ in 1885 . Shortly after that crisis was resolved, like a faithful old soldier, he "faded" away .
 Hong Xiuquan; Li Hongzhang; Manchus; Nian Rebellion; Opium War, First; Qing Dynasty; Self-Strengthening Movement; Taiping Rebellion; Zeng Guofan . Zeng Zeng is a Chinese poet of the Song dynasty
 Zhou or Western Zhou dynasty begins . Han or Western Han dynasty begins. Zhou or Zhou dynasty . begins .
 Southern Song dynasty begins Northern Qi dynasty with Lin’an as the capital in begins the south . Lin'an is the capital of the Southern Song, which began in the south of China .
 Whampoa Military Academy was founded with Jiang Jieshi as its commandant . Jiang was the commandant of the academy . The academy was founded in 2008 .
 The National Revolutionary Army was founded with Jiang as its commander . Jiang is now the head of the army's first major military force .
 Truman sends Marshall to China for further mediation . Marshall sent Marshall to meet with China's leaders in 1950s and 1950s . U.S. president Truman sends him to China to mediate .
 Geneva Agreement signed and French troops withdraw from Vietnam, August-September: The First Taiwan Strait Crisis begins . First Taiwan Stra Crisis begins in Taiwan Strait crisis in Taiwan in August 1950 .
 The mass organizations begin to overtake Shanghai; other cities follow . Shanghai is the first major city to have mass organizations overtake Shanghai .
 2 million officers and soldiers of the PLA are employed to restore order through military administrative committees . To prevent civil war, 2. million officers, soldiers and civilians are employed by the PLA . The Chinese government is trying to prevent a civil war .
 Mao begins a purge in the military and appoints Ye as defense minister . Mao begins to purge the military after appointing Ye as chief of state department . Ye is one of the most prominent figures in China's history .
 President Richard Nixon signed the Shanghai Communique . Nixon visited China in 1972 and signed the document . Nixon's visit to China was the first time he had visited China .
 Ford agrees to terminate the U.S. Taiwan Defense Treaty and withdraw United States military forces from the island . Ford visits Beijing and withdraws United States forces from Taiwan . Ford visited Beijing in 1973 and signed the treaty to terminate .
 About 240,000 people killed, 164,000 severely injured, and 779,000 injured . An earthquake measuring 7.5m. on the Richter scale rocks Tangshan and becomes the largest earthquake of the twentieth century .
 Maoist leaders, or the Gang of Four, are arrested by Hua Guofeng, Mao’s successor . Maoist leader's arrest is the first of his kind in China since Mao's death . Mao's successor Hua Guoofeng is now the leader of the Gang
 Deng becomes the first PRC leader to visit America, holding talks with Jimmy Carter and signing the protocols . Deng is also the first Chinese president to visit the U.S. since 1979 .
 The Fifth Plenary Session of the Fifth NPC adopts the new constitution . The Fifth NPC adopts a new constitution. The Fifth NPC adopted the new Constitution .
 Fourteen coastal cities and the island of Hainan are opened to foreign investment . The island is open to investment by foreign investors .
 The First Session of the Seventh NPC adopts two constitutional amendments on private property and protection of the ownership . The amendments were adopted by the First Session .
 The government establishes martial law and deploys 22 infantry divisions in the cities . Martial law is declared in response to the threat of terrorism .
 The PLA troops open fire at the students and citizens at Tiananmen Square, estimated thousand casualties . Estimated thousand casualties from the shooting .
 The First Session of the Eighth NPC makes nine important changes as amendments including some changes in the Preamble to the Constitution . The Eighth NPC is the first session of the eighth NPC .
 The State Council promulgates the Regulations on the Administration of Sites for Religious Activities . The regulations were promulgated by the State Council .
 China fires missiles near Taiwan and conducts military exercise in the Taiwan Strait . China has conducted military exercises in Taiwan Strait in recent years .
 China becomes third country in the world to have independent human spaceflight capability . China becomes the third country to have independently human space flight capability .
 The Ministry of Public Security estimates 10,000 women and children are abducted and sold each year . Between 2 and 4 million women are involved in prostitution, the ministry says .
 Official statistics show 31 million people are below the poverty line . Official figures show that 31 million are in poverty .
 An earthquake measuring 8.6 magnitude rocks Wenchuan, Sichuan, China . The quake measured 8.5 magnitude on the Richter scale . It was the largest earthquake ever recorded in China .
 Official statistics show at least 69,000 killed, 374,000 injured, 18,000 still missing, and 4. million people homeless . Official statistics also show that at least 4.6 million people are homeless .
 President Obama explains the significance of civil liberties to Chinese students in Shanghai . President Obama visits China and explains civil liberties in China .
 Akmal Shaikh is executed by lethal injection by Chinese authorities . He was convicted of drug smuggling in October . Shaikh's execution comes after he was found guilty of smuggling drugs into China .
 Google says it will no longer cooperate with China's censorship laws . The company will not comply with the country's censorship law .
 Fourth Plenary Session of the Eleventh National Congress approves the 12th Five-Year Plan and accepts Xi Jinping as the new leader . Xi Jinping is the new Chinese leader .
 During and after the incident, more than 180,000 officers, soldiers, and civilians were killed or wounded in the city streets of Wuhan . More than180,000 people, including soldiers, died or wounded during and after incident .
 Most of the important top top CCP, PRC, and PLA meetings, such as the Politburo, were and still are held there . Most important top CCP and PRC meetings are still being held there.
 America’s Response to China; A History of Sino-American Relations.th ed. America's Response to . China . A history of China's relations with the U.S. in China . China's relationship with the United States.
 Modernization and Revolution in China; From the Opium Wars to World Power. 4th ed. Modernization of China . Modernization . in China . From the opium wars to world power .
 Across the Taiwan Strait; Mainland China, Taiwan, and the 199596 Crisis Crisis . Mainland, Taiwan and China are at odds over the future of the region .
 Timothy C Dowling Associate Professor of History Virginia Military Institute Kim Draggoo Independent Scholar Pham Cao Duong Independent Scholar James B Emmons Independent Scholar Dr. James Emmons independent Scholar . Dr. Dowling is a History Professor at Virginia Military School .
 Dr. John M Jennings is a member of the John Jennings Department of History at the U.S. Air Force Academy . Dr. Jennings is an Air Force Historian at the Academy .
 He is the author of A History of the Modern Chinese Army, Voices from the Vietnam War, Civil Liberties in China . He is also co-author or co-editor of Voices From the Korean War .