 Thirteen days movie worksheet includes United States/1945 – 1991; World/Russia and Cold War; SOCIAL-EMOTIONAL LEARNING — Leadership; Brothers; Peace/Peacekeepers; MORAL-ETHIC EMPHASIS — Responsibility. Continue Thirteen Days
 This film is on TWM's short list of the best films to complement United States History classes, High School Level . TWM: "This is on a short list"
 At the height of the Cold War, the U.S. discovered that the Russians are secretly installing nuclear missiles on the island of Cuba . In 1962, the United States discovered that Russia had installed nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 President John F Kennedy convenes a team of advisers to help decide how to respond to the crisis . President Kennedy meets with advisers to decide how best to respond .
 Thirteen days shows President Kennedy's leadership to tackle the challenge . President Kennedy resists demands for airstrikes and invasion that would have triggered a nuclear holocaust . President JFK's leadership shows he resisted demands for strikes and invasion .
 Kevin Costner, Bruce Greenwood, Steven Culp, Dylan Baker and Dylan Baker star in the film . Director: Roger Donaldson.
 Thirteen days catches the tension caused by the crisis . It gives as an example of how foreign policy was made in the last half of the 20th century .
 It allows students to understand the importance of diplomacy and leadership in senior office . Students will be able to learn about diplomacy, leadership and leadership skills, says the author .
 Students will get a glimpse of this period in U.S. history and the Cuban missile crisis . Students will also learn about the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Students will exercise research and writing skills in the expression of these ideas . Students will be able to use their research skills to express these ideas in their writing .
 Thirteen days can be a valuable supplement to the study of the Cold War, but only if serious deapressions are left and discussed . The Cold War can be valuable, but it can only be left out of the book, which was published in 2007 .
 The Useful Background section of this Tutorial provides the information needed to make these corrections . The useful background section of the tutorial provides the necessary information to make corrections .
 You may want to read the useful background information in this guide if your children want more details about the Cold War .
 Thirteen days is the story of humanity's closest brush with nuclear armageddon . The film is based on the book, "Thirteen Days of Nuclear Armageddon"
 The film provides an example of how foreign policy was made in the latter half of the 20th century . The film undertays the tension that the crisis caused and provides the tension .
 The film shows how wise leadership during the crisis saved the world from nuclear war . Errors and errors in judgment led to the crisis . Complemented by the information provided in this Tutorial .
 The film is an excellent platform for discussions about the Cuban missile crisis, the weapons during the Cold War, and current foreign policy problems .
 With the corrections described in this Tutorial, the film can serve as a motivator and supplement for a unit about the Cold War .
 As terrified as the world was in October 1962, not even policy makers had realized how close the situation really was . The world was terrified as much as it was in .
 Kennedy thought the likelihood of nuclear war was 1 in 3, but the administration didn't know many things . Kennedy thought it was a good idea, but didn't have many things to say .
 For example, he believed that the missiles were not operational and that there were only between 2 and 3,000 Soviet people . He believed that only 2-3,000 people were in existence .
 The airstrike was planned for the 30th, before nuclear warheads could be installed . Consequently, the airstrike was scheduled for the month of April 30 .
 In 1991-92, Soviet officials revealed that 42 had been in place and fully operational . In 1992-93 Soviet officials said that 42 of the facilities had been fully operational.
 These could force U.S. cities all the way to the Canadian border . Cities could force United States cities to the border .
 In addition, 9 SRBMs were ready to be used against the Americans in the event of an invasion . The U.S. was also prepared to use 9 SR BMs against an invasion of Russia .
 The Soviets had tactical nuclear weapons that local commanders could use to repel an attack . Local commanders were authorized to use the weapons to defend themselves .
 This meant that a U.S. invasion had been carried out... there was a 99 percent chance that nuclear war would have started . This was the first time a nuclear war had been possible .
 Although the crisis began and ended in October 1962, the story began much earlier . The story began with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Almost immediately after World War II, relations between the Soviet Union and the U.S. deteriorated, ending cooperation that allowed the allies to defeat Nazi Germany . Relations between the two countries deteriorated almost immediately after the war .
 Russian occupying forces survived their tour of duty in the Middle East . Russia's occupying forces were stationed in the region for more than a decade .
 Britain and America thwarted the Soviet Republic's expansion from Azerbaijan to Iran . Britain and U.S. tried to restrict Soviet expansion by trying to restrict it .
 As the Cold War took hold, Americans were alarmed by the spread of communist regimes in Eastern Europe and East Asia . Americans were worried about the spread in East Asia and Eastern Europe .
 The Soviets were concerned about postwar unity between the U.S. and the powerful nations of Western Europe . The Soviets feared that the United States and Western Europe would be divided .
 Both the communist bloc and capitalist democras paraded from crisis to crisis . Both the communists and democrats paraded through crises to crisis. Both are now in crisis .
 Soviet blockade of Berlin, Korean War, U.S. spy planes crossing Russian airspace . Chinese bombardment of taiwanese islands Quemoy and Matsu . Egypt and western allies Israel, France and Britain over Suez Canal .
 More than a hundred million people would have died in the U.S. and NATO countries . The United States and NATO nations would have lost more than 100 million people .
 While there were defenses to the long-range bombers, there were no defenses at ICBMs or IRBMs . ICBm and IRBm were not protected by the U.S. Air Force .
 In 1962, the United States knew that its nuclear forces were much stronger than those of the Soviet Union . The U.S. government realized that losing its major cities with victims approaching 100,000,000 people was not acceptable .
 "No U.S. government could allow Europe to be destroyed," says Obama . "Through treaty obligations and as a practical matter, no United States government would allow Europe destroyed"
 The Soviets acutely felt the inferiority of their nuclear deterrence . However, the Soviets felt inferiority to their nuclear deterrent .
 The effort to place missiles in Cuba was an effort by the Russians to improve their nuclear capability quickly and economically . The effort was part of an effort to improve the nation's nuclear capability .
 Missile-ready tents where fuel and maintenance took place . Missile conveyors and missile-ready tent were used to transport missiles .
 The Kennedy Administration increased military spending and increased its leadership in nuclear weapons over the Russians . While at the same time refusing to deauthorize a first nuclear strike, the U.S. continued to increase military spending .
 Despite the Bay of Pigs debacle, the U.S. continued its efforts to destabilize Cuba and assassinate its dictator, Fidel Castro . In addition, the United States continued to try and destabilize the country .
 The Soviet leadership did not realize how much the United States feared Russia's nuclear deterrent . The U.S. feared the threat of the Soviet Union's nuclear weapons .
 Nikita Khrushchev began a program to secretly place intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba . In an attempt to redress the imbalance in nuclear missiles and ensure that the U.S. would not mount another Cuban invasion, the dictator of the Soviet Union secretly placed the missiles .
 These missiles would be capable of reaching nearly all continental U.S. dollars . They would be able to reach nearly all of continental United States dollars .
 The CIA learned of suspicious activity from intelligence sources on the island . The U.S. sent U-2 spy planes to investigate .
 President Kennedy summoned his advisers before announcing the discovery to the world . When a U-2 returned with photographs of missile sites under construction, Kennedy summoned advisers .
 While some recommended diplomacy, others lobbied for military options, such as airstrikes or the invasion of Cuba . Some recommended diplomacy .
 President Kennedy adopted a middle-of-the-ground approach in which the U.S. Navy quarantined the island of Cuba, preventing any additional missiles or offensive weapons from reaching .
 The U.S. mounted a diplomatic offensive trying to use world opinion to the Soviets to eliminate the missiles . Meanwhile, the U.N. tried to use the world's opinion to help the Soviets get them to eliminate missiles .
 The Soviet ships tested the blockade, but eventually chose not to challenge the quarantine . The Soviet vessels tested the quarantine, but ultimately chose to not challenge the blockade . The quarantine was quarantined until the end of the Cold War .
 The missile battery will shoot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot . The U.S. allowed ships with food and fuel through quarantine through quarantine .
 In secret negotiations, Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missiles in Cuba . In secret talks, he agreed to remove them from Cuba .
 In a confidential side agreement, the United States promised the future withdrawal of 15 obsolete Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The U.S. also promised to withdraw 15 obsolete missiles from the country .
 President Kennedy had ordered these missiles removed months earlier, but because of the Turkish's objections and bureaucratic inertia, the missiles had remained in place . The missiles were ordered removed by Kennedy months earlier .
 After the Cuban missile crisis, superpowers moved to reduce the risk of a nuclear confrontation . Superpowers move to reduce risk of nuclear confrontation in order to avoid a confrontation .
 Difficulties in communications found during the crisis led to the installation of direct telephone communications to avoid future misunderstandings .
 Future U.S. presidents and Soviet leaders conducted Strategic Arms Limitation Talks in the 1960s and 1970s . Talks were to limit the number of nuclear warheads willing to attack the other side .
 The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1969 attempted to limit the spread of nuclear weapons to other countries . The treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1969 .
 Never again would the United States and Russia reach the same level of threat that characterized these thirteen days in October 1962 . Never again .
 The following additional backgrounds will be useful for understanding the concerns of the participants and their statements .
 Leaders of western powers agreed to the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia to appease Hitler . At a conference in Munich held to consider Hitler's demands, leaders agreed to dismembered the country .
 Hitler promised that if Germany absorbed Sudetenland, he would not seek any additional territory . Hitler promised to not seek additional territory if he absorbed the territory .
 Neville Chamberlain returned home saying he brought peace back in our time . Neville Chamberlain was British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain . Chamberlain was Prime Minister of the Second World War .
 The Munich conference convinced Hitler that France and Britain were weak, leading to the German invasion of Poland . The conference convinced him to invade Poland, leading him to the invasion .
 Britain and France declared war on Germany after realizing their mistake with Czechoslovakia . Realizing their mistake, the two countries declared war against Germany .
 His father, Joseph P Kennedy, had been one of the few millionaires to support Franklin Roosevelt in the 1932 election . Kennedy's father was a millionaire who supported FDR .
 Ambassador Kennedy supported the Munich compromise . On private wires at the State Department and in public speeches, he supported the compromise .
 From munich time until long after the U.S. had declared war on Germany, Joseph P Kennedy advocated a commitment to Hitler and isolated foreign policy . Kennedy's isolationist foreign policy lasted for decades .
 President Kennedy, as a young man, had written a best-selling book criticizing the appeasement . President Kennedy had written the book, which was published in 1963 .
 John Kennedy carried the burden of his father's position in favor of appeasement . Despite this fact, until the end of the missile crisis, John Kennedy continued to carry the weight of his position .
 On December 7, 1941, the Imperial Japanese Navy mounted an attack on the United States naval base in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii . The attack took place at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii .
 President Roosevelt labeled December 7 as a date that will live in infamy . Japan had not declared war on the U.S. President Roosevelt said December 7 was a date of infamy.
 The lesson that an adversary could mount a sneak attack had been absorbed by U.S. intelligence . U-2 flights and aerial reconnaissance that discovered the missiles were part of the U.N. mission .
 Fear of losing moral ground by mounting a sneak attack on missile bases served as a constraint on politicians, he says . Second, he said, was fear that the military would lose moral ground if it attacked missile bases .
 President Kennedy hid back problems that would have easily earned him an exemption from military service . President Kennedy, for example, volunteered for combat, hiding back problems .
 When the PT ship he commanded was sunk and sunk by a Japanese destroyer, Kennedy took his men to a small island several miles away . He saved a seriously injured sailor holding the leash to a lifesaver between his teeth while swimming .
 Kennedy was awarded the Marine Corps Marine Medal for his leadership and courage . Kennedy won the award for leadership and bravery .
 Russia had suffered more from war than any other nation in terms of casualties and property destruction . Russia suffered more than any nation in war than anyone else in the world .
 The men making the decisions during the Cuban missile crisis, in Moscow and the United States, knew firsthand the terrible effects of a major war . The men in the U.S. and Russia knew firsthand about the effects of war .
 Fidel Castro had only experience in a relatively painless civil war . Importantly, Fidel Castro did not have to go to war .
 Castro's willingness to provoke a nuclear war was one of the destabilizing factors of the crisis . Castro was willing to provoke nuclear war . As you will see, Castro was a key figure in the Cuban crisis .
 After World War II, the Allies (USA, USA, Great Britain and Great Britain) divided the German capital, the city of Berlin, into four occupation zones . The occupation zones were occupied by the Allies .
 Shortly after the war, western powers consolidated their zones into a new state called West Germany . West Germany was formed from West Germany following the war .
 Berlin's western sector, although deep in East German territory, became part of West Germany . Berlin's west sector was part of the West German territory .
 West Berlin's status and prosperity increasingly upset russians and East Germans . West Berlin increasingly upset East Germans and Russians . The status of West Berlin became increasingly important to East Berlin .
 The U.S.-led Western powers mounted an effective air elevator to bring supplies to the city . The air elevator was an effective way to get supplies into the city of Aleppo .
 Western democras made it clear that if the Soviets interfered with the airlift there would be war . Western democrats made clear if the Soviet airlift was interfered with . The Soviet Union airlift would have been a major source of conflict .
 Russia dropped the blockade when it became convinced that the West would not back down . The blockade began when the West refused to back down, and the blockade was lifted .
 West Berlin became a symbol of U.S. determination to resist Soviet expansion . West Berlin was a symbol for the United States of Germany .
 It was a cornerstone of Western containment policy that sought to block the expansion of Russian influence and communist ideology . As such, it was aimed at stopping the spread of communist ideology in Russia .
 West Berlin became a brilliant rich oasis standing in contrast to the stubborn and relatively impoverished life of East Germany . Over the years, West Berlin has become an oasis of life .
 West Germany also became an economic power, dwarfing its eastern rival . West Germany became the most powerful country in the world .
 Many East Germans, seeking a better life in the West, fled to West Berlin on their way to West Germany . East Berlin was the heart of the Berlin-West Berlin riots in the 1960s .
 Increasingly, well-educated and highly trained East Germans used this escape route . East Germans often used it as a way to escape from the Soviet Union .
 The situation had become intolerable for the Russians and the East German government . The situation was 'unacceptable' for the Russian and East German authorities .
 Khrushchev committed his personal prestige and that of the Soviet Union to action against Western interests in Berlin . The Soviet Union had committed its own prestige to action in Berlin, according to a report .
 As Khrushchev said colorfully, Berlin was a bone in the throat of the Soviet Union . Berlin was the heart of the USSR, but it was also a bone of its throat .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko declared to President Kennedy that after November elections in the U.S., Russians would be required to take steps to end the Western presence in Berlin .
 In August 1961, the Russians and East Germans sealed off in West Berlin and began construction of the Berlin Wall . To stop the exodus through Berlin to West Germany, the Wall was built in 1961 .
 Its defenders were surrounded on all sides by East Germany and a higher number of Russian and East German troops . It was surrounded by East German and Russian troops .
 The U.S. should not allow the Russians to take West Berlin, the author says . Western European partners would feel betrayed and the NATO alliance severely weakened if not destroyed .
 President Kennedy announced that West Berlin would be defended, if necessary, with a nuclear strike on the Soviet Union . In response to the need of Western Europeans to maintain the status quo in Berlin and due to the to defend the city using conventional forces, the U.S. decided to defend
 For the US, maintaining the NATO alliance was, militarily, more important than the elimination of Cuba's missiles . For the U.S. it was more important to maintain NATO alliance than eliminate missiles from Cuba .
 The American public would not tolerate the presence of Russian missiles in the Western Hemisphere . The United States would not have had any credibility with its allies or its enemies if it allowed the missiles to secretly be introduced to the island .
 In April 1961 the CIA mounted an invasion of Cuba using Cuban exiles as an initial landing force . President Kennedy approved of the invasion, with the approval of President Kennedy . The invasion was carried out with the help of Cuban ex-Cubans .
 President Kennedy relied on advice of experienced men in government who told him the invasion would succeed . President Kennedy had relied on the advice of experts who said it would succeed in Iraq .
 The invasion was an unsigested disaster for the U.S. government and for President Kennedy . President Kennedy was killed in the invasion of Vietnam .
 CIA chief and assistant told President Kennedy that they should resign after a decent interval . Responsible officials, CIA chief, assistant told president Kennedy that he should resign . President Kennedy told him to resign as soon as possible .
 After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the CIA developed Operation Mongoose that attempted to actively destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Castro . The CIA developed the operation to destabilize Castro's regime and kill him .
 Robert Kennedy, in the president's direction, personally oversaw these activities . Robert Kennedy pushed the CIA for more aggressive action against Cuba and against Castro personally .
 This was a massive operation with 6000 acts of sabotage committed in Cuba . The operation was a 'massive operation' in Cuba, according to CNN.com's John Sutter .
 After the Bay of Pigs, President Kennedy analyzed his decision-making process . President Kennedy analyzes his decision to launch the attack on Cuba .
 I now knew before making important decisions I needed to explore the possible consequences of each alternative course of action and seek advice from a variety of sources, within the government and outside of the government . I now know what to do before making decisions, I said .
 He used this process in the summer of 1961 when the Soviets made their first threats against West Berlin . In 1961, he used the same process to deal with the Soviets .
 Excomm's deliberations shown in the film were the means by which President Kennedy gained advice during the Cuban missile crisis . Excomm was the means of President Kennedy's advice .
 Excomm was an unusual body because it included representatives from outside the government . Excomm included former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, who was in charge of Excomm .
 Government officials at agencies did not usually participate in critical military decisions . The committee includes government officials who usually do not participate in the decision .
 As shown in the film, Adlai Stevenson, the UN ambassador and former Democratic candidate twice for the presidency, advocated appeasement from the Russians . The film, which was released in March, was released by the U.S. on Friday .
 President President protected Stevenson from being expelled from excomm and removed as ambassador to the UN, as Bobby Kennedy advised . President President. President . President .
 Stevenson proved immensely valuable to the U.S. by showing dramatically that the Russians were lying to the world about the missiles . In the end, Stevenson proved invaluable to the United States .
 His speech was the single most important victory in the propaganda war that was such an important part of the Cuban missile crisis . The speech was one of the most important victories in that propaganda war .
 President Kennedy reached out to a wide range of advisers to help make decisions in the crisis . President Khrushchev had very few advisers. In contrast to the way President Kennedy .
 He saw the members of the Presidium, which would have provided the most experienced and logical group of advisers, as political adversaries . He saw them as political opponents, he said . He said: "He saw the . Presidium members as political . adversaries"
 Khrushchev conceived the policy and extended the crisis to try to gain more leverage against the U.S. See the discussion below for more on Khrushchevez .
 President Kennedy and Khrushchev had spent a considerable amount of time together in Geneva . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Khrushchev acted civilly and withdrew the missiles from Cuba . As it turned out, when faced with the likelihood that its occupation in Cuba would lead to nuclear war, the Soviet Union acted .
 "When we said we're not going to and then go ahead and do it, and then we don't do anything, then I would think our risks increase. But when we said . We said we . . then went ahead and did it, then we didn't do it,"
 The military vision was not monolithic, President Obama says . He modifies his web reservation to reflect that .
 Well, actually, it was a pretty dangerous game, but quite useful of yours, says the author . "It was actually a very dangerous game," he says .
 If we do nothing, they have a missile base there with all the pressure it brings to bear on the U.S., it will damage our prestige, says President Obama . If we don't act, it will be "damage to our prestige," he says .
 If we attack Cuba, the missiles, Cuba, somehow, then gives them a clear line to take Berlin, as they were able to do in Hungary Hungary Hungary Anglo war in Egypt . If we attacked Cuba, it would give them a chance to go to Berlin, he says .
 It would be regarded as the trigger-happy Americans who lost Berlin. We have been regarded as think we have this fixation on Cuba anyway it would be . We have had a fixation on the island nation. We would be seen as trigger-hurt, rather than the trigger happy Americans
 Berlin was let go because we didn't have the guts to withstand a situation in Cuba. And that we let Berlin go, he says, "We let Berlin let go," he says . Berlin was the last Berlin to be sent to Cuba .
 Cuba would say that we jeopardized their interests and security, reunification and everything else, because of the preventive action we took in Cuba . So they would say, "We jeopardized" their interests, security and reunification . The U.S. took preventive action in Cuba,
 If we do nothing, Cuba will be able to say that every time we try to do anything about Cuba, they will fire those missiles, he says . And third, if we do . then they will have these missiles, and they will say that . They will fire them if we
 "I think it's dangerous, but quite satisfying, from your point of view," he says . So I think it is dangerous, he says, "but quite satisfying" "It's quite satisfying," he adds .
 Khrushchev has personally committed to Berlin . Even last night talked about Cuba for a while, but talked about it for a long time .
 If we go in and take them on a quick airstrike, we will neutralize the possibility of the U.S. being used for these missiles, he says . "We will prevent a situation from emerging, at least within Cuba, where Cubans themselves have the means to exercise some
 There always is of its just coming in and taking Berlin by force at some point, says German leader . On the other hand, we greatly increase the opportunity as I believe that there must be a retaliation from the Soviet Union, he says .
 'Which leaves me only one alternative, which is to fire nuclear weapons which is a hell of an alternative and start a nuclear exchange with all this happening,' he says .
 "On the other hand, if we start the blockade we're talking about, they'll most likely start a blockade and say we've started it," he says . "They will most likely say they've started a blockade," he adds .
 The blockade of Berlin has been initiated by our blockade, he says . So, once again, they will say that there will be this feeling in Europe that the Blockade of Berlin was initiated by us, he adds .
 Cuba is not only Cuba, it is also Berlin, and Berlin's importance to Europe, says President Obama . "When we balance that our problem is ... Berlin, that is what has made this thing a dilemma for three days," he says .
 He knew there would have been a very strong reaction, probably an all-out war, if nuclear weapons were used on U.S. troops . He also knew that there would be a very . strong reaction .
 Khrushchev knew it was very important and this was a fact he had not understood when he gave the order to put the missiles in Cuba . There was an additional fact that Khrushvic knew it .
 The U.S. population was not willing to tolerate nuclear missiles hostile to Cuba . The United States would not tolerate a nuclear attack on Cuba .
 It was therefore impossible for any U.S. government to allow the missiles to remain . The United States would go to war, if necessary, to remove the missiles, President Obama said .
 The failure to measure the reaction of ordinary U.S. citizens to the prospect of Russian missiles in Cuba was Khrushchev's key mistake in his planning for the crisis .
 It was certainly an understandable mistake for a Russian leader to make, it was certainly a mistake for him .
 The United States had missiles in countries relatively close to Russia, including Turkey . The U.S. had missiles stationed in countries close to the Kremlin .
 Khrushchev forgot that the United States mainland had not been invaded since 1812 . The U.S. mainland had been invaded by 1812, and the U.N. mainland was not invaded .
 In 1962, with the advent of nuclear ballistic missiles, this sense of isolation might have been irrational, but it was still very real . "In 1962, the isolation of the United States was very real," says historian John Sutter .
 Khrushchev never dreamed that the United States population would react so dramatically to Russian missiles in Cuba . The U.S. population reacted badly to the U.K. response .
 Khrushchev had only incomplete control over Russian military units in Cuba . As a result of this, he only had control of Russian military forces in Cuba.
 The main example of this was the landing of the U.S. U-2 spy plane over Cuba on October 27 . The U.2 plane landed over Cuba .
 This occurred when a Russian commander violated orders and acted on his own initiative . This is the first time a commander has disobeyed his orders .
 Castro was the only head of state involved in the crisis who had not seen service in the army . Khrushchev had trouble controlling Castro, who, significantly, was not in the military .
 Castro believed the massive military buildup in Florida was behind the invasion of the Bay of Pigs and Operation Mongoose . Castro had good reason for that belief .
 He knew the Red Army regiments in Cuba and its nuclear capabilities . He also knew the Soviet Union's nuclear capabilities, including its nuclear capability .
 He knew that Russian IRBMs in Cuba could deal a massive blow to their hated enemy in the North . He may not have been entirely aware of the great advantage the United States had on ICBMs .
 Castro thought that if an invasion were to trigger a nuclear war, the Soviets had the best chance of winning if they struck first with their nuclear weapons . Castro thought an invasion was the best way of winning was to strike first with nuclear weapons.
 Castro knew Cuba would be cremated, but was willing to sacrifice the island and its people for the sake of his friends in the communist bloc . Castro knew he was going to sacrifice Cuba and the island for his friends .
 Castro proposed to Khrushchev that the Russians start a nuclear war before the invasion of Cuba . When Castro proposed the idea, the Soviet leader was horrified . Khrushchen was horrified by Castro's proposal .
 Khrushchev had already decided to withdraw the missiles, he was waiting for the right time, he said . The missile tests were launched in 1958, but were never completed .
 Khrushchev decided that Russia should dismantle the missiles immediately . After learning of Castro's position, Khrushchchev decided to dismantle them immediately .
 Castro said in 1962 he had advocated a first Soviet nuclear strike with the knowledge that it would lead to an American nuclear attack on Cuba . The Cuban leader told Kennedy's Defense Secretary Robert McNamara that in 1962, a strike would have led to a nuclear attack .
 Khrushchev backed down because President Kennedy was willing to provide a formal compromise that if the missiles were withdrawn, the U.S. would not invade Cuba and that would not help others do so . Finally, President Kennedy agreed to a deal that if missiles were pulled, the United States
 Khrushchev claimed he had achieved an important goal despite eliminating missiles . He gave him a way of claiming that he had . achieved a . important goal . Despite eliminating missiles, the missiles were not launched .
 President Kennedy is credited with forcing the Russians to withdraw the missiles without provoking a nuclear war . President Kennedy was credited with making the move without provoking war .
 With the disclosure of secret documents once, our understanding of Kennedy's triumph has changed . But the crisis is still seen as a huge success for him and U.S. foreign policy .
 In the aftermath of the crisis, it appeared the removal of the missiles had been achieved without the U.S. making any real concessions to Russia .
 Operation Mongoo was not known and had not been official U.S. policy to invade Cuba . The scope of the operation was unknown and it was not an official United States policy .
 The commitment not to invasion was nothing more than a reaffirmation of existing policy . Therefore, the commitment was not to invade was merely to reaffirm existing policy, it said .
 As the crisis became public, it has become clear that the commitment not to invasion was concession . Over the years, as the . crisis became . public, as . the . commitment not . invasion was . concession .
 The Kennedy brothers were actively working to change Cuba's government and assassinate Castro . Castro was assassinated by the Kennedy brothers in Cuba in 1961 .
 Kennedy's role in restricting forces in the US who wanted to carry out airstrikes or invade Cuba has been revealed . However, as more information has come out, Kennedy has been criticized for his role in limiting forces in Cuba .
 President Kennedy always chose actions that would not lead to war . As shown in the film, while preparing for war if he were to come, he always chose not to engage in war . The film was released on Friday at 9 p.m. ET .
 He ratified the pressure on the Soviet Union with steps that left room for the Soviets to maneuver and time to rationally decide what to do . The steps were left by the Soviets, leaving room for them to maneuver .
 President Kennedy gave Khrushchev a way out of the crisis . President Kennedy agreed to formally agree not to invade Cuba . Kennedy's willingness to agree not invade Cuba was key to ending crisis .
 Revelations in the 1990s that the Russians had been able to secretly carry out a massive military buildup in Cuba demonstrate the wisdom of President Kennedy's approach . The 42 nuclear missiles were operational during the crisis .
 President Kennedy avoided war by restricting those who wanted to start airstrikes or an invasion . Kennedy also initiated the United States response with a naval quarantine . The U.S. response to the invasion of Libya was a response to a coup d'Beaten .
 A prime example of Kennedy's containment occurred on October 27, when an air-to-air Russian surface missile goes down a U-2 U.2 spy plane killing the pilot .
 It could treat the incident as an intentional escalation ordered by the Kremlin or see it as unauthorized action by a Soviet commander . The incident could be treated as an accidental escalation or as an unauthorized action .
 One election brought the world much closer to nuclear war and the other kept alive hopes of a peaceful resolution . The election was held in New York City .
 If he had been wrong, and ordered the U.S. Air Force to remove the battery he had fired on U-2, we would have been several steps closer to the war .
 Khrushchev, on the other hand, exhibited extremely poor leadership initiating the crisis, writes . "Krushchev's poor leadership initiated the crisis," he says .
 It put his country and the whole world at great risk of nuclear holocaust, he says . It put him at risk of a nuclear war, he writes .
 Khrushchev showed foresight and political courage by backing up and removing missiles with only the promise without invasion, he says . However, by backing down and removing the missiles, he showed courage .
 Both sides contributed to the crisis, but the consensus is that the greatest responsibility lies with Khrushchev and the Soviets . The consensus among the historian is that Khrushvic and the Soviet Union are responsible .
 Khrushchev appears to have had several targets when he ordered IRCBMs to be installed in Cuba . The former Soviet Union leader appears to be targeting several targets .
 I wanted to increase Russia's nuclear capability without waiting for Russian scientists and engineers to improve and build their own fleet of missiles . Russia. Russia. wants to increase its nuclear capability .
 At the time of the crisis, Russia had fewer than 40 ICBMs, while the U.S. had approximately 170 . The United States had about 170 ICBM missiles .
 The United States had a bigger advantage in strategic bombers and submarine-based missiles . The U.S. had an even bigger advantage, including strategic bombers, submarines and missiles .
 IRBMs could be immediately installed in Cuba instead of waiting to build ICBMs that could attack the U.S. from Russia . The Soviet Union would save billions of rubles if they could be installed, the Soviet Union says .
 President Kennedy did not believe the U.S. advantage in ICBMs meant the United States could safely engage in nuclear war with Russia . President Kennedy didn't believe the US had a nuclear advantage that could prevent nuclear war .
 Even with the great U.S. advantage, there was no defense against the 40 Soviet-possessed ICBMs . The United States was unable to defend itself against the threat of the Soviet Union's ICBM .
 Casualties in this exchange, tens of millions, were unacceptable to any U.S. leader . "Tens of millions" would have been unacceptable, he says .
 President Kennedy realized that the U.S. advantage was only temporary and that the Russians would soon increase their ICBM fleet . President Kennedy also believed that the United States advantage would only be temporary .
 The Russians achieved nuclear parity a year or two earlier, placing missiles in Cuba, was not very important to him . That Russia had achieved parity with the U.S. in Cuba .
 Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from U.S. invasion in the service of Russian neo-imperialism and communist solidarity . The Soviet Union wanted Cuba to be protected from invasion .
 Even before the crisis, the history of the Bay of Pigs invasion and Operation Mongoose, russians and Cubans had reason to fear U.S. intentions . Even before this crisis, Russia and Cuba had reasons to fear the United States .
 Khrushchev claimed that protecting Cuban sovereignty was the only goal in placing missiles in Cuba . After the crisis, Khrushchevs claimed that . protecting Cuba's sovereignty was Khrushsche's only goal .
 Khrushchev is said to have made several remarks to close aid indicating that improving Russia's nuclear capabilities and reducing U.S. advantage were important to him . The remarks were made in a bid to reduce the United States advantage .
 Castro's reasons for accepting the missiles were based on solidarity with the other communist countries rather than defending Cuba from a U.S. attack . Castro accepted the missiles in order to protect Cuba from an attack .
 The presence of Russian missiles in Cuba would hamper many of Castro's other targets, such as exporting the revolution to other Latin American countries . Castro's Cuba has been hit by a series of missile attacks in recent years .
 Khrushchev may have sent the 40,000 Red Army troops with a mission to defend the island .
 Everyone knew that an attack on large numbers of Red Army troops would have triggered a larger war . The Red Army would have been at risk of a bigger war if it had taken place .
 If they were confined to the island they would only be Defensive . After all, they would be Defensive. After all the islanders were only Defensive.
 The only reason for the massive buildup of Soviet service officers on the island was to protect missiles, not Cuba . Cuba was not the target of the buildup, not the Cuban missiles .
 Khrushchev wanted to change the status quo in West Berlin and damage NATO by using the missiles to force the United States to back off to Berlin, or trade West Berlin to take the missiles out of Cuba or to distract the U.S. from reacting to a Russian takeover .
 Any of these situations, if they had come to pass, would have shown Europeans that they could not trust the United States to look after their interests and would have undermined the NATO alliance .
 The idea for the installation of the missiles was that of Khrushchev and his own . The idea of the installation in the missile range was the original idea . The missile system was installed in the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Khrushchev was the absolute dictator of the Soviet Union . The entire Presidium signed the plan to put missiles into Cuba, but his word was definitive .
 Secretly placing offensive nuclear weapons outside the Soviet Union, 90 miles from the U.S. mainland, was a clandestine military offensive that attempted to change the nuclear balance of terror .
 The United States and the Kennedy Administration contributed to the Cuban missile crisis through a series of policies . The U.S. contributed to Cuba's missile crisis in the early 1960s .
 Cuba's attempted invasion of the Bay of Pigs followed by Operation Mongoose, which attempted to subvert Castro's government and assassinate Castro, certainly helped set the stage for the crisis .
 The US would not deauthorize a first nuclear strike as a military option . However, due to the numerical superiority of the Red Army and the Chinese Army, the U.S. would not take action .
 American policy makers felt, with substantial justification, that their nuclear shield was all that kept the peace in Europe . U.S. policy makers believed that their nuke shield was the key to keeping the peace .
 The expense of maintaining an army large enough to counter the Red Army in Europe and the Chinese Army in Asia would have put a great deal of strain on Western economies . Western economies would have been strained by the expense .
 The western outpost of Berlin would have fallen and perhaps the entire NATO alliance would have failed, perhaps if the U.S. would wage a nuclear war to protect Berlin . On the other hand, perhaps NATO would have collapsed if Russia hadn't been convinced that the United States would .
 The U.S. refusal to deauthorize a first nuclear strike made the Russians justifiably nervous . However, the United States refused to take responsibility for a first strike .
 On balance, responsibility for events that put the world's future at risk falls more sharply on the Soviet side than in the US . More to Khrushchev than Kennedy than to Kennedy, writes David Frum .
 We believe this played a role in Khrushchev's decision to back down and was his saving grace . We believe it played a key role in his decision to withdraw from the Soviet Union .
 He vividly recalls a confrontation in which nuclear war was truly possible . The confrontation reminds us of a lasting truth about the nuclear age, he says .
 He invites spectators to enter the room as president and his advisers struggle with a seemingly intractable problem that does not offer good options . The president invites spectators into the room to see how he is dealing with the problem .
 Most of the incidents described in the film occurred in which meetings in which Russian Foreign Minister Gromyko lied directly to President Kennedy when he assured him that the Russians were not installing missiles in Cuba . Some of the specific exchanges between President Kennedy and his advisers .
 The language of many important conversations has been taken to the right of transcripts or reports from participants . This article includes a list of important conversations that have been published on CNN iReport .
 "The film leaves the viewer with several important mispressions," reviewer says . "That said, the film leaves a lot of important mistakes," he says .
 According to the film, the Kennedy Administration was required to risk nuclear war in order to recreate the pre-existing balance of nuclear power . The film was released in October 2013 .
 The installation of the missiles 90 miles from the U.S. mainland destroyed the sense of security enjoyed by the United States population for a hundred and fifty years . The installation .
 The Kennedy Administration would not have been able to govern if it had allowed the missiles to remain in Cuba . The Kennedy administration would have been unable to govern with the missiles in Cuba if they had remained there .
 The president had gone on to history by stating that the U.S. would never accept missiles in Cuba . Believed that Russian guarantees that they had no plans to place missiles on Cuba .
 The credibility of the Kennedy Administration, with its friends and enemies, had been tied to keeping Cuba free of Russian missiles . Thus, the credibility of Kennedy Administration was tied to the Cuban crisis .
 The missile installation in Cuba was the opening gambit in the long planned move by the Russians against West Berlin . West Berlin was the target of the long-planned move .
 An attack on Cuba would give the Russians an excuse to overthrow West Berlin, says President Eisenhower . The U.S. would attack Cuba would be an excuse for West Berlin's West Berlin .
 The Europeans would take these events as proof that the U.S. valued getting the missiles out of Cuba more than preserving Berlin . The Europeans . would take this as proof of the United States valued getting missiles out .
 The strains of the NATO alliance would have been serious and perhaps fatal, perhaps fatal . The strain of NATO would have led to the collapse of the U.S.-led NATO .
 The secret nuclear missile placement in Cuba was an aggressive move by the Soviets . The secret missile placement was a 'aggressive move' by the Soviet Union .
 None of these reasons for forcing the removal of the missiles had anything to do with the actual damage they could inflict on the US, but were side effects of placing the missiles .
 An adequate assessment of the actions of President Kennedy and his administration should refer to these goals . President Kennedy's actions should reflect the goals of the Kennedy administration .
 While important, it is necessary to answer the question of whether it is worth risking nuclear war, it's necessary to do so .
 To achieve the political goals of the U.S. government, the Russians had to be forced to withdraw the missiles in terms that appeared to be a United States foreign policy victory . The Russians had been forced to pull the missiles .
 At the same time, the crisis could not afford to escalate to World War III . The crisis was a very different possibility if the Russians had refused to withdraw the missiles and the U.S. had invaded Cuba .
 On 13 incredibly tense days in October 1962, President Kennedy and his advisers achieved these goals . President Kennedy's advisers were able to achieve these goals on 13 days of October 1962 .
 After this time, Superpowers introduced new procedures to defuse crises and acted more cautiously . Superpowers introduce new procedures for defusing crises .
 After the Cuban missile crisis, neither Superpower made a sudden, surprise and radical move that endangered its opponent's population, or leadership . Although they maintained their competence and the wars were fought in places like Vietnam, Angola and Afghanistan, after the crisis, after .
 The film does not show the role played by U.S. foreign policy to help create the atmosphere in which the crisis occurred . The film shows the role of foreign policy in creating the atmosphere .
 Even after the Bay of Pigs debacle, the U.S. attempted to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Castro . The United States attempted to kill Castro in Cuba even after the failed mission .
 Russians and Cubans justifiably feared for Cuba's territorial integrity . Given the historic U.S. tendency to invade Latin American countries and the ongoing Mongoose operation, Russia and Cuba feared for their own territory .
 The United States had completed the installation of 15 Jupiter missiles in Turkey in 1962 . In addition, the ongoing United States nuclear weapons buildup had resulted in a missile breach in favor of the United States .
 President Kennedy repeatedly said the missiles were already obsolete and added little, in any case, to U.S. military power . This infuriated the and it was totally unnecessary because, as President Kennedy said, "as President Kennedy frequently said, the missiles are already obsolete"
 U.S. politicians understood that Russian nuclear forces could inflict unacceptably high casualties . United States politicians clearly understood that Russia could inflict high casualties on American soil .
 The friction between the U.S. military and President Kennedy was exaggerated in the film . The friction was exaggerated by the film's portrayal of the president .
 President Kennedy and General LeMay, Chief of Staff of the Air Force, had disagreements . Kennedy and LeMay had disagreements and mistrust between them . LeMay was President Kennedy's chief of Staff .
 General LeMay thought nuclear war with the Soviets was inevitable and wanted it to occur before the U.S. loses its 18-to-1 superiority in nuclear delivery devices . LeMay wanted it before the United States lost its 18 to 1 superiority in nukes .
 There was also friction between Secretary McNamara and the Chief of Staff of the Navy . McNamara was Secretary of State McNamara .
 We are unaware of the evidence demonstrating a concerted effort by the military to maneuver the U.S. into a war . We are not aware of evidence .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Maxwell Taylor had the confidence of President Kennedy before, during and after the crisis . State Department official who served during this time says he had confidence of the president .
 O'Donnell's subplot contacting American pilots, asking them to bypass the chain of command and make false statements to their superiors, is simply fiction . The subplot is based on a subplot of contacting American pilot .
 The events of the Cuban missile crisis are a clear example of the importance of civilian control over the military . The events are an example of how important civilian control of the military should be, writes David Frum .
 If they had left it to the military, there probably would have been a war, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "There probably would be a war," he says .
 The film recognizes the importance of the vote of the Organization of American States that supports quarantine . The OAS voted to support quarantine .
 The film glosses over the importance of the rapid support of NATO allies the United States and even African countries that would have played an important role if the Russians had tried to send nuclear nuclear weapons Cuba by air .
 The only landing strips available to refuel were in Guinea and Senegal, which had agreed not to allow flights . Guinea, Senegal and Guinea are the only countries to refuel .
 O'Donnell's role was exaggerated and the roles of other advisers were minimized, the author says . "O'Donnell was very important to President Kennedy," he says. "His contribution of which is very important"
 The most aggressive letter was caused by the Kennedys' proposals to trade the obsolete U.S. missiles to Turkey for Russian missiles to Cuba . O'Donnell's character asks Bobby Kennedy if he believes the second Russian letter, the most aggressive of the letter, was the proposal to
 Second, tougher charter was prompted by the Kennedys' proposals for trade . However, it is true that the second, tougher Charter was prompted .
 Khrushchev offered to withdraw missiles in return only for U.S. assurances that it would not invade Cuba . Kennedy informed by Kennedy's feelers that the United States could also trade missiles to Turkey . After offering to withdraw in return for assurances that the U.K. would not
 There is no defense of what Khrushchev did by delaying resolving the crisis by a day or more just to gain some advantage, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: "There is no defence of what he did just because he delayed resolution by more than a day"
 President Kennedy's restriction prevented nuclear war . At that time, an American under-2 pilot was killed, and it was only President Kennedy’s restriction that prevented war .
 We are fortunate that some other incident did not occur that would have caused a general war . We are lucky that some of these incidents did not happen that would've caused a war .
 McNamara and McCone agree that the U.S. strategic position had been reinforced by the outcome of the crisis that they could now run the table on Russians in places like Asia . Another beautiful elegant touch is the conversation between the two men in the film .
 Given the U.S. experience in Vietnam, this conversation demonstrates the dialectic nature of historical struggles . Given the United States experience in . Vietnam, the conversation demonstrates how the country's relationship with Vietnam has evolved .
 President Kennedy had everyone on the Security Council read Barbara Tuchman's August Weapons . President Kennedy read the book after his administration took office .
 According to McNamara in The Fog of War, Tuchman related a conversation between two men who had previously been Chancellor of Germany during different periods of the war . McNamara said the conversation was about two former German leaders .
 One asked the other how the war came to be and the other said he wished he knew . The two men said they wished he had known each other how it started .
 If anyone is about to write after that, they will understand that we have made every effort to find peace . All efforts to give our opponents room to move were made to give them room to leave, says the BBC .
 Meet your opponent and see the situation the eyes of the opponent . Take into account your needs and give you space to move . Meet your opponents and see your opponent's eyes in the eyes .
 Khrushchev did not look at the missile crisis through the eyes of U.S. leaders or their people . He said the crisis was not the result of the crisis in the United States or its people .
 The existence of nuclear missiles 90 miles off the United States coast was intolerable to the public in the U.S. because of its history of isolation and protection behind the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans .
 ICBMs launched from Russia would take only a few more minutes to reach the US, but it was a given . This may have been irrational, but the U.S. was irrational since it was given .
 The United States maintained nuclear missiles in Turkey and several other countries close to the Soviet Union . It was also hypocritical view, given that the U.S. maintained nuclear missile bases in Turkey, other countries .
 The key factor in Khrushchev's decision to back down was that the U.S. population woke up and would force his government to go to war to eliminate the missiles . The key reason for Khrushchev's decision is that the United States woke up to the threat of
 Khrushchev didn't know much about United States history and his U.S. experts didn't tell him about it . He didn't even know about the history of the United States and his experts .
 The person making the final decision, in it is the United States the President, should have the benefit of the best information possible and many recommendations and opinions from both inside and outside the government. The President should also have many recommendations from inside and out of government.
 President Kennedy learned this lesson from the Bay of Pigs debacle . President Kennedy had learned this from the 'Bay of Pigs' debacle .
 This has already been discussed above, but one more example will be useful . This is a simple example of the use of this type of tool .
 President Kennedy called Llewellyn Thompson who had just returned from serving as United States ambassador to Moscow . Thompson was the U.S. ambassador to Russia . Thompson served as ambassador to the Soviet Union .
 Thompson provided President Kennedy with crucial advice on Khrushchev reactions and how he thought . Thompson provided crucial advice to President Kennedy on how to react .
 At times, Ambassador Thompson directly contradicted President Kennedy's initial ideas by convincing him to change his mind . Ambassador Thompson helped convince President Kennedy to make his decision .
 Based on the experience of the Cuban missile crisis, we can derive some general principles . But based on experience, there are some principles to be drawn up .
 As discussed above, try to see the situation through your opponent's eyes . Try to see your opponent through your eyes .
 Policy makers need to understand that there will be many things he doesn't know . Policy makers must understand that, while trying to get the best information possible, need to be careful .
 "All diplomatic and peaceful channels must be tried before there is a commitment to war," says David Cameron . "Peaceful channels must not be tried," says Cameron .
 A graduated approach that always allows your opponent a face-saving exit is optimal is optimal . Graduated approach is optimal to avoid a repeat of the same thing happening .
 Be flexible and engage with small things, but don't appease them by giving away the important points . Be flexible, engage and engage, but not give away the most important points. Be flexible .
 President Kennedy described the crisis management process by stating that one must be firm, get the best possible and act carefully . After the missiles had been removed, President Kennedy said he would be firm and get best possible .
 During the crisis, there is always some son of a bitch which means there will be people who through stupidity or their own agenda will take measures that push the country towards war .
 The Cuban missile crisis lasted 13 days in October 1962, but the story began much earlier .
 At the end of World War II, relations between the Soviet Union and the U.S. deteriorated, ending cooperation that allowed the allies to defeat Nazi Germany . Relations between the United States and the USSR deteriorated .
 Britain and America thwarted the Soviet Republic's expansion from Azerbaijan to Iran . Britain and U.S. began containment policy, seeking to restrict Soviet expansion .
 The communist bloc and capitalist democras paraded from crisis to crisis . The Soviet Union and Soviet Union have been at odds with each other .
 Soviet blockade of Berlin, Korean War, American spy planes crossing Russian airspace . Chinese bombardment of taiwanese islands Quemoy and Matsu, and confrontation between Soviet ally Egypt and Western allies Israel, France and Britain over Suez Canal .
 IRBMs on Russian soil could not reach the U.S. apart from Alaska, but could reach Western Europe . IRBM could also reach the United States apart from the Alaska .
 More than a hundred million people may have died in the U.S. and NATO countries . More than 100 million may have been killed in the United States and NATO .
 In April 1961 the CIA mounted an invasion of Cuba that had been planned during the Eisenhower Administration . In the effort to stop the spread of communism, President Kennedy approved of the invasion .
 Using Cuban exiles as an initial landing force, the target was the Bay of Pigs off the Cuban coast . The Bay was the target of the invasion of Cuba .
 President Kennedy relied on the men's council in government they told him that the invasion would succeed . President Kennedy had relied on them to tell him that they would succeed in the invasion .
 The head of the CIA, Allen Dulles, and President Kennedy told them they should resign after a decent interval . The officials responsible for the deaths of the Soviet Union in the 1960s were told to resign . President Kennedy and Secretary of State George W. Bush told them to resign after
 Operation Mongoose was an attempt to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Fidel Castro . After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the CIA developed a plan to kill Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 With the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion, President Kennedy analyzed his decision-making process . President Kennedy analyzes his decision to invade Cuba .
 President Kennedy protected Stevenson from being expelled from excomm . Stevenson was dismissed as ambassador to the UN, as advised by Bobby Kennedy . Stevenson received a letter from President Kennedy .
 The Soviets, for their part, acutely felt the inferiority of their nuclear deterrence . The Soviets felt inferiority to their own nuclear deterrence.
 The Soviet leadership, however, did not realize how much they feared Russia's nuclear power . Soviet leadership did not know how much it was feared .
 Nikita Khrushchev began a program to secretly place intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba . In an attempt to redress the imbalance in nuclear missiles and ensure that the United States would not mount a Cuban invasion, the Soviet Union secretly placed the missiles there .
 CIA learned of suspicious activity from intelligence sources on the island . U-2 spy planes would be able to reach almost all continental U.S.
 Some recommend diplomacy, others push for military options, such as airstrikes or an invasion of Cuba . Others push for a military option .
 President Kennedy adopted a middle-of-the-ground approach in which the U.S. Navy established a quarantine that prevented any additional missiles or offensive weapons from reaching the island .
 The United States mounted a public relationship and diplomatic offensive trying to use world opinion to pressure the Soviets to remove the missiles . Meanwhile, the U.S. mounted a diplomatic offensive to pressure them to remove them .
 The United States for its part allowed ships with food and fuel through quarantine . The U.S. for its own part allowed the ships to be quarantined .
 A Soviet surface-to-air missile battery will shoot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot and exacerbating tension between Cold War fighters . Acting without Moscow's approval, the missile will shot down the plane .
 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missiles in Cuba in secret negotiations . The missiles were eventually dismantled by the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy pledged that the United States would not invade Cuba . President Kennedy promised that the U.S. would never invade Cuba in the 1960s .
 Future Soviet presidents and leaders agreed to strategic arms limitation treaties in the 1960s and 1970s . The treaties limited the number of nuclear warheads ready to attack the other side .
 Never again would the U.S. and Russia come to the brink of a nuclear Armageddon . The United States and Russia would never again have a nuclear war .
 Looking back on the crisis from a safe distance of decades, it is easy to see the contrast in decision-making styles in both President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev . Looking back at the crisis, it was easy to understand the contrast between the two .
 President Kennedy reached out to a wide range of advisers for help in decision-making, while President Khrushchev had very few advisers . see the members of the Presidium, which would have provided the most experienced and logical group of advisers, as political adversaries .
 U.S. policy makers rushed to prepare for an invasion of the island unaware that the missiles were already in place . The island was guarded by 40,000 Red Army servicemen armed with tactical nuclear weapons the size of bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki .
 He knew there would have been all war, had nuclear weapons been used on U.S. troops . He also knew that there would not have been any war .
 Khrushchev mistakenly thought the young president was limestone and weak . Khrrushchev thought he was weak and limestone .
 Khrushchev withdrew the missiles from Cuba after fears of nuclear war would lead to nuclear war . However, faced with the likelihood that its occupation in Cuba would end up leading to war, he withdrew them .
 Khrushchev had not understood when he gave the order to put the missiles in Cuba in the first place . The U.S. population was not willing to tolerate nuclear missiles hostile to Cuba .
 Not measuring the reaction of ordinary U.S. citizens to the prospect of Russian missiles in Cuba was Khrushchev's key mistake . Not measuring public reaction was key mistake in his planning for the crisis, he says .
 In 1962, with the advent of nuclear ballistic missiles, this sense of isolation was irrational, but it was still in the hands of many Americans . "In 1962, many Americans still believed they were isolated, but they were still in their hands of Americans"
 Khrushchev made some of the key decisions made by the Soviet Union in 1962 . Communications in 1962 were not what they are today, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Castro was confident that the U.S. would invade Cuba during the crisis . Castro was also confident that he would be able to get his country to Cuba . Castro: "I'm sure that the United States will invade Cuba"
 Given the massive military buildup in Florida, Castro had good reason for this belief . Castro believed the military buildup was behind the Bay of Pigs invasion .
 You may not have been fully aware of the great advantage that The United States had on ICBMs, but knew that Russian IRBMs in Cuba could deal a massive blow .
 Castro knew cuba would be cremated, but he was willing to sacrifice the island and its people for the sake of communists around the world . Castro knew Cuba was going to die, but it was a sacrifice for the people of Cuba .
 Castro proposed in a letter to Khrushchev that the Russians begin a nuclear war before the invasion of Cuba . Castro proposed the idea to begin a war with the Soviet Union in advance of the invasion . Khrushchchev was horrified by Castro's proposal .
 Khrushchev had already decided to eliminate the missiles; I was waiting for the right time, he says . "I was waiting to be able to get rid of the missiles," he says. "Khrrushchev's decision was made to eliminate missiles"
 Kennedy's willingness to back down can be attributed to his willingness to provide a formal compromise that the U.S. would not invade Cuba and that would not help others do so . President Kennedy agreed to withdraw missiles if the missiles were withdrawn .
 Over time, as the crisis became public, it became clear that the non-invasion commitment was a real concession . Over the years it has been clear that it was a concession .
 Kennedy's role in restricting forces in the U.S. who wanted to carry out airstrikes or invade Cuba has been revealed . However, as more information has come out, Kennedy has been criticized for his role in limiting forces to attack Cuba .
 President Kennedy always chose actions that would not lead to war . As shown in the film, while on the one hand preparing for war if it were to come, he also chose not to engage in war . The film was released in March 2013 .
 Revelations in the 1990s that the Russians had been able to secretly carry out a massive military buildup in Cuba . 40,000 Red Army troops, including 42 nuclear missiles were operational during the crisis .
 The main example of Kennedy's containment occurred on October 27, when a Russian Surface to Air missile shot down an American U-2 spy plane killing the pilot .
 Kremlin could treat the incident as an orderly intentional escalation Kremlin or see it as an unauthorized action by a Soviet commander . Could treat incident as intentional escalation .
 President Kennedy knew that an option much closer to nuclear war and the other kept alive the hope of a peaceful resolution . President Kennedy kept the hope alive that a peaceful solution would be possible .
 President Kennedy chose to believe that the attack on U-2 was not authorized . President Kennedy did not believe the attack was authorized by the government .
 Khrushchev, on the other hand, exhibited poor leadership initiating the crisis, writes . "Krushchev showed poor leadership in initiating crisis," he says .
 Most Western historians believe the most serious responsibility lies with Khrushchev and the Soviets . Both sides contributed to the crisis, although most Western historians say most serious blame lies with the Soviet Union . The crisis was triggered by the collapse of Yugoslavia in 1968 .
 He wanted to improve Russia's nuclear capabilities without waiting for Soviet scientists and engineers to improve their own missile fleet . He wanted Russia to improve its own nuclear capabilities .
 Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from U.S. invasion . In addition, in addition to the service of Russian neo-imperialism and communist solidarity, he wanted Cuba to be protected .
 Khrushchev said to have made several remarks to close aid indicating that Improving Russia's nuclear capabilities and reducing the United States advantage in I.C. were important to him .
 The U.S. contributed to the arrival of the Cuban missile crisis through a series of policies . The United States and the Kennedy Administration contributed .
 U.S. nuclear policy at the time also contributed to the crisis . United States nuclear policy in the 1950s and '60s contributed to nuclear crisis .
 Due to the numerical superiority of the Red Army and the Chinese Army, the United States would not deauthorize a first nuclear strike as a military option . The U.S. would not be deauthorizing a first nuke strike .
 American policy makers felt that their nuclear shield was all that kept the peace in Europe . U.S. policy makers believed that their own nuclear shield kept Europe's peace .
 On balance, responsibility for events that put the future of the world at risk fall far beyond the Soviet side than more to Khrushchev than to Kennedy, says historian .
 This imbalance of guilt probably played a role in Khrushchev's decision to back down and that was his saving grace . This imbalance was probably due to the fact that the Soviet leader was in fact guiltier .
 The world and Khrushchev were fortunate that the U.S. had elected a president who had enough wisdom and personal strength to resist demands for an invasion or airstrike . No other escalating incident would have forced President Kennedy's hand .
 President Kennedy described the crisis management process by stating that one must stand firm, get the best information possible, and act carefully . After the missiles had been removed, President Kennedy said he would stand firm and get best info possible .
 During the crisis, he warned that there will be people who, out of stupidity or on their own agenda, would take steps to push the country towards a nuclear Armageddon .
 What could have been the result prevailed those who wanted military action against Russia? What could be the result of the result? Russia. Russia.
 In democratic countries, many believe that the repository of wisdom is ultimately in the people . In democratic nations, people are believed to have wisdom in the wisdom of others .
 In 1962 the American people thought that the installation of intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba would have led to an intolerable change in the balance of power . However, in 1962 the U.S. thought that such a change in power would be intolerable .
 The Soviets already had 40 nuclear-armed ICBMs stationed on Russian soil . The Soviets had 40 ICBM missiles stationed on Russia's soil .
 These missiles could have destroyed all major U.S. population centers killing about 100,000,000 people . This was an unacceptable outcome for any United States leader, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The U.S. had more ICBMs than Russia, but the two superpowers were in a strit. So while the United States had more than Russia did, it was in a state of war .
 The addition of IRBMs to Cuba did not really change the balance of power in the country . The U.S. people were wrong to consider the installation of missiles in Cuba as a substantial change in the balance .
 President Kennedy probably would have been unlikely to convince them of that . However, it probably would be impossible for President Kennedy to convince that .
 President Kennedy's solution was to try to force the Russians to dismantle the missiles through diplomacy and a naval quarantine . President Kennedy tried to force Russia to remove the missiles from the Soviet Union .
 The need to look strong on the international stage, the need to punish Russia for a reckless bet, etc. There were other issues, including the need for Russia to be punished for reckless bet .
 A key episode in the film Thirteen Thirteen it is the confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship that refused to stop . The film is based on a confrontation between a U.S. and Soviet ship refusing to stop.
 The navy admiral insists his ship correctly followed the traditional rules of engagement . He insists that his ship did what he needed to do in the battle .
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara argued that the rules had changed, given the importance of the crisis and the chances of misconception and error . Defense Secretary McNamara said the rules were changed .
 It was a civil matter because the response of the U.S. warship could have led to war . The response to the incident was civil, but it was not a war, the author says .
 Under the United States Constitution, that is a decision to be made by civilian leaders . The Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces is the President of the U.S. 4.
 Some may suggest that President Kennedy claimed aggressive action against a small, weak enemy . But he supported peace when the stakes were high and the enemy was powerful . Kennedy supported peace during the war .
 In the film, O'Donnell's character asks Bobby Kennedy to consider whether the second hostile letter was the result of the hearers he and his brother had sent to Khrushchev, who offered to trade with Turkey's obsolete NATO missiles for Russian missiles to Cuba .
 Khrushchev's second letter was a direct result of President Kennedy's suggestions that he might be willing to add the missiles to Turkey to the agreement .
 Khrushchev was trying to take advantage of the situation and change his first offer . "Krushchev's first offer was to give him a chance to change his offer," he said .
 In the film at the end, McNamara's character and McCone's character have a conversation in which they point out running the table about Russians in various places .
 The United States lost the Vietnam War after many casualties and big spending . The U.S. lost the war in Vietnam in the early 1960s .
 Kennedy knew that missiles in Turkey were outdated and scheduled to be replaced by submarine missiles . Removing the missiles from Turkey was not like Munich, as President Kennedy knew they were outdated .
 Germany received large amounts of territory, and gained possession of the Czech fortifications . The fortifications were the only natural barrier between Germany and Czechoslovakia .
 The situation in 1962 was like Munich, as the Soviets wanted to get missiles out of Turkey . If they their goal through intimidating and aggressive actions, political victory could have been to make further demands .
 President Kennedy worried that a surprise preventive attack on Cuba would be the moral equivalent of Japan's attack on the U.S. on Pearl Harbor . President Kennedy was worried a surprise attack would be a moral equivalent to the attack on Japan .
 Japan made an unprovoked attack sneaking into the U.S. naval base at Pearl Harbor in 1941 .
 Japan felt U.S. economic sanctions were hampering its expansion war in Asia . Japan felt United States economic sanctions hamper its expansion efforts in Asia.
 The U.S. could not be sure of having destroyed all nuclear weapons, and it would only take a nuclear strike on the United States to start a nuclear war with the Soviet Union . It had not been proven that it was impossible to force the Russians to withdraw their nuclear missiles using
 There were 40,000 Red Army troops in Cuba equipped with battlefield nuclear weapons . Unknown to President Kennedy or the U.S. government, the troops were armed with battlefield nukes . President Kennedy was unaware of the presence of the troops .
 President Kennedy convened a large group of military leaders and foreign affairs experts in a team known as Excomm . Excomm was a team of military, foreign affairs and national security experts .
 The advantages of involving a large group include: the president is exposed to a wide range of opinions and ideas . A large group of people working on a problem can often come up with alternatives and ideas that a single person, no way smart, would not have considered .
 United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson recommended the option of making substantial concessions to the Russians, in addition to agreeing not to invade Cuba . U.N. ambassador: "Make substantial concessions" to Russia .
 If it was simply a choice between peace with some concessions and war, the answer is easy . "The answer to the question is easy. If it's simply peace, it's war, it would be war," says CNN's John Defterios .
 Munich taught us that a concession is usually followed by a demand for another, and again and again until the war results from miscalculation or when the aggressor simply goes too far . Munich's war was the first time a concession has been followed by another .
 Wisdom is knowing the difference between a concession and a legitimate commitment, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . Wisdom is to know when a concession is not a concession, says Sutter . Sutter: "Wisdom is knowing between concession and legitimate commitment."
 History has judged a commitment not to invade Cuba for having been a legitimate compromise . Additional concessions may have been appeasements, while additional concessions may be appeasement . History judged the commitment not invading Cuba as having been legitimate .
 There was no American policy to invade Cuba and while Kennedy wanted to depose or assassinate Castro, he could . Kennedy said the U.S. did not give up anything by agreeing not to invade .
 The threat of nuclear war by both countries preserved peace during the Cold War . Paradoxically, the threat of a nuclear war preserved peace .
 Bobby Kennedy was referring to the situation in which all of the president's top advisers told him that the Bay of Pigs invasion would succeed . Bobby Kennedy: "All of the presidents' top advisers said that the attack would succeed" Bobby Kennedy says, "They told me that the invasion would
 During the Cuban missile crisis, the military predicted success in Cuba, unaware that the U.S. armed forces would face 40,000 Red Army troops equipped with tactical nuclear weapons . The United States was unaware of the threat posed by the Red Army .
 A large-scale U.S. invasion would have been very different from the Bay of Pigs fist effort . A large scale invasion of Cuba would have had a very different effect on Cuba .
 The Secretary of Defense of the United States, McNamara observes that America could use a blockade because it had been assigned earlier as a Game. McNamara . McNamara: America could . use a . blockade because . it had already been assigned as a game .
 Historian argues that World War II was activated because parties adhered to standard operating procedures such as the Schlieffen Plan, which could not be stopped . 13 million people died because of the plan, the historian argues .
 The advantage of using previously planned scenarios is that they have developed at a leisure time when the tensions of the current crisis did not deprive planners of the time to think clearly and meticulously .
 The United States never signed a peace treaty that took the option of first nuclear strike off the table . The U.S. never signed an agreement that took that option off of the table, the U.N. says .
 There is no morally defensive reason to use a massive number of nuclear missiles that will kill hundreds of millions . There is also no moral justification to use such a number of nukes, author says .
 There is no morally defensive reason to answer whether your country has suffered this attack. Nor is there a morally defensive response to the attack, he says. Nor there is a moral right to ask if your country is suffering this attack .
 In any case, the vast majority of people killed have been totally innocent, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The only justification for preparing for a first or a retaliatory nuclear strike is to convince the other side that if it hits you, it will be destroyed in turn . "The only justification" for a nuclear strike would be to convince other sides that if they hit you, you will be
 The Soviets insisted that the missiles they were installing in Cuba were defensive weapons, intended only to protect the island of Cuba . The missiles were installed in Cuba by the Soviets .
 He did nothing to stop the construction of missile sites or the weaponry of existing missiles with nuclear warheads . He did not stop construction of sites or weapons of existing warheads .
 The U.S. is in a position to quickly drown oil and other essential imports to Cuba in case of war . This is one of a number of a put the United States in a . position .
 The U.S. military's quarantine and preparations to invade Cuba convinced Khrushchev to withdraw the missiles . The United States' quarantine and . assurances that if the missiles were not withdrawn the United States would eliminate them, . would .
 Critics of President Kennedy's plans noted that without a tough policy, the United States would look weak . Excomm critics of JFK's plans said that without the tough policies, the U.S. looked weak .
 Pacifists argue that building a large army and using threats results in wars . Pacifistists say that war is in the country's best interest or through miscalculation .
 Self-styled realists believe that looking weak invites others to take advantage of you . Appeasement results in further aggression, and Munich proved that it did .
 President Kennedy said an airstrike probably wouldn't destroy all missiles . President Kennedy: "I'm sure it's not a matter of whether or not an airstrike will destroy missiles"
 Russia could have struck again, either by taking West Berlin or unilateral action in some other disputed area or by a nuclear attack on U.S. 25 .
 As the film accurately shows, the only person killed in the confrontation was Major Rudolph Anderson, the under-2 driver shot down .
 In an interview with the History Channel, the Soviet leader of the missile battery that will shot down the U-2 stated that he acted without authority from Moscow . He decided to act on his own and let politicians resolve it later .
 Joint chiefs wanted retaliation against the surface-to-air battery that will bring down the U-2 spy plane . Joint chiefs also wanted retaliation for the U.2 plane's crash .
 A memorable scene from the film involves the demonstration by the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, that the Soviets were installing missiles in Cuba and that they were about it .
 Colin Powell argued the case for the war against Iraq in the U.S. In 2003 Colin Powell was Secretary of State for the United States . Many have noticed the similarities and differences between these two events .
 Stevenson presented irrefutable evidence and public opinion of the galvanized world . Stevenson presented the evidence to the world. Stevenson presented evidence .
 He did not unite the usual U.S. allies in favor of the Iraq War . Obama's administration has been criticized for its lack of support for the war in Iraq .
 It now turns out that much of the information Powell presented was exaggerated, misleading or incorrect . Powell presented much of what he said was exaggerated or incorrect in the interview .
 Iraq had no weapons of mass destruction or programs to make them . Al Qaeda had no operational link between Al Qaeda and Iraq, etc.
 Stevenson's speech was decisive in preventing a war and improved U.S. prestige . Stevenson was influential in preventing war and preventing war in the United States .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, U.S. intelligence was decisive in making the case that the missiles actually existed . The missiles were found in the Cuban Islands .
 The next time the U.S. or Western nations ask the world or the UN to act on the basis of intelligence information, there will be a very strong question as to whether this intelligence is accurate .
 Further evidence will be required that will increase the risk of compromising intelligence sources . Further evidence would be required to prove the case .
 The United States and its allies in Western democraies will have to work harder and give up more information to obtain consent and cooperation in international crises . This means that in all likelihood for many years, probably for decades, the U.S. and its . allies in . Western
 "This means that some times we will not have the support we need. This means that we may not be able to support ourselves," she said . She said: "This is not the first time we have been able to do this."
 A key point in the film Thirteen Days is the naval confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship that refused to stop . The film is based on the confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet ship refusing to stop.
 The not only do they have a valuable perspective, but they also have ultimate responsibility, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Civilian leaders must have absolute control over the military, says President Obama . Therefore, civilian leaders must be able to control the military .
 The U.S. Constitution requires this by making the President the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces . The President is President of the United States. The Constitution requires that .
 The consensus of the world community, expressed in various treaties, is that nuclear, biological and chemical weapons are special cases, and that their development must be controlled . Nuclear, biological, chemical weapons must be a special case, says the UN .
 Countries that control arms do not want to relinquish control of arms . However, they want to retain control .
 The role of adviser Kevin O'Donnell has been possibly exaggerated and the civil/military conflict has been exaggerated . For example, the role of Kevin O’Donnell was possibly exaggerated, says Simon Tisdall .
 The film's approach to the crisis is too limited to give a balanced view of the crisis . The film has been criticised for being too limited .
 The subplot of going around the military chain of command and getting pilots to make false reports to their superiors about whether they received anti-aircraft fire is fictitious .
 Films are entertainment, but they shouldn't give a false impression of historical events . Films should not be given false impression that historical events are historical, says historian .
 "As long as the essence of the situation is transmitted, films dealing with historical issues are beneficial," says the director of the film . "We need to be able to make films that reflect historical issues," he says .
 The correct information should be made available to the public and comparisons with the historical record should be available, says the author .
 Thirteen days bends the story and requires correction as set out in this Tutorial . The tutorial is based on the original version of this tutorial . Please submit your story to the Daily Mail for further information .
 Give your opinion on President Kennedy's leadership the Cuban missile crisis and justify this view . Give your view of the crisis in the U.S.
 The general consensus is that President Kennedy showed excellent leadership skills in this crisis that this leadership was key to avoiding nuclear war . President Kennedy was President of the United States during the Cold War .
 President Kennedy gave President Kennedy someone he could trust completely and without any reservations . President Kennedy was a trusted confidante of the president .
 Of course, there were many other men involved who gave full loyalty to the president . President Barack Obama's administration has been accused of corruption .
 John F Kennedy was a cold warrior and used force when he felt it was in the U.S. interest . Kennedy was the president of the United States during the Vietnam War . He was assassinated in September 1968 .
 President Obama's policies before the Cuban missile crisis can be criticized as too aggressive and dangerous . His policies can also be criticized for being too aggressive or dangerous .
 President Kennedy understood the horrors of war, especially nuclear war . However, President Kennedy knew the horrors, especially the horrors .
 He is the only man in history who has guided the world back from the brink of nuclear war . He is only person in history to have managed to save the world from war .
 A good answer will be given to the problems established in the authors' note prior to this question . The author of this article will give a good answer to the question .
 Discussion issues relating to ethical issues will facilitate the use of this film to teach ethical principles and critical visualization . The film will be shown to students at the University of North Carolina .
 President Kennedy acted responsibly during the crisis by making, at every step, the election that minimized the chances of war while preparing for war if it were to come . We could argue that President Kennedy .
 It can be argued that Khrushchev acted irresistibly except in his decision to end the crisis by leaning on himself . It can also be argued he acted in the way he ended the crisis .
 The U.S. and President Kennedy may be flawed in trying to destabilize the Castro regime and assassinate Castro, author says . On the other hand, the United States and Kennedy may have been flawed in setting the stage for assassination .
 Research sources and writing an exhibition essay on one of the following topics can be expanded to include a power point presentation at class .
 An in-depth look at Adlai Stevenson's role in the crisis . The Kennedy brothers' collaboration in resolving the Crisis . Differences in the roles and power of the top leadership positions of the Soviet Union and US .
 She writes a review of the film in which she talks about the tension and severity of the situation, as it can be evaluated by viewers who have experienced a considerable number of crises, such as September 11, etc.
 Write a proposal for a checklist of steps and decisions that the U.S. should make before engaging in war .
 Consider factors that were important to those facing the Cuban missile crisis, as well as important factors for a modern, more interconnected world . Consider factors important to dealing with the Cuban crisis, including the threat of a missile strike .
 Teachers are encouraged to review specific standards to ensure that all standards are met over the course of the term . Teachers are also encouraged to check specific standards .
 To John A Tures, assistant professor of Political Science, at La Grange College, Georgia, for help with the first drafts of this Tutorial . Alexander Frieden for correction and commentary .