 There is historical debate about the causes of the Cuban Crisis . Just as the origins of the Big Bang are contested, so too is there is a historical debate .
 The question forms part of the Higher History Cold War course and is also examined at National 5 level . Such a question is part of a National 5 degree course and can be examined at national level .
 This article examines potential teaching activities which allow pupils to investigate the cause of the crisis . It also outlines different historical opinions on this issue .
 Pupils can engage in activities to give them a better understanding of the events, including possible causes . There are different activities in which pupils can engage .
 Pupils can be given a list of key events from before and during the crisis, and then research each of these . Pupilants can also research key events before and after the crisis .
 This information can be used to design a timeline, including a description of events and also featuring discussion of why this might have caused the crisis . The timeline is based on the events leading up to the current crisis .
 Relevant events from before the crisis might include the 1959 Cuban Revolution and the building of the Berlin Wall . The crisis may have been triggered by the Cuban Revolution in 1959 . It is not the first time the crisis has occurred since then .
 Historian quotes can be used to provoke discussion and understanding amongst pupils . The historian quotes included in this article can also be used by pupils to provoke debate .
 For instance, one approach would be to give a quotation from each of the possible causes listed in the article . For example, one could give a quote from each possible cause listed in this article .
 Pupils could then undertake a research task to identify evidence which supports and/or opposes this point of view . The task includes identifying evidence supporting and opposing views .
 A similar task could be used to develop pupil skills in historiographical research .
 Pupils could again be provided with a quote and then asked to read other historians’ work to identify supporting or counter arguments .
 Both tasks will enhance pupils’ understanding of events, and can also be used as part of assignment research . Both these tasks can be used to enhance pupils' understanding .
 Pupils could participate in a ‘Triangle’ discussion of events, developing their evaluation skills .
 This would involve pupils considering all possible causes, along with historian views and other research . Pupils would be asked to take part in the project .
 They should complete the triangle by ranking the causes in order of importance . They should make a decision about which factors were most and least important .
 Having ideological opponent so close to home caused outrage in the USA, leading to American attempts to kill Castro . Castro's ideological opponent was his ideological opponent .
 In October 1962, an American U-2 spy plane took photographs of weapons sites in Cuba . The plane was a U.2 aircraft that flew over Cuba in October 1962 .
 Analysis of images showed that the unthinkable – for the United States – had happened . The Soviet Union had placed nuclear missiles in Cuba . Analysis of the images showed the unthinkable .
 The USA demanded that the Soviets remove the weapons and imposed a naval ‘quarantine’ (essentially a blockade) of Cuba . The USA was forced to impose a naval 'quarantine' of Cuba and impose a blockade .
 The USSR refused to bow to this pressure, although secret negotiations were taking place between both sides . Secret negotiations took place between the two sides .
 At points each country came close to giving the order for a nuclear ‘first strike’ - something which had hitherto seemed impossible . At least one nuclear strike was thought to have been impossible .
 Later accounts suggest such an instruction was only minutes away from happening . Later accounts say such a decision could have been made minutes away .
 This followed provocations such as the shooting down of a U.S. spy plane, and the dropping depth charges on Soviet submarines . This followed the shooting of a United States spy plane .
 As the world watched with horror, events came to a swift – and peaceful conclusion . Events came to an end with a swift and peaceful end .
 Following behind-the-scenes discussions, the Soviets agreed to remove the Cuban weapons . The weapons were removed from the Soviet Union's Cuba .
 The USA committed to do likewise with their nuclear missile sites in Turkey and Italy, although this deal was not made public at the time . The U.S. committed to doing likewise with the nuclear sites .
 Soviet actions as a response to strategic missile inferiority . Given that the crisis almost became a nuclear disaster, it is pertinent to consider as a cause the impact of the arms race .
 Just one year before Cuba events, the Soviets detonated the world’s largest nuclear weapon, the Tsar Bomba . This was a key feature of the Cold War; indeed, just a year before the events in Cuba events .
 Gerard de Groot argues in that eradicating this military gap was a primary influence on Soviet actions . In his book, The Bomb Gerard deGroot argues .
 He sees the Soviet strategy as a ‘quick-fix solution to a severe strategic imbalance’ which would be relatively inexpensive, in a financial sense at least .
 The Soviet military were alarmed by the growth in U.S. weapons spending . They were worried that this huge military advantage would be used to take control of areas of Soviet influence .
 The placing of cheaper medium range weapons in Cuba made it possible for the USSR to present an immediate credible threat . Since the USSR had limited ability to launch ICBMs from its own soil, the placing of cheap medium range arms in Cuba gave it an immediate threat .
 The Soviets believed that even if the U.S. had more weapons, the fact Russia could devastate large areas of the United States would remove any American advantage . The Soviets thought that even 19 if the . United States had more . weapons, they believed .
 It would take almost a decade to establish parity in ICBMs . But parity could be achieved overnight through the back door, by installing medium range missiles in Cuba .
 David Hoffman goes further in his 2011 book, The Dead Hand, when he writes, The Soviet Union, looking through an entirely different prism from the U.S., saw nuclear weapons as a blunt instrument for deterrence .
 Nikita Khrushchev himself claims to have influenced him to achieve parity in terms of nuclear threat . He says achieving parity is what he believes is what influenced him .
 The Americans had surrounded our country with military bases and threatened us with nuclear weapons . Now they would learn just what it feels like to have enemy missiles pointing at you . The U.S. would learn what it felt like having enemy missiles pointed at you.
 The Cuban revolution sparked fear across the USA that this would lead to similar events across the Americas, leaving the U.S. encircled by its enemies . Soviet actions as an attempt to spread communism .
 Kennedy and his advisors conceptualised Cuba in terms of a monolithic view of communism . They also placed the country in the context of the domino theory . Not only did Kennedy conceptualise Cuba as a communist state, they also placed it in context of domino theories .
 So desperate were they to see the end of Castro that they were prepared to enlist the help of the Mafia . Even as publicly Bobby was trying to shut down the Cosa Nostra’s activities .
 America wanted to rid itself of a neighbouring Red Menace, and over the years contrived many elaborate attempts to remove the Cuban leader . America wanted the dictator to be rid of Cuba, and many attempts were successful .
 Most famous was the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, an American-backed coup which failed and brought humiliation onto the new president . U.S. backed the failed coup in 1961 .
 Michael Burleigh highlights the central role this played in the brewing of the crisis . He highlights the role of this role in the crisis in the UK .
 As a result of this they would pursue Castro with a vengeance, up to and including conspiracies to murder him . When he and his Soviet patrons went to the brink of war they would match them move for move during the most deadly moment of the entire Cold War .
 USSR's commitment to buy Cuban sugar was desperately needed by Castro’s government . American attempts to isolate Cuba threatened economic disaster for the island .
 With Cuba’s communist revolution under threat from America, the Soviets then acted to support their new partners . The Soviet Union acted to protect Cuba from the threat of the U.S.
 John Lewis Gaddis claims that defending Castro's government was the main priority for Khrushchev’s government . He uses materials from Soviet archives released years after the crisis .
 This was in the belief that Cuba’s revolution could inspire similar revolts across South America . This was believed to have inspired similar revolutions across the continent .
 The USSR was hugely excited by Cuba’s revolution, which they saw as a spontaneous communist uprising brought about without outside interference . The USSR hoped to see the action repeated elsewhere .
 They worried that the USA would eventually succeed in removing Castro from power, ending these dreams . However, they worried that they would end these dreams, ending their dreams .
 Khrushchev intended his missile deployment chiefly as an effort to spread revolution throughout South America . According to Gaddis’ book, The Cold War, private papers say: We had to think up some way of confronting America with more than words. We had a way .
 "We had to establish that a tangible and effective deterrent to American interference in the Caribbean," says President Obama . "I'm not going to be able to go to the Caribbean. I'm going to the U.S. and I'm not afraid to go there," says Obama .
 Khrushchev allowed his ideological romanticism to overrun whatever capacity he had for strategic analysis . The former Soviet leader allowed his ideology to overrun his capacity for strategic thinking .
 He risked his own revolution, his country and possibly the world on behalf of Castro Castro . Castro was so emotionally committed to the Castro revolution that he risked his life on his behalf .
 Robert Dallek, a U.S. historian who specialises in presidential chronicles, sees additional motivations connected to Castro’s revolution . He sees additional motivation connected to the Castro's revolution .
 For Dallek, the Soviet Union had concerns about China’s growing influence . The Soviet Union worried for Russia's position as the world's primary communist state, he says .
 Khrushchev felt that Castro’s support of subversion would eventually persuade Kennedy to act against him . Kennedy felt he would act against Castro if he supported subversion .
 Khrushchev was concerned that Castro was moving closer to communist China . Concerns over Castro's relationship with China also gave Khrushcherchev another reason to strengthen Soviet-Cuban 21 links .
 "To do this, he decided to turn Cuba into a missile basis from which he could more directly threaten the U.S. He decided to do this," he said .
 Khrushchev decided that the USSR should ride the doctrinally unpredicted wave or else be left behind in what could well be the Marxist-Leninist dream of world revolution . The USSR was left behind by the Communist Party in the 1960s .
 To do so involved co-opting the Cubans, who had won enormous prestige by defeating the Americans, in order to halt their drift towards the perfidious Chinese and to curb the Castro-Guevara combine’s pretensions to becoming an autonomous ideological force in their
 Soviet Actions as a response to United States Foreign Policy . In order to analyse the extent to which United States foreign policy influenced events in Cuba, it is important to understand actions America had taken which might drive the Soviets to risk an annihilatory war .
 The Soviets had their own nuclear Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey . The Soviets also had its own soldiers based in West Berlin . The West Berliners were particularly hated by the Soviets .
 Khrushchev could not understand why the United States assumed the right to place missiles in Turkey and Western Europe but would not allow the Soviets to place them in Cuba . This is a point echoed by other historians who identify Soviet anger at US hypocrisy as an inducement to Cuban events .
 Khrushchev told a visiting member of Kennedy’s cabinet that the Soviet Union had armed Cuba . The Soviet Union would continue to arm Cuba, he told Kennedy .
 The fact that America was trying to remove Castro, a Soviet ally, encouraged action from Moscow . And of course, the fact that U.S. tried to remove Fidel Castro, an ally of the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets could hardly hope to see a spread of world communism if they were not seen to defend countries following that path . The Soviets were seen to have defended countries following the path of communism .
 Kennedy was far too sensible to start a nuclear war, he said . The point was solely to deter any American invasion, he added .
 Russian strategy may have been to manipulate this American desire to avoid the spread of communism on their continent . Russia may have wanted to avoid a spread of communist communism on the continent .
 The Soviets wished to see a global revolution, but a more immediate priority was reducing or even removing the United States’ influence in Europe, especially in Germany . The Soviets wanted to see the U.S. out of power in Europe .
 Khrushchev planned to announce the existence of Cuban missile sites during a speech at the United Nations . Once the sites were operational, the missile sites would be operational . They were planned to be announced at the U.N. in a speech .
 He would offer to remove the Berlin wall if NATO agreed to leave West Berlin . And then he would say that he would remove them – and then offer to leave them . NATO would agree to remove them if it left West Berlin, he says .
 The personal dynamics between Premier Khrushchev and President Kennedy are worth examining too . Soviet actions as misguided opportunism as well as the personal dynamics of the two leaders .
 At the time of the crisis, Khrushchev was age 68 and had led his country for almost a decade . By contrast, Kennedy was age 45 and had been in office fewer than three years . Kennedy was 45 when he died .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy talked on different occasions, with the first meeting taking place at the 1961 Vienna summit . The first meeting took place in 1961 at the summit of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev is said to have liked Kennedy, although also believed him to be inexperienced . Khruschev believed Kennedy was inexperienced, but also thought him inexperienced .
 Khrushchev may have seen Kennedy as someone to be exploited, says historian . Such episodes may have led him to see Kennedy as an exploited, he says .
 This could help the Soviet Union in different ways . Not only might it reduce America’s military advantage, it could also bring Khrushchev added prestige domestically .
 He knew that if he permitted the deployment to stand, the American people, Congress and NATO allies would interpret it as a complete unwillingness on his part to defend American interests . He knew if he allowed the deployment, it would be interpreted as an unwillingness to defend U.S. interests .
 Khrushchev may have planned events in Cuba as a distraction from his own domestic problems . Some historians have also considered a theory some historians have considered .
 Khrushchev's 'Secret Speech' caused controversy in 1956 . It angered many Stalin supporters and others believed that it showed his limited commitment to communism . Others believed it showed Khrushchechev’s limited commitment .
 These had partly risen owing to higher military spending taking precedence over social policies . Social policies had been taking precedence of social policies, officials said .
 Khrushchev’s Cuban plan also rested on a hope of regaining political influence lost because of domestic and foreign setbacks . The Cuban plan was part of a plan to regain political power lost due to setbacks .
 President Obama failed to close the missile gap between Russia and the U.S. Most important he had not closed the gap between the two countries .
 In reality, none of the events which contributed to the Cuban Crisis can be seen in isolation . Each has an individual influence, and each contributes to and affects one other .
 Khrushchev did want to defend Castro’s government, however this also offered opportunities to overcome the military disadvantages the Soviets had compared to America . The Soviets had a military advantage compared to the United States .
 The prospect of making real Marx’s dream of spreading global communism was appealing, especially if it also helped Khrushchev fight off domestic discord . Furthermore, the prospect of the . prospect of . spreading global Communism was appealing .
 The Soviets were angered by the American contradiction of having their missiles in Europe, whilst stopping the Soviets doing likewise in Cuba . Equally the Soviets were angry by the U.S. stopping them in Cuba, while they were not .
 Khrushchev’s actions suggests he saw an opportunity to challenge what he viewed as a new and inexperienced U.S. president . Nevertheless, this had been the case for many years, this was not the first time it had happened .
 All of these events converged to create the conditions in which the roots of potential tragedy could grow .
 The story is a cautionary tale of how to avoid disaster, rather than how to deal with its aftermath . Fortunately for the world at large, the story serves as a warning tale of the world's future .