 The U-2 Affair THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT David Wise & Thomas B Ross . First published in Great Britain 1965 © 1964 by David Wise .
 The White House Years, Mandate for Change 1953, by Dwight D Eisenhower . Eisenhower's White House years were followed by the Eisenhower administration . Eisenhower was President of the U.S. in 1953 .
 My War with Communism, Miguel Ydigoras Fuentes, with Mario Rosenthal, is published by Prentice-Hall, Inc. It was published in 1963 .
 Excerpts from copyrighted interview with Robert F Kennedy, January 28, 1963 . Kennedy was president of the United States in 1963 .
 Printed photolitho in Great Britain by Ebenezer Baylis and Son, Limited The Trinity Press, Worcester, and London on paper made by John Dickinson and Co. on paper .
 The first is the government that citizens read about in their newspapers and children study about in civics books . The second is the nation's government, which citizens learn about in newspapers .
 The second is the interlocking, hidden machinery that carries out the policies of the U.S. in the Cold War . The U.N. policy was carried out by the United States in Cold War.
 The Invisible Government gathers intelligence, conducts espionage, and plans and executes secret operations . This second, invisible government gathers intelligence and conducts espionage . It is not a formal body .
 It's a loose, amorphous grouping of individuals and agencies drawn from many parts of the visible government . It is a loose-knit group of individuals .
 CIA is not limited to the Central Intelligence Agency, although it is at its heart . CIA is at the heart of the CIA .
 The Invisible Government includes, also, many other units and agencies, as well as individuals, that appear outwardly to be a normal part of the conventional government .
 It even encompasses business firms and institutions that are seemingly private, such as private firms .
 The shadow government is shaping the lives of 190,000,000 Americans . To an extent that is only beginning to be perceived, it is shaping their lives, says the author .
 Major decisions involving peace or war are taking place out of public view . The U.S. government does not reveal how much of its power is behind the scenes .
 An informed citizen might come to suspect that the foreign policy of the U.S. often works publicly in one direction and secretly through the Invisible Government in just the opposite direction .
 It was a much graver challenge than any which had previously confronted the Republic, it said . It was the first time the Republic had faced such a challenge, it was a challenge .
 It employed an espionage network dedicated to the subversion of the power and ideals of the United States . The network was dedicated to subverting the power of the U.S. and ideals .
 To meet that challenge the U.S. began constructing a vast intelligence and espionage system . The United States began constructing its own .
 This has mushroomed to extraordinary proportions out of public view and apart from the traditional political process . This is quite apart from traditional political processes, says David Cameron . It is not the only way to deal with the problem, he says .
 By 1964 the intelligence network had grown into a massive, hidden apparatus, employing about 200,000 persons and spending several billion dollars a year . By 1964 it had grown to a massive intelligence network, employing around 200,00 persons .
 Because of its massive size and pervasive secrecy, the Invisible Government became the inevitable target of suspicion and criticism . The Invisible Government has been the subject of much scrutiny and scrutiny .
 The Invisible Government has been accused by some congressmen and other influential citizens of conducting a foreign policy of its own . Former President Harry S Truman, including a former President, has accused the government of conducting foreign policy .
 "The American people have not been in a position to assess these charges," he said . The American people should assess the charges, he added .
 Congress provides money for the Invisible Government without knowing how much it has been appropriated or how it will be spent . The Invisible Government is a government that doesn't know how much money it will spend .
 A handful of congressmen are supposed to be kept informed by the Invisible Government . But they know relatively little about how it works .
 American ambassadors are supposed to act as the supreme civilian representatives of the President of the United States . Overseas, in foreign capitals, they are .
 They are told they have control over the agents of the Invisible Government . The Invisible Government is said to be in control of the government .
 CIA maintains more than a score of offices in major cities throughout the United States . It is deeply involved in many domestic activities, from broadcasting stations and a steamship company to the university campus .
 The Invisible Government is generally thought to be under the direct control of the National Security Council .
 Many of the Council's major decisions are never discussed in the Council . But, fact, many of its major decisions never discussed, the Council says .
 "These decisions are handled by a small directorate, the name of which is only whispered," says the head of the directorate . These decisions will be handled by the name, only whispered .
 The name of this group, even its existence, is unknown outside the innermost circle of the Invisible Government . The group's existence is unknown .
 The Vice-President is by law a member of the National Security Council, but he does not participate in the discussions of the Special Group . He is a non-member of the national security council .
 As Vice-President, Lyndon B Johnson was privy to more government secrets than any of his predecessors . As Vice President, LBJ had access to most government secrets .
 He was not truly involved with the Invisible Government until he was sworn in as the thirty-sixth President of the United States .
 The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((6 Situation Room) is a restricted command post deep in the White House basement . President Johnson was taken by McGeorge Bundy, who had been President Kennedy’s personal link with the Special Group .
 President Barack Obama was briefed by the head of the Invisible Government, John Alex McCone, Director of Central Intelligence and a member of the Special Group .
 Johnson knew the men who ran the Invisible Government and was aware of much of its workings . It was not until that morning that he began to see the full scope of its organization and secrets .
 This book is an attempt, within the bounds of national security, to reveal the nature, size and power of the Invisible Government . The book is published by Edward Snowden, a former CIA operative .
 Much of the material has never been printed anywhere else before . It is not intended to be an exposé, although much of it is never printed elsewhere .
 It is an attempt to describe a hidden American institution which the American people, who finance it, have a right to know about . The American people should know about the hidden institution, the author says .
 There can be no meaningful consent where those who are governed do not know to what they are consenting . And there can't be meaningful consent if people don't know what consenting is consenting to .
 In the harsh conditions of the mid-twentieth century, leaders have increasingly come to feel that certain decisions must be made by them alone without popular consent, and in secret, if the nation is to survive .
 The area of this secret decisionmaking has grown rapidly . The size of the Invisible Government has increased proportionately .
 If the American people are to try to answer these questions they must first achieve a greater level of understanding about the secret government itself . The American people must also understand about the Secret Government itself, says author .
 The Invisible Government has operated in Washington to expand and consolidate its power . It has operated overseas in attempts to bolster or undermine foreign governments, it says .
 The secret government has engaged in “special operations,” ranging from political warfare to para-military activities and full-scale invasion . For beyond the mere gathering of intelligence, the secret government is engaged in special operations .
 Under certain conditions, and on a limited, controlled basis, such special operations may sometimes prove necessary . Special operations are sometimes necessary in the United States .
 But they cannot become so unwieldy that they are irreconcilable with the kind of society that has launched them, they must not become so much unwieldable .
 The story of the Bay of Pigs is a deeply revealing example of how the Invisible Government works . We shall begin with the story of how it works in the US .
 Mario Zuniga edged his B-26 bomber onto the runway at the edge of the Caribbean Sea . The plane landed in the Caribbean at the end of the runway in Puerto Rico .
 Only the sound of the twin engines broke the stillness of the darkened airfield at Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua .
 Cuban exile pilot sat alone in the cockpit of the big bomber . The tall, tall, thirty-year-old Cuban exile pilots sat alone .
 In his pocket he carried a pack of Cuban cigarettes, borrowed from a fellow pilot at the last moment to lend a final authentic touch . In the pocket of a Cuban cigarette, he also carried a Cuban cigarettes .
 At a signal, Zuniga took off, his bomber roaring down the 6,000-foot runway . At a . signal, he took off from the runway .
 His mission, upon which hinged on the success or failure of the most ambitious operation in the history of the Central Intelligence Agency, was under way . His mission was to find out what happened to him .
 Their target was Cuba, and their mission was to smash Castro’s air force before it could get off the ground . The U.S. was in Cuba in the 1950s and '60s .
 Castro's planes bore a replica of the FAR insignia of Castro’s air force . The planes, too, bore the same insignia as the Cuban air force. Castro's air force is based in Cuba .
 The eight B-26s were to strike at dawn in a surprise raid on Castro’s air bases . It was to be the first of two strikes at Castro's air bases, to pave the way for the secret invasion of Cuba scheduled to take place forty-eight hours later
 The operation had the approval of the CIA, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the President of the United States . Zuniga was to land in Miami shortly after the bombing raid . The operation was to take place in Miami .
 He was to announce to the world that the attack had been carried out from bases inside Cuba by himself and other pilots who defected from Castro's air force .
 In reality, the planes had left from Happy Valley, the CIA code name for the air base at Puerto Cabezas .
 The Nicaraguan Government had secretly agreed to let the U.S. use the air base and port as a staging area for the invasion . The air base was used to stage the invasion of Nicaragua .
 As he flew northward through the night to Miami, Zuniga had time to go over the prepared story once more in his mind . The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT.
 He had been selected by the CIA’s American instructors from among the Cuban exile pilots . The Cuban exile pilot was especially selected .
 CIA agent known simply as “George” had asked for volunteers for a special mission . The mission took place on a mission known as "George" The mission was the first time volunteers had been asked to volunteer for the CIA .
 The CIA fired questions at them to test their reactions under stress . Mario was then selected for his intelligence and quick thinking . The CIA selected Mario for the test .
 There followed endless rehearsals of the cover story that Zuniga came to know almost in his sleep . The cover story was rehearsed almost in Zunsiga's sleep .
 He was instructed not to reveal the truth about his mission, even years afterward . He was told not to tell the truth even years after .
 As his plane carried him toward Florida, Zuniga was flying also toward his wife Georgina, his two young sons, Eduardo and Enrique, and his daughters, Beatriz and Maria Cristina .
 He had joined the exiles who were training in Central America to invade their homeland . He had left them behind in the safety of Miami, in an apartment on South West 20th Avenue .
 To the southeast, the strike force droned onward toward Cuba and the new day . The strike force continued to the southeast .
 Luis Cosme, a wiry, crew-cut former Cuban Air Force and Cubana Airlines pilot, had fied Cuba eight months before . The attack was to be led by Cosme .
 At the controls of the other two planes were Alfredo Caballero, a stocky twenty-five-year-old, and Rene Garcia . They, too, were Cuban Air Force veterans .
 Their target was San Antonio de los Banos, a vital military airfield twenty-five miles southwest of Havana . The Cuban military airbase is located near the city of San Antonio .
 Jose Crespo, short and handsome, led the “Puma’s flight that was to strike at Camp Libertad airfield on the outskirts of Havana, Cuba . The ‘Puma' flight was the first to strike in Cuba .
 The other two B-26s in Crespo’s wing were flown by Daniel Fernandez Mon, Spanish-born and the only bachelor in the flight, and “Chirrino” Piedra, at twenty-five one of the youngest and bestl
 None of the three pilots or their co-pilots survived the Bay of Pigs . None of these three pilots survived the attack on the Cuban island .
 All six men in the “Puma’s wing had less than forty-eight hours to live . The six men were in the 'Puma' wing . All six of the men were shot in the head by a helicopter .
 Castro had begun his climb to power in the Sierra Maestra five years earlier . They were flown by Gustavo Ponzoa and Gonzalo Herrera . Their target was the airport at Santiago de Cuba, in Oriente Province, Cuba .
 Private in E Company, 2nd Infantry Battalion of the exile brigade, heard the drone of the bomber fleet overhead . Private Mario Abril, 19, was unable to sleep on the crowded deck of the Houston, a private in E . Company .
 Two months before he had been in Miami, preparing to leave for the training camp in Guatemala . Two months later he was in Miami .
 Instead of the present he expected she gave him a rosary, instead of a gift he expected . And yet, when his mother had awakened him on February 26, his nineteenth birthday, he expected a gift .
 The slender youth switched on his transistor radio to hear whether Havana would describe the bombing raids . Now, aboard the Houston in battle dress, he switched on to hear what Havana would say about the bombings .
 In Washington, Richard M Bissell, Jr., an urbane, six-foot-four former economics professor, waited anxiously for word of the bombing strike and for news of Zuniga’s arrival in Miami .
 Bissell was the CIA’s deputy director for plans, “plans” being a cover name for covert foreign operations . Bissell: “Plans’ are a cover-name for covert operations. Bissell is the former CIA deputy director of plans .
 In intelligence parlance, “black” means secret, and Bissell directed the blackest of the black operators . Bissell was a top intelligence officer in the early 1950s .
 He was CIA man in charge of the clandestine Bay of Pigs operation from the beginning . He was the CIA man who was responsible for the operation .
 From a secret office near the Lincoln Memorial, across the reflecting pool from the White House, he was linked by high-speed coded teletype circuits to Happy Valley . He was linked from a special office across the Reflective Pool from the . White House .
 On this Saturday, April 15, Bissell’s boss, the CIA director, Allen W Dulles, was in Puerto Rico . Bissell was Bissell's boss and CIA director Allen W. Dulles .
 He had gone there that day to keep a long-standing engagement to speak at a convention of young businessmen Monday morning . He was speaking at the convention that day .
 The CIA chief decided that canceling the event would look peculiar and might attract attention . The decision was made to cancel the event because it might look peculiar .
 Dulles reasoned that his presence in Puerto Rico would be good cover . Dulles: "It would be a good cover. Moreover, it would be useful to hide"
 The public appearance of the head of the CIA in San Juan, rather than in Washington, might divert any suspicion that the CIA was directing the drama which was now unfolding .
 At 11:37 A.M. he spoke at an African Freedom Day celebration at the State Department . He also spoke at a State Department celebration celebrating African freedom of speech .
 Early in the afternoon he got into a helicopter and flew to Middleburg, Missouri, to see his victims .
 The largest secret operation in American history was already beginning . It was already a secret operation .
 Neither the President of the United States nor the director of the Central Intelligence Agency was in Washington, D.C. But neither the President nor the CIA chief were in Washington .
 Anti-aircraft guns opened up and residents of Cuban capital realized an air raid was in progress . The raid was the first of its kind in Havana, Cuba, in the 1950s .
 From their windows and balconies, Cubans could see tracers from the anti-aircraft shells shooting in great arcs across the sky . Cubans were able to see tracer shots from their balconies and windows .
 Three B-26s in Jose Crespo’s ‘Puma’ wing attacked with bombs, machine guns and rockets . In Mirtad, early risers watched as the three B.26s attacked with .
 A series of explosions followed and continued intermittently for forty minutes . The explosions were followed by a series of blasts .
 Bomb fragments hit administration building and gouged huge holes in airport runways . Bomb fragments also gouged holes in the runways of the airport in the aftermath .
 The attack lasted only fifteen minutes, but the guns kept firing for an hour . The attack was only 15 minutes long and lasted an hour.
 Luis Cosme’s ‘Linda’ flight of three B-26s was bombing San Antonio de los Banos . Simultaneously, three B.26s were being bombed by the U.S. Air Force at the time .
 One of Castro’s T-33 American-made jet trainers sitting on the end of Runway 11 blew up . Some Castro B-26s caught on the ground .
 At Antonio Maceo Airport in Santiago de Cuba, on the eastern end of the island, the “Gorilla’s wing destroyed a hanger containing one British-built Sea Fury and two smaller planes .
 A Cubana Airlines C-47 parked in front of the administration building was also demolished . The plane was also parked in the building's parking lot .
 Less actual damage to aircraft was inflicted at Camp Libertad by the “Puma’s flight . Less than actual damage was inflicted on aircraft .
 The B-26 crashed into the ocean within sight of Havana’s Commodoro Hotel . The plane was shot down by the Cuban Air Force in Havana .
 The red-haired bachelor pilot pleaded for five days to be allowed to take part in the first raid . He had pleaded for a five-day period to allow him to fly part of the raid .
 Perez would have celebrated his twenty-sixth birthday in 13 days . Perez would be celebrating his birthday in the next week .
 He decided he could not make it back to Happy Valley, and nosed his bomber north to Key West . He decided not to make it, and instead nosed the plane north to Florida .
 Crespo and his co-pilot, Lorenzo Perez, made an emergency landing at the Boca Chica Naval Air Station in Key West, Key West . Navy officials were at the scene to the consternation of Navy officials .
 Key West high schools were to have held an Olympics Day at Boca Chica, with track events, bands and parades, and the public invited .
 Alfredo Caballero discovered after dropping bombs on San Antonio de los Banos, that one fuel tank was not feeding . Alfredo found fuel tank not feeding after dropping his bombs on the city of San Antonio .
 He headed south and landed on Grand Cayman Island with his co-pilot, Alfredo Maza . Maza landed in Cayman with the pilot .
 Miami International Airport picked up a mayday distress signal from a B-26 bomber . Shortly after 8:00M.m. the Federal Aviation Agency control tower picked up the signal .
 He called the tower at a point twenty-five miles south of Homestead, Florida, or about twelve minutes from Miami, Florida .
 At 8:21 A.M. he landed, his right engine feathered as if it had been put out of action by gunfire . The plane landed in New York at 8:20 A.m. Saturday .
 Zuniga, wearing a white T-shirt and green fatigue trousers, climbed out of the water . The incident took place in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Zuniga was taken to Immigration Headquarters and questioned for four hours . He was kept from reporters . The incident occurred at Immigration Headquarters .
 The pilot's name is being withheld to prevent reprisals against his family still in Cuba . The pilot’s name is not being released .
 Photographer allowed to take pictures of the unidentified pilot and of his bullet-pocked bomber .
 The pilot was a tall, mustached man wearing dark glasses and a baseball cap . Across the nation the next morning, newspapers carried photographs of the pilot .
 Ahrens released a statement from the nameless pilot . The Invisible Government was responsible for the plane crash .
 FAR9g15, had been seen talking to an agent of Ramiro Valdes, the G-2 chief . The agent was seen talking with Valdes' agent .
 My comrades had broken off earlier, to hit airfields which we agreed they would strike . My comrades broke off earlier to hit targets which they had agreed to strike . The airfield was hit by airfields agreed to be attacked by the group .
 "I had to go into Miami, because I could not reach our agreed destination," she says . "I was low on gas, I had to drive to Miami, and I was stuck in Miami," she adds .
 Jose Miro Cardona, the professorial, softspoken president of the Cuban Revolutionary Council, could not resist issuing a flowery Latin statement .
 Not until 9:00 A.M., three hours after the attack, did the Cuban radio in Havana announce the bombings . The bombings were not announced until three hours later on Cuban radio .
 Sergei M Kudryavtsev, an old hand in the KGB, was seen leaving his official residence in a Cuban military car with two Cuban Army officers .
 The foreign diplomatic corps was summoned to the Foreign Ministry and told that Cuba had proof that the U.S. had “directed” the attack . Militiamen armed with Czechoslovak automatic weapons stalk the streets of Havana .
 At the White House, presidential press secretary Pierre Salinger denied any knowledge of the bombing . The White House has also denied knowledge of any involvement in the attack .
 Raul Roa, the excitable Cuban representative, marched to the THE IN INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT’s rostrum at the start of the General Assembly session .
 Soviet representative proposed emergency session of Assembly’s political committee to hear Cuban complaint . Valerian Zorin, the Soviet representative, then proposed an emergency session .
 The U.S. is “cynically attempting” to assert the attack was carried out by Cuban Air Force defectors, he says . The United States, he adds, is ‘cynical attempting’ to assert’s attack was done by Cuban
 Cardona’s statement that he had been in touch with those who did the bombing was in itself a violation of U.S. neutrality laws, Roa says . Roa: Cardona is in violation of United States neutrality laws . Cardona's statement that Cardona had
 Only his closest advisers were aware of exactly how delicate and difficult a position Stevenson was in . Stevenson's position was in a delicate position, according to his advisers .
 Stevenson became aware of Cuban exile training from newspaper stories . Initially, Stevenson had become aware of the training from newspapers .
 Some time before the invasion, he had expressed some misgivings about these published reports in an informal conversation with President Kennedy, which took place in the White House .
 Kennedy assured Stevenson that the U.S. armed forces would not be used in any Cuban operation . Stevenson: "Whatever happened, United States armed forces wouldn't be used"
 Tracy Barnes was the CIA man assigned to keep the State Department informed of the Bay of Pigs plans . He was Tracy Barnes, the CIA's man in charge of the CIA .
 Barnes talked about how the Cubans were operating from abandoned airfields . He mentioned the exile radio on Swan Island in the Caribbean . Barnes talked on about how he mentioned the radio on the island .
 Stevenson was aware that Barnes was from the CIA . The more he listened to Barnes’s ambiguous assurances, the more convinced he became that the U.S. was involved . Stevenson was convinced that the United States was involved.
 Barnes did not mention that an invasion was about to begin over the weekend . Barnes didn't mention that the invasion was due to begin this weekend .
 Stevenson did not immediately connect the April 15 bombings with the CIA man’s briefing of two days earlier . As a result, it is possible that Stevenson didn’t immediately connect them with his briefing of April 15 .
 The Cuban star and the initials FAR—Fuerza Aerea Revolucionaria—are clearly visible . It has the markings of the Castro air force right on the tail, which everyone can .
 Steps have been taken to impound the Cuban planes that had landed in Florida, he said . They would not be permitted to take off, he added .
 Spring is in many ways the loveliest time of the year in the rolling hills of the Virginia hunt country . Spring is the most beautiful time of year in Virginia hunting country .
 President Kennedy had little time to appreciate it on April 16, 1963 . President Kennedy was in the midst of a busy day in Washington DC .
 At his Glen Ora estate in Middleburg, the President was deeply worried . President was worried at his estate in the area .
 He and his advisers had not anticipated the volume and nature of the publicity that was being given to the bombing raids and to the story of the mysterious “defecting” pilot who had landed in Miami .
 Across the nation, the morning papers had played the story of the bombing raids with varying degrees of caution . The bombing raids were the first to hit the U.S. in the UK .
 Pilots of Prime Minister Fidel Castro’s air force revolted today . They attacked three of the Castro regime's key air bases with bombs and rockets .
 The pilot who landed in Miami said their escape from Cuba was hasty . He wondered how the Cuban Revolutionary Council had advance notice of the defection .
 The Times Washington Bureau this Sunday was trying to reach administration officials at their homes .
 Newsmen in Washington and Miami were asking where the third plane was if three pilots had defected . Other newsmen in Miami and Washington asked where the plane was .
 While the B-26s in Castro’s air force had plexiglass transparent noses and guns in the wing pods, the plane had eight .50-caliber machine guns in a solid nose . Further, while the .50 caliber machine guns were in the wings pods,
 When the Times story appeared the next day, it particularly irritated President Kennedy . What had occurred was the inevitable collision between the secret machinery and the secret government . The Times story was about a secret operation .
 He was angered because he felt it had systematically listed flaws in the CIA cover . He said he was angered by the list of flaws he felt were systematic flaws .
 It was at this point of contact between the Invisible Government and the outside, real world, that the Bay of Pigs plan began to deteriorate . The plan was at the point when it began to fail .
 President Eisenhower had discovered during the U-2 fiasco a year earlier . President Kennedy was now finding out, it is an extremely difficult and precarious business for the government to try to deceive the press and the country to protect a covert operation .
 At a military funeral for the ‘Cuban heroes’ killed by the bombing raids, he compared the attack to the raid on Pearl Harbor . He compared the bombing to the attack on Pearl Harbour .
 Immigration Director Ahrens was sticking to the scenario in Miami . But in Miami, immigration director Ahrenz was sticking with the scenario .
 He announced that the three fliers who had landed in Florida had been granted political asylum . He said they were granted asylum by President Obama .
 One was shot down, and three had landed, respectively, at Key West, Grand Cayman and Miami . Three had landed in Miami, Key West and Grand Caymen .
 Richard Bissell was encouraged by the partial success of the April 15 raid . Despite the heavy air losses and the trouble over Zuniga’s cover story and the UN debate, Bissell said .
 From the beginning the CIA understood the rather elementary military principle that no amphibious landing can take place without either air cover at the beaches or complete destruction of the opposing air force .
 In actual fact, the pilots flew back to Happy Valley in a C-54 on April 16, and participated in the air operations during the invasion .
 Alfredo Caballero was flown to Miami, and then to Retalhuleu, the CIA’s Guatemalan air base . Alfredo was flown from Grand Cayman Island to Guatemala, then flown to the Guatemalan base .
 In the case of the Bay of Pigs, Castro’s air force would be destroyed on the ground by the exile B-26 force, so that air cover at the beaches would be unnecessary . The Invisible Government would be responsible for the defeat of Castro .
 The second strike was scheduled to take place at dawn, Monday, April 17, as the 1,400-man exile invasion force fought its way ashore . The 2nd strike was set to begin at dawn on April 17 .
 CIA had estimated before the first raid that Castro’s air force included at least four T-33 jet trainers, six to eight B-26s and several British Sea Furies, fast propeller-driven fighters .
 Estimates by the returning exile fliers of how many of Castro’s planes were destroyed varied . Estimates vary as to how many aircraft were destroyed by the war .
 Pilot claims are often inflated, but Bissell knew that at least a number of Castro's B-26s were destroyed . Bissell says he knew at least one of Castro’s B.26s was destroyed .
 The next raid, on Monday, would finish the job of demolishing Castro’s air force . Hopefully, the next raid would be the next .
 Political and foreign policy considerations began to outweigh the tactical plan . But political and foreign . considerations outweighed the tactical considerations .
 The CIA plan had hinged on the assumption that Zuniga’s cover story would hold for at least forty-eight hours . The CIA had hoped the plan would hold on for as long as possible . The plan had been based on a plan to keep the cover story for
 The second air strike would either seem like the work of the rebelling Castro pilots, or would be overlooked in the general confusion of the invasion .
 The CIA reasoned that if the airstrip at the Bay of Pigs could be captured and held, photographs could be released by Tuesday, April 18 . The photos could show exile B-26s operating from inside Cuba .
 CIA assumed it would divert attention from where the bombers had taken off from on April 15 and 17 . This, the CIA assumed, would distract attention from the question of where bombers took off from .
 The problem was to get by with the ‘defecting’ pilots’ tale from Saturday to Tuesday . The problem is getting by by using the “defect’s tale’ from Saturday until Tuesday .
 Zuniga's cover story would not matter; it would be overtaken by events . After that, the cover story was not matter, it would not be a cover story . After then, events would take place .
 It was McGeorge Bundy, the patrician Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs . Bundy was Bundy's assistant to the president for national security affairs . Bundy is a patricious, well-known patricist . Bundy has been in charge of the National Security Council since
 Alarmed by the President’s eleventh-hour decision, Bissell and Cabell hurried to the State Department to appeal to Secretary of State Dean Rusk .
 The air strike was vital to the invasion plan and should be reinstated, Bissell and Cabell argued . Otherwise Castro would have jets and other planes to attack the invaders, the authors said .
 Rusk telephoned Kennedy at Glen Ora. From his office at the State Department, Rusk called from his office . Rusk then called the White House .
 He told him that Cabell and Bissell were there and believed the strike should go ahead as planned . He also said that he believed Cabell, Bissell and Cabell were there .
 Rusk asked whether Cabell wished to say anything to the President directly, but Cabell declined . Rusk: Cabell asked whether he wished to speak directly to President .
 Twelve hundred miles away, the invasion fleet was already approaching the beaches . 12 hundred miles from the beaches, the U.S. invasion fleet had already arrived .
 Some CIA officials felt Bissell should have hopped into a car and driven to Glen Ora to plead with the President . Because the operation was secret, he would have been able to speak more freely in person than he could have over a telephone wire .
 It would have been close to midnight before he could have arrived at Middleburg . D-Day would then have been at hand, but it would be too late to arrive .
 Bissell and Cabell might have gotten on the telephone in Rusk’s office and pleaded with the President directly at this point . Cabell and Bissell might have got on the phone in the office and called the White House .
 Bissell flashed word to Happy Valley that the B-26s were not to strike at Castro’s air bases . Bissell returned to his office from the State Department .
 Messages flowed back and forth between Nicaragua and Washington, and as it was finally resolved, the bombers were only to try to fly support missions .
 At Happy Valley the change in orders caused dismay and considerable confusion . The change of orders caused confusion at Happy Valley .
 So secret was the Bay of Pigs operation that many high officials of the government were not let in on it . Many high officials were not allowed in on the operation . The government was behind the secret operation .
 Roger Hilsman, the director of the State Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research had also been kept in the dark . State Department director of intelligence and research was also kept in dark .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff, headed by General Lyman L Lemnitzer, had given qualified approval . Joint chiefs of Staff had been consulted and given their qualified approval, he said .
 The second air strike was a vital part of the plan that had been approved by the Joint Chiefs . The Joint Chiefs approved the second strike .
 Rusk expressed his fears over the cancellation of the air strike . Rusk says he fears that the strike will not be allowed to take place .
 Despite the hour the Secretary of State called the President once more in Middleburg . The Secretary-of-State was in the middle of the hour .
 President's response to CIA official’s pleadings was still negative . CIA official: “In answer to the CIA official's pleadings, the President's reply is still negative.”
 The light burned late in Rusk’s suite K-608 in the otherwise quiet Sheraton Park . Rusk: "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going to do it"
 A light spring breeze caressed the pale, new green leaves on the trees . The spring breeze was a welcome welcome to the world of spring .
 Castro still had planes, and they were about to raise havoc with the exile brigade on the beaches . Castro's planes were still at the top of the list, but they were still in control of Cuba .
 It was forty-eight hours since Mario Zuniga had taken off from Happy Valley . Mario's plane had arrived at Happy Valley, California, yesterday morning .
 Two visitors walked into the office of Roberto Alejos in the Edificio Townson in Guatemala City in April, 1960, when two visitors walked in .
 Alejos, a handsome, athletic businessman, was one of the wealthiest coffee-growers in Guatemala . He was a successful businessman .
 He was the closest friend, backer and adviser of Miguel Ydigoras Fuentes, the President of Guatemala . He owned two huge fincas, plantations, both in remote areas .
 Davis bore the title of First Secretary of the American Embassy in Guatemala City . Davis was a diplomat at the U.S. Embassy there .
 A charming Californian of forty-three, graying at the temples, he looked the part of a THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((24) diplomat . A charmless Californian, he was graying in his hair and graying the temples .
 Davis was the CIA station chief in Guatemala . It was an open secret in sophisticated political and diplomatic circles in Guatemala City . But it was open secret that Davis was in charge .
 CIA agent recently returned to Guatemala after a three-year absence . CIA agent who accompanied him was less well known; he had recently returned . The CIA agent was also in Guatemala .
 They wanted to know if Alejos would help arrange secret training sites in Guatemala for Cuban anti-Castro exiles . They asked him if he would be willing to help arrange training sites for exiles in Guatemala .
 They also wanted to know whether Alejos could fix it for them to talk to President Ydigoras . They also want to know if they can talk to him about the situation .
 They were aware that he felt the U.S. regarded him as politically erratic, they said . They said he felt that the United States regarded him politically erratic .
 His election two years before had been greeted by Washington with less than enthusiasm, and Ydigoras knew it . His election was greeted by D.C. with less enthusiasm .
 Ydigoras says a mysterious visiting American called on him at his suite at the Maya Excelsior Hotel in Guatemala City in 1958 . The incident occurred late in January 1958 .
 At this point, the Guatemalan Congress had not yet officially chosen him to be President . At this time, he had not been officially chosen as President .
 Ydigoras was offered $500,000 in U.S. currency if he would withdraw . The visitor, who gave his name as “Mr Karr,” opened a suitcase containing $500k .
 The CIA knew that rightly or wrongly Ydigoras, who declined the money, became convinced that “Mr Karr” was a CIA agent, although he possessed no evidence of that . The CIA also knew that right or wrongly .
 CIA asks Ydigoras to risk his political career by permitting the U.S. to establish secret training camps in Guatemala . CIA: "It's asking him to ... risk his career by allowing the United States to set up secret camps"
 Ydigoras agreed to meet with Davis at the President’s private residence, the Casa Crema, located on the grounds of a military school . Alejos approached him, but he said he would meet discreetly with Davis .
 Castillo-Armas had come to power in 1954 in a CIA-engineered coup that overthrew President Jacobo Arbenz Guzman, whose regime was honeycombed with Communists . He was overthrown in a coup by the CIA .
 He designated Roberto Alejos to handle the details of the project for him . The project will be completed by the end of the year .
 Guatemala was to become the staging area for the overthrow of Fidel Castro’s regime in Cuba . Now Guatemala is to be a staging area to overthrow the Castro regime . Guatemala was also to be the staging site for the overthrowing of Castro's regime .
 The CIA told Alejos that it would like to find privately owned land, with trustworthy owners, for use as training sites . The CIA said it wants to find land that can be used for training purposes .
 CIA chose the Alejos coffee ranch in the Boca Costa, the Pacific slope region of southwestern Guatemala . CIA, after looking over several other possible sites, selected as its main base Helvetia .
 The estate rose to 8,000 feet along the slopes of Santiago Volcano, which had erupted in 1928 and was still active . The estate is located in Santiago, which is still active and has a volcano that erupts .
 The training area, or “Trax Base,” was at 4,000 feet . The camp came to be known as a training base for the Marines .
 Retalhuleu, the other town in the area, was twenty-five kilometers from Helvetia . The other town was Retalu, which was also located in the region, was 25 kilometers away .
 Guns could be fired and military maneuvers held at the ranch with complete security and safety . Guns could also be fired . Guns were fired .
 The entire plantation was heavily guarded, so there was little chance that any curious outsider would stumble into the Cuban exile camp, or penetrate its secrets . The plantation was also heavily guarded .
 If the volcano behaved, the CIA would have an ideal mountain hideaway to begin training the exiles who would topple Fidel Castro . The volcano would be an ideal hideaway for the CIA .
 The Americans who called on Roberto Alejos in the Edificio Townson that day in April, 1960, were acting on the authority of the President of the United States . The Americans called on the President's authority in 1960 .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower ordered the visit to the U.S. on March 17, 1960 . Their visit was a direct result of an order given by President Eisenhower . The visit was the result of a request from President Eisenhower for the visit .
 President turned over the task of arming and training the Cuban exiles to Allen Dulles . President turned the task over to Dulles, who was responsible for training and arming exiles .
 The date was revealed by Eisenhower at a press conference June 13, 1961, following the Bay of Pigs disaster . A highly articulate, highly intelligent man, Richard Mervin Bis*
 The Invisible Government did not fit the popular conception of a master spy, any more than did Dulles . The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT was created by the CIA in 1961 .
 Bissell liked to refer to himself as a “high risk man,” and it was he who ran the U-2 spy plane program . Bissell ran the program for the U.2 spy planes .
 In 1948 he joined the Marshall Plan, rising to the post of Acting Administrator . In 1948, he was Acting Administrator of the Marshall plan .
 The CIA’s original plan, as it evolved under Bissell, was to build up the underground within Cuba through a long, slow period of guerrilla infiltration by exiles trained in Guatemala . The original plan was to create a long-term, slow, slow infiltration of Cuba by
 The CIA designated one of its most energetic agents, with the cover name of Frank Bender, to be the top agency representative in dealing with the fragmented Cuban exile groups .
 Bender, whose real identity was carefully protected, became an almost mythical figure to the Cuban refugees . Bender's real identity has been carefully protected . Bender became a figure in the lives of Cuban refugees in Cuba .
 Bender was an assistant to top Allied planners during the North African invasion in 1942 . Another account had him as an assistant . Bender was also a top Allied planner .
 He smoked a Pipe, wore glasses, was well mannered and displayed a good knowledge of history . He wore glasses and smoked a pipe .
 CIA’s first task was to try to weld squabbling and emotional exile groups into some semblance of cohesion, and to select promising leaders . The CIA's first task is to weld the squabbling groups into cohesion .
 The Cuban who looked most promising was Manuel Artime Buesa, a young firebrand orator who fought in the hills with Castro in 1958 .
 Artime accepted a job with the Institute of Agrarian Reform when Castro overthrew Dictator Fulgencio Batista on New Year's Day, 1959, and became Premier . Artime became Premier in 1959 .
 Artime broke with Castro later that year and fied Cuba in a Build-Up boat . Artime also broke with Cuba in the early 1950s . But Artime later fied with Castro .
 Another Cuban leader contacted by the CIA early in the planning stage was Manuel Antonio de Varona, former Premier of Cuba under President Carlos Prio Socarras, the man Batista had overthrown .
 By the end of May, 1960, five exile groups had been organized as a revolutionary frente, or front, with Varona as co-ordinator . Varona was the co-founder of the five exiled groups that organized the front .
 The CIA began pumping what eventually became millions of dollars into the frente and its successor, the Cuban Revolutionary Council . The CIA eventually began pumping money into the Cuban government .
 The CIA funds were deposited in a Miami bank and drawn by the frente through checks signed by an accountant named Juan Paula . The CIA money was deposited in the Miami bank .
 In the back streets of downtown Miami, word began to spread that something big was afoot . In the bars, hotels, old rooming houses and apartments of the Cuban refugee community, Cuban refugees began to speak out .
 In May of 1960, less than a month after Davis approached Alejos, the first Cubans arrived at Helvetia .
 Alejos already had radio facilities for communication with the rest of the ranch . These were expanded by the CIA and installed in a warehouse near the main building . The CIA also installed radio facilities in the warehouse of the main ranch .
 The first group of Cubans lived comfortably in the Alejos guest house . Besides Artime’s MRR and Varona, the frente members were Jose Ignacio Rasco and Aureliano Sanchez Arango .
 Trax Base was built on the mountainside in Helvetia, with barracks completed in June . But as more trainees flowed into the country, the Trax base has been built .
 The base was also known by its code name, “Vaquero,” which means cowboy in Spanish . The base also known as a cowboy in the U.S. Navy base .
 Coffee workers doubled as armed guards to keep potential snoopers out of the Trax area . The 1,300 coffee workers were also armed guards .
 CIA instructors, as well as logistics and accounting officials from the agency, were also housed at the base . CIA instructors also housed there .
 Alejos owned a sugar plantation at San Jose Buena Vista, halfway between Retalhuleu and Guatemala City . He owned the plantation .
 The terrain proved excellent for parachute jump training and mass maneuvers . The terrain was excellent for parachuting training .
 Amphibious landings were practiced on the Pacific coast below Retalhuleu . Amphibiles were practiced in the Pacific Coast .
 The existing strip there was inadequate for the C-46s, C-54s and B-26s that would be brought in . The planes would have to be fitted to the new aircraft . The new planes would be C-45s, B-54 and B26s
 The firm, already in operation in Guatemala, had the necessary heavy equipment available in the area .
 Alejos fronted for CIA on all financial transactions in Guatemala . He was he who signed the airstrip contract . He signed the contract .
 Before it was over, the airstrip and air-base facilities at Retalhuleu cost the CIA $1,200,000 . The CIA spent the money to build the facilities .
 President Ydigoras, his son and adviser, Miguelito Ydigora, and the foreign diplomatic corps journeyed to Retalhuleu to cut the ribbon . The ceremony was attended by the foreign diplomats .
 A few of the more observant diplomats noticed that, curiously, there were no markings at all on the planes that were to transport the fruit and seafood delicacies .
 In Miami the CIA instructed them in weapons handling and guerrilla tactics . The training took place in the Everglades and even in Miami hotels .
 In Louisiana one group trained under the leadership of Higinio “Nino ‘Nino” Diaz, an MRR leader .
 Once the airstrip has been completed at Retalhuleu, the airlift of trainees from Florida to Guatemala could begin .
 If he passed preliminary screening, he would be picked up, brought to a CIA “safe house” at night . From there, he was flown from the mysterious, guarded Opa-locka Airport in Miami to Retalhuleu .
 Sometimes other airstrips in Florida were used for clandestine flights . The CIA had occasional troubles with overzealous local police officers .
 The Hendry County sheriff’s office once investigated a report that unmarked, unlighted planes were picking up groups of men at night from an abandoned airstrip at Clewiston, Florida .
 The CIA had another narrow brush with local guardians of the law shortly before midnight on October 27, 1960, when a plane without lights landed at Opa-locka . The plane landed without lights in a plane that landed at the airport .
 Miami patrolman radioed Opa-locka police to investigate . Since the place had not been used as an airfield by the Navy for five years, police were called .
 Jones had once worked for Twentieth Century-Fox and Spyros P Skouras, but nothing had prepared him for the production he was about to get into now . Jones had been working for the likes of Spyros and Spouras but nothing prepared him .
 He decided to call him to make sure that his representation of the Cuban exiles would be in the national interest . He gave him the names of some of the Cubans in the frente .
 A man would call in a half-hour and say he was a mutual friend and would meet Jones alone . Jones would meet with a man who would say he wanted to meet with him alone . The man would then call in the next half an hour to say he'd meet with Jones
 It was the beginning of a series of cloak-and-dagger meetings between Jones and the CIA men . Jones and CIA men met at the start of their meetings .
 Sometimes meetings took place in hotel rooms, sometimes in Grand Central Terminal . Sometimes the meetings were held in New York hotels, sometimes Grand Central . The CIA also favored Grand Central Central Terminal.
 The CIA financed and organized the caravan, which was to end with the mothers praying in Saint Patrick’s Cathedral . The mothers prayed in the cathedral .
 The CIA did not have a man aboard when it left Miami on the chartered Greyhound buses . But when the CIA left Miami, the man was still aboard .
 Jones had made elaborate preparations for television and newspaper coverage along the way . The busloads of mothers got lost for two days .
 Only one woman on the bus spoke English, and she had her problems as the caravan inched northward . The caravan was headed northward, but only one woman spoke English .
 Four of the women were pregnant and the buses had to stop every few miles for them . The buses stopped to pick up the pregnant women .
 The next day the ‘Caravan of Sorrow’ reached Philadelphia, where Jones had it halted . Jones had the "Caravan" halted .
 The CIA plan, under Bissell’s guidance, was undergoing a gradual metamorphosis . As Richard M Nixon and John F Kennedy battled across the Build-Up ((3r autumn landscape for the presidency,
 From the original concept of isolated guerrilla landings, it moved toward the idea of a larger operation that really amounted to a pocketsized invasion . The operation was a "pocketed invasion," the author says .
 By October it was decided that a force of perhaps four hundred men would make a landing in Cuba in the late autumn . It was decided by October that the force would land in Cuba .
 This group would be a major, well-trained and well-supplied guerrilla unit within Cuba . This would be the Cuban government's largest guerrilla unit in Cuba .
 At the same time, there would be a large-scale program of air drops to resupply and strengthen the guerrillas in Cuba .
 To fly the clandestine air-drop missions over Cuba, the CIA needed pilots . The CIA used to fly clandestine air drops over Cuba .
 Sergio Garcia was one of the men who flew these missions . Garcia was a member of the Air Force Air Force One . Garcia is one of those who flew the missions .
 In August, 1960, Garcia smuggled his wife and newborn son out of Havana into Miami . Garcia managed to smuggle the couple and their newborn son into Miami, Cuba .
 He was screened by Americans, who also gave him a lie-detector test in a motel in Coral Gables . Americans gave him the test at a motel on Segovia Street in Coral .
 For a time Garcia practiced dropping paratroops and cargo near Retalhuleu, he dropped cargo near the city .
 In November he began flying a C-46 over Cuba, dropping supplies in the Escambray . He began flying over Cuba in November . In November, he began dropping supplies over Cuba .
 The C-46s had no guns and there were Castro air force markings on them . Castro air forces markings on the planes were also marked by the Castro Air Force .
 At that time the air operations at Retalhuleu were under the supervision of an American CIA man known as “Colonel Billy Carpenter,” a cover name similar to his real one . The air operations were overseen by a CIA man .
 In all, dozens of overflights of Cuba were carried out by the exile pilots between November, 1960, and March, 1961 .
 The men flying these missions over Cuban territory were told that if they were captured they were to say they worked for an air transport company owned by the Alejos brothers and had strayed off-course .
 The pilots were given the telephone number of a Mr G in * As will be shown in a later chapter, the invasion preparations played a major part in the secret behind-the-scenes calculations of both the Nixon and Kennedy camps .
 Garcia was briefed at Retalhuleu by the American CIA advisers . He was told to look for lights that would shine at a designated place and time for about ten minutes .
 The flights would come in over the sea at fifty to a hundred feet to avoid Castro’s radar . The planes would come into the sea over the night to avoid his radar .
 Garcia climbed to 1,000 for the drop, then zoomed back down to sea level and headed for home . Garcia was chasing the wavetops when he hit the top of the world .
 Garcia concluded that the CIA’s contacts with the underground were not as good as they might be . Garcia says he frequently encountered anti-aircraft fire in areas supposed to be friendly .
 Bissell was dismayed at the lack of success of the air drops . Bissell and the other CIA operators were dismayed by the failure of the drops .
 Almost without exception they were flown properly, but the guns and ammunition seldom reached their targets .
 He realized that unless guerrillas had radios, small beacons and one or two trained people on the spot, the drops would miss their targets . The drops would have to be carried out in a controlled drop zone .
 To make an air drop successful, a guerrilla unit has to be able to communicate in code ten to twelve hours before a drop, in order to notify the senders of any change in location . Air drops are carried out in a guerrilla operation .
 Guertillas inside Cuba were communicating by runners back to Havana, a slow, ineffective means . But the guertillas in Cuba have been communicating by running back to Cuba .
 The CIA was unable to get radios, beacons and trained experts into Cuba, partly because Castro moved much more rapidly than had been anticipated . Castro moved quickly to create an effective counter-intelligence and counter-guerrilla network .
 Miliamen sent into the mountains in small groups tend to defect to guerrillas when they make contact . As Castro had learned when he fought against Batista in the Sierra Maestra, he learned .
 Castro deployed troops in large numbers around the mountains . Instead of sending troops in small groups into the Escambray, Castro deployed them around the mountain . Castro deployed his troops to large numbers of troops .
 He cordoned off the area and prevented the movement of couriers and food into the hills .
 The CIA’s troubles were compounded by what the Americans considered to be the impossibility of organizing a clandestine operation among “talkative” Cubans, There were leaks, and as a result, Build-Up agents were being picked up by Castro's intelligence men . Build-
 In the late fall, bad weather prevented small boats from landing with equipment for the guerrillas . In the fall, small boats were unable to land with equipment .
 Later, tons of supplies were landed by boat, but the CIA was never sure they were being properly distributed once inside Cuba . The CIA never knew if the supplies were being distributed properly .
 This was a vitally important factor, because it led directly to the decision by the CIA to abandon the guerrilla concept and to invade Cuba in strength . This was the CIA's decision to abandon guerrilla concept, and invade Cuba .
 On November 13, 1960, a portion of the Guatemalan Army rebelled against President Ydigoras . Puerto Barrios, a banana port on the Caribbean, was captured by the army .
 Cuban exile pilots at Retathuleu were enlisted to help put down the rebellion . The Cuban exile pilot pilots were enlisted by the government to fight the rebels . The rebels were killed by the Cuban government .
 The CIA reasoned that if Ydigoras were overthrown, the new government might shut down the training camps . The new government may shut down training camps, the CIA says .
 One Cuban pilot flew a C-46 loaded with troops to Puerto Barrios, as the CIA’s B-26s bombarded the rebel stronghold . The Cuban pilot was the pilot who flew the plane loaded with Cuban troops to the island .
 He actually touched down at the airport in Puerto Barrios, in the mistaken belief that it was in government hands . He was mistaken for the government to say the plane was safe .
 When his plane drew gunfire, the pilot immediately took off again without unloading any troops . The pilot took off from the plane without taking off with troops .
 Cuban and American pilots flew the B-26s in this secret sidelight to the Bay of Pigs operation . Cuba and the U.S. pilots were flying the B.26s to Cuba .
 Guatemalan Army rebellion quickly collapsed and the potential threat to the CIA camps was averted . The Guatemalan army rebellion collapsed quickly .
 Some Guatemalan politicians later blamed the uprising on the existence of the training camps . But some Guatemalan officials later blamed training camps for the uprising .
 CIA aircraft and pilots had been used to put down an internal uprising in Guatemala . And, unknown to the world, the CIA aircraft were used to do so .
 On November 18, 1960, ten days after his victory, President Kennedy summoned Dulles and Bissell to Palm Beach and received a briefing on the state of the Cuban operation .
 Guatemalans were soon gossiping about the CIA’s operation at the Alejos ranch . Guatemalan villagers gossiped about the operation .
 The cocoon of secrecy in which the CIA had, of necessity, wrapped the Cuban operation, was beginning to unwind dangerously . In January, as the change-over from the Eisenhower to Kennedy Administration was taking place, things began to happen all at once, on several levels .
 On January 3, as one of his last diplomatic moves, President Eisenhower broke off diplomatic relations with Castro . The move was one of the last moves President Eisenhower made .
 In its January 7 issue the Nation unveiled a detailed story about the Retalhuleu base by Don Dwiggins, the aviation editor of the Los Angeles Mirror . The Nation unveiled the story in its Jan. 7 issue .
 The exile training posed an extremely knotty problem for those newspapers which had learned something about it . It was a problem for the newspapers which learned something from it .
 The day after the Times broke the Retalhuleu Build-Up story, the Miami Herald published a story on the Guatemalan camp, and another on the Opa-locka air traffic .
 The MiamiGuatemala airlift was withheld for more than two months by the Herald . Publication of the accompanying story was withheld by the paper for two months .
 United States aid to anti-Castro fighters in Guatemala was first revealed elsewhere . Its release was decided upon only after U.S. aid to Guatemalan fighters was revealed elsewhere in the country .
 The lid was off now, but despite the stories, the fact that the U.S. was training Cuban exiles for a return to their homeland did not penetrate the mainstream of news . Despite the reports, the stories of the training didn't get the mainstream news .
 Most Americans were unaware that an invasion was in the making . Most Americans remained unaware of the invasion being made .
 Official Washington attended a round of gay parties ushering in the New Frontier . Official Washington ignored the deep snow that blanketed the capital and attended parties .
 With this collapse, any lingering thoughts of guerrilla infiltration disappeared . The collapse of the U.S. Embassy in Moscow has also been a major problem .
 Recruiting was stepped up and more men and material began to flow into Retalhuleu . Recruitings were stepped up to recruit more men .
 Pressure began to operate on President Kennedy to approve the invasion as soon as possible . President Kennedy was pressured to authorize the invasion in order to protect his country .
 The CIA warned him that the rainy season would hamper the landing and make the Guatemala camps unusable if the invasion was postponed much beyond the spring . The CIA also felt that the exiles could not be held together much longer because of morale factors .
 The operation was surfacing in the press, and President Ydigoras was urging that a decision of some sort be made .
 CLA concluded that between six months and a year from January, 1961, Russian-trained Cuban pilots would be returning to Cuba . That alone would make this invasion impossible, the CLA said .
 President Kennedy and his advisers were tasting the wine of victory and of power . President Kennedy was tasting the winnings of victory, power and victory .
 The young, energetic administration suffered from a bad case of overconfidence . virtually no one at the THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (36 White House) stopped to think about possible failure .
 The exile operation had acquired something of a life of its own . And deep inside the secret bureaucracy, the exile operation has become something of an important part of it .
 In Washington it is not simple to stop a project, overt or covert, once it is under way . In Washington, it's not easy to stop the project, covert or overt or overt .
 If President Kennedy had halted the invasion plan, he would have risked criticism for abandoning a project started by President Eisenhower . The invasion was designed to overthrow Castro and rid the hemisphere of Communism . President Kennedy would have been criticized for abandoning the project .
 President relied on strong assurances of the CIA and the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the operation could succeed . But beyond all that, he relied on the strong assurances that it could succeed, he says .
 He was not an expert, so he would have to take the word of the experts, he said . He would not be able to say what he thought of the world .
 Trinidad, in Las Villas Province, on the southern coast of Cuba, was to be the town of Trinidad . The town was set to be in the town Trinidad, which is located on the coast of the island .
 A landing on the south coast was mandatory, since the jumping-off point for the invasion would be Central America . The landing would be mandatory, with a landing at the base of Central America being the jumping point .
 The north coast of Cuba would have been too far away for the invading planes and ships to operate effectively . The island nation was invaded by the Soviet Union in 1941 .
 Along the south coast of Cuba the charts showed a barrier reef, except at the mouths of rivers . The charts showed that the reef was not a reef, but a reef at the mouth of many rivers .
 Trinidad was located at such a river mouth, and it also had a small port which could be made usable . Trinidad was also located at the mouth of a river which could have been made usable.
 The terrain near Trinidad offered a good chance of sealing off and securing the beachhead . The terrain was near Trinidad, which is a good place to secure a beachhead.
 If something went wrong, it was thought, the invaders could melt into the hills to carry on the fight . The invaders were thought to melt in the hills and carry on with the battle .
 Castro’s militia at Trinidad could offer immediate resistance . And there was a detachment of Castro's militia at . Trinidad, Cuba, could offer .
 CIA hoped to recruit about 1,000 troops from the local population of approximately 5,000 . CIA hoped that shortly after the landing, it could recruit about . 1,200 troops from local population .
 Under Eisenhower, there had never been any plan to use U.S. armed forces in the Cuban operation . The operation was never planned under Eisenhower .
 Kennedy reached the same decision, even though the operation had changed in scope and size . Kennedy made the decision even though it had changed the scope of the operation and size of the mission .
 Kennedy’s decision was that the formal, overt armed forces of the United States would not be used in the invasion . Build-Up ((37) was later to become a point of confusion and controversy .
 Since the operation was secret, or was supposed to be, it remained under Bissell's and the CIA’s direction and control . Since Bissell’ed Bissell, the operation remained under his direction . The operation was kept secret .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon, the nation’s top military commanders, were consulted as the plans were developed . They did not have primary responsibility .
 The Joint Chiefs were briefed on the operation for the first time in January, 1961 . The Office of Naval Intelligence stumbled on the fact that some kind of CIA operation was under way .
 The CIA’s proposal for a landing at Trinidad was sent to the Joint Chiefs for consideration . The Joint Chiefs have yet to consider the proposal .
 Joint Chiefs chairman: Plan for landing at Trinidad would have even chance of success . After studying it, they submitted an opinion signed by General Lyman L Lemnitzer .
 A sensitive youth of nineteen, Mario had soft brown eyes and a quiet nature . Mario was a quiet youth of 19, with soft brown brown eyes .
 Many of my friends from Cuba were getting training and I heard about it and that’s how I got into it, he says . Many of his friends from Cuban were getting trained and that's how he got into the military .
 Lemnitzer acted for himself, Admiral Arleigh Burke, Chief of Naval Operations; . General Thomas D White, . Chief of Staff of the Air Force; General George H Decker, Army Chief of . Staff; and General David M Shoup, Commandant of the Marine Corps.
 Some of the chief's papers were signed by Burke, in the absence of Lemnitzer . Later, some of Burke's papers was signed by the chief . Burke was the only person to sign some of the papers .
 Sometimes he did it right in the hotel, and sometimes he took us to the Everglades to shoot with .45caliber guns . Sometimes he took the team to shoot . The team shot .
 "I went to the recruiting office for those camps at 27th Avenue and roth Street, South West. I went to a recruiting office," he says .
 They were dressed just like the rest of us, khaki uniforms and blue baseball caps . They were in the military when they came to the U.S.
 It had no seats, you know, just seats along the side, and we were packed in on the sides . We were packed into the sides of the stadium, with no seats . It was the first time we had seats in the stadium .
 When there was no more room, they put the rest of them on the floor of the plane . The rest of the passengers were placed on the plane's floor . When there were no more space, the rest were put on the ground .
 "We had a real good breakfast there, bacon, ham, everything we wanted, That felt real good, so I began to like the looks of this place, you know, because we had such a good breakfast," he said .
 The same day we started shooting with M-1 rifles and they took us up eight, nine thousand feet to practice . But no, the same day they started shooting, they said, "they took us to practice"
 I thought we were going to bed, because we started out the whole day before with no rest, but we had lessons in machine guns . So that night I thought . We had no rest. We had to learn about machine guns. We didn't want to go to bed .
 After about five days they gave us a choice of battalions we could join . I chose the Second Battalion because I had a couple of friends there in E Company . After five days we were given a choice, we were allowed to join Second Battalion .
 Bob was the second battalion instructor, Another was Jim and another was Juan, who was the only one who spoke Spanish . Juan was Juan . Bob was Bob, Jim and Jim .
 CIA analysts concluded it would have been wiser to choose a commander Build-Up instead of a commander .
 The instructor had a .38-caliber revolver on his hip, like all the American instructors . But he had a handgun on his hips, like the instructor .
 We took hikes and learned to shoot .50-caliber machine guns and mortars and Browning automatic rifles and bazookas . We also learned how to shoot Browning .
 It would knock out Castro’s air force on the ground, thus making air cover over the beaches, during the landing operations, unnecessary . It would do so by knocking out Castro's air force .
 During the invasion eight more were added, making a total of twenty-four . During the war, eight more of the 24 were added to the list .
 These transports were used in the air drops over Cuba prior to the invasion, and would drop paratroops during the invasion . These transports would be used to drop troops during the war .
 To head the Cuban pilots, the CIA selected Manuel Villafana Martinez, an ex-Cuban Air Force pilot who spent three years in jail on a conspiracy charge against Batista .
 Luis Cosme had experience in battalion-strength landings rather than a massive assault like Iwo Jima .
 The first commander of Trax Base was “Colonel Vallejo,” a high ex-Philippine Army officer who had fought the Huks . The first commandant was a high-ranking former Philippine Army officer .
 He was replaced by “Colonel Frank’s” when the CIA shifted from a guerrilla operation to a larger amphibious landing . He was the CIA's most senior commander in the operation .
 The Cuban Air Force fighter pilot who led the April 15 B-26 strike, was named deputy chief . The Invisible Government was named by the U.S. government .
 There were sixty-one Cuban pilots at Retalhuleu, plus navigators, radio operators and maintenance men .
 Six instructors stayed with these pilots throughout the months of training and the invasion . Six American instructors remained with the pilots throughout their training .
 "Stevens" told Cubans he had false teeth because the Chinese Communists had pulled out his real ones during the Korean War . "Seig Simpson" was a tall, ruddyfaced man who had a Japanese wife . Other American advisers included “Billy Belt,” a
 None of the CIA advisers used their real names, although several used correct first names .
 General G Reid Doster, the chief of staff of the Alabama National Guard, used the name “Reid” when he was at Retalhuleu as a CIA adviser . Doster used the same name as Doster when he worked for the CIA in Alabama .
 The B-26s had two-man crews and no tail gunners or guns . Several of the Americans were recruited by the CIA through a Miami front from among National Guard pilots who had flown B-25s in World War I .
 These were eliminated to make room for extra fuel to increase the range of the bombers . They were eliminated in order to make space for more fuel .
 The normal take-off weight for a B-26 is 36,000 pounds, but the bombers lumbered off the runways at 40,000 lbs . The bombers were the first to carry a maximum of 40kg take-offs .
 Castro's jets were formidable machines of war, but Castro’s jets could fly higher and faster . Castro's planes could fly faster and faster than any other fighter jet .
 By now the training camps had become a sensitive political issue in Guatemala . The training camps became a controversial political issue .
 President Ydigoras wrote to President Kennedy that morale in the camps was high and troops ready for action . President Kennedy wrote that morale was high in February .
 The Guatemalan Government is concerned about the unrest in the camps . Behind his move was the private alarm of the government over the unrest .
 The sooner the invasion, the sooner the camps could be closed and the whole thorny issue removed . From Build-Up ((4z their viewpoint, they say the sooner is the sooner .
 He called on President Kennedy at the White House and also met with Allen Dulles . He met with President Kennedy and met with Dulles in the 1960s .
 CIA and Joint Chiefs were having trouble behind the scenes in agreeing on a landing site for the invasion . As the pressure mounted, in late February and early March, the CIA and the Joint Chiefs had trouble .
 The Joint Chiefs had given a landing at Trinidad a fifty-fifty chance . Three alternative sites were submitted to them by the CIA, which had decided it no longer favored Trinidad . The airstrip there was too small for B-26s .
 Joint Chiefs studied three alternate sites overnight, then held one meeting . Joint chiefs studied the three alternate locations overnight . Joint Chiefs met in Washington, D.C., to discuss alternate sites .
 They then said the best of the alternate sites would be the Bay of Pigs . They said there would be less chance of ultimate success at the site than at Trinidad to the east .
 Chiefs selected Bay of Pigs mainly because there were only two access roads leading to the beach . Chiefs selected the beach because of the only access roads to it . Chiefs select the beach in order to avoid a repeat of last week's defeat by the Eagles .
 Castro's forces would have to come this way, and the roads could be bombed by the invaders . Castro’s forces would need to be able to enter this way . The roads would be bombed .
 The Chiefs warned that it would be more difficult for the invaders to break out of the beachhead at the Bay of Pigs than at Trinidad . By the same token, the Chiefs said it would not be more likely for the invasion to break into a beachhead .
 The CIA’s military experts, however, felt the Bay of Pigs was at least as good a site as Trinidad, or better . The CIA's military experts said it was a good site .
 The CIA was having trouble with a group of Cubans who objected to Artime and Captain Jose Perez San Roman, the CIA’s handpicked leaders . While this was going on in Washington the CIA had trouble with the Cubans .
 Cuba was a CIA prison from which the bitter Cubans were released only after the Bay of Pigs . The CIA prison was actually a prison from Cuba .
 The CIA had taken political as well as operational control of the exile movement . It tended to favor the more conservative elements in the community, the CIA says .
 In May, 1960, Manolo Ray, the Minister of Public Works under the INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT, broke with the regime and went underground . He was a member of the Communist Party .
 Ray maintained that he believed in the original social aims of Castro’s revolution . But he took the position that Castro had betrayed those aims by leading Cuba down the Communist path . Ray: Castro betrayed the aims of the revolution .
 It presented a strong competitor on the left to the CIA’s frente on the right . The CIA is now in charge of the CIA .
 With the target date for the invasion fast approaching, something had to be done to prevent a political split in the exile ranks . The target date of the invasion is fast approaching .
 The frente and the MRP were tenuously patched together in a new organization, the Cuban Revolutionary Council . Under CIA prodding, the CIA prodded them to form the new organization .
 Jose Miro Cardona, a colorless but dignified fifty-nine-year-old former Havana attorney, is a former Cuban attorney . Cardona was a prominent lawyer in the 1970s and 1980s .
 He was Premier of Cuba for the first six weeks of Castro’s regime . The son of a Spanish general who fought for Cuban independence, he was Premier .
 He had resigned as Premier but was named Ambassador to the U.S. by Castro in July, 1960 . Castro named him ambassador to the United States in July 1960 .
 Instead of taking the job, Cardona went into asylum in the Argentine Embassy . Cardona has been granted asylum in Argentina since 2008 .
 He came to the United States three months later on a safe-conduct pass . He was in the U.S. three months after arriving on safe-condcond pass .
 The document was designed to prepare public opinion at home and abroad for the secret invasion now only two weeks away . It was not generally realized at the time, but .
 Clearly, it was an attempt to provide a form of philosophical underpinning for the imminent clandestine invasion . Clearly, the attempt was intended to provide an underpinning of the imminent invasion .
 Behind the scenes in Washington, a few voices were raised in opposition to the invasion of Iraq .
 Senator J William Fulbright was invited by the President to ride with him to Palm Beach on March 30 . Fulbright is the outspoken Arkansas Democrat who headed the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . President Barack Obama invited Fulbright to travel with him .
 Fulbright handed a memorandum to the President when he boarded Air Force One, the presidential jet . Fulbright had heard rumors of the invasion plans, and handed it to him .
 Millions of people still think the United States instigated the Castillo-Armas invasion of Guatemala in 1954 . The United States hand in that enterprise was far better covered than it is today with regard to the Cuban exiles .
 The prospect must also be faced that an invasion of Cuba by exiles would encounter formidable resistance which the exiles, by themselves, might not be able to overcome . The prospect of a Cuban invasion of the country's borders is also being faced .
 The question would then arise of whether the United States would be willing to let the enterprise fail . Or whether the U.S. would respond with progressive assistance as necessary as necessary to insure success .
 This would include the use of armed force, even under the paper cover of legitimacy, says David Cameron . "We would have undone the work of thirty years in trying to live down earlier interventions"
 Fulbright also suggested that “even covert support of a Castro overthrow” probably violated the treaty of the Organization of American States as well as U.S. neutrality laws . Fulbright suggested that covert support for a Castro overthrowing’s overthrow’ probably violated U.
 On April 4, President Obama met with his top advisers at the State Department . The President met with top advisers on April 4 .
 Only Fulbright, who was invited by the President to attend, spoke up firmly against the operation .
 CIA established liaison with State Department to keep tight circle of officials informed of its progress . CIA had established liaison between State Dept. and CIA .
 Whiting Willauer, former Ambassador to Honduras, was the special assistant for the Cuban operation . Christian A Herter was still Secretary of State when he named Willauer in 1960 .
 CIA assigned Tracy Barnes* to maintain liaison with Willauer . Tracy Barnes was assigned to maintain a liaison with the CIA . The Invisible Government was responsible for the CIA's decision .
 Barnes continued to report to the State Department . After the Kennedy Administration took over, Willauer was dropped, but Barnes was dropped .
 He spoke to Adolf A Berle, a Latin American adviser to the President, and Thomas C Mann, then Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American affairs .
 They were among the few department officials besides Dean Rusk who knew about the invasion . The invasion was the first time the department officials knew about it .
 Late in March, Under Secretary of State Chester Bowles learned of the invasion plan . Bowles was Acting Secretary of the State .
 He also asked Rusk to guarantee him half an hour to present his opposition to President Kennedy in the event the plan was approved . Rusk also asked him to give Rusk a half-hour to present him opposition to the president .
 Bowles came away from his talk with Rusk with the belief that there would be no large-scale invasion . However, Bowles believes there would not be a large scale invasion of the U.S.
 In the remaining two and a half weeks Bowles paid little attention to the matter . Bowles had formed the impression it would be, at most, a small guerrilla landing .
 Cuban pilots at Retalhulen were handed sealed envelopes and told to open them only after they are in the air .
 The orders were to proceed to Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, that was to be their home for the next few weeks . The misnamed Happy Valley was the home of the soldiers .
 The entire air operation, including the American advisers, moved from Guatemala to Happy Valley . The entire operation was moved from the Guatemalan capital, Guatemala, into Happy Valley.
 The exile brigade was airlifted to Puerto Cabezas, their port of embarkation . It was the first time they had been to the island nation .
 The twenty-five-year-old company owned half a dozen vessels . The company was headed by Alfredo Garcia .
 In pre-Castro era it plied between East Coast ports, Havana and Central America, carrying rice and sugar . It also had branch Offices in Houston, Texas, and Lake Charles, Louisiana .
 Alfredo Garcia’s five sons, Eduardo, Marcos, Alfredo Jr,. Lisardo and Francisco, came to the U.S. after Castro . After Castro, Garcia's five sons came to America .
 The Garcia Line was Cubanowned and the only Cuban shipping company still operating from Havana, was perfect cover . The CIA needed a navy, and the Garcia Line provided the cover for the CIA .
 The agency then mapped out a complex plan to get the vessels to Puerto Cabezas at the last possible moment . Eduardo and Eduardo worked with the agency to get them to the island .
 Alfredo remained behind in Cuba, which further served to divert suspicion . Alfredo was not in Cuba at the time of his death . The incident was the first time Alfredo died in Cuba .
 Their crews believed they were on a normal voyage to Central America . Their crews were told nothing at first, and believed it was a normal journey .
 At Puerto Cabezas they were informed about the invasion and given the choice of leaving . They were given the option of leaving the island .
 A few did—they were held by the CIA at Puerto Cabezas until the invasion was over . A few of the men survived the invasion . They were held there until the end of the war .
 Each of the ships had about twenty-five crewmen, so there were more than a hundred seamen in all who suddenly found themselves in the middle of a shooting war . Each ship had about 25 crewmen and more than 100 seamen .
 The CIA also purchased two World War II LCIs, the Blagar and Barbara J. J., and added them to the invasion fleet . The CIA purchased two LCIs from the U.S. during the Second World War .
 The Garcia Line provided cover as well as transportation . Some of the exiles recruited by the CIA were handed papers to fill out that led them to believe they were signing up, technically as able-bodied hands .
 While the CIA assembled its secret navy, there were important political moves back in the U.S. The CIA assembled a secret navy .
 The day after the invasion Castro seized Castro seized the company, but, of course, Alfredo had already fled . The same day Federal Immigration agents in Miami arrested Rolando Masferrer, a notorious Batista henchman who, *
 Later, disheartened by the failure of the invasion, he sold the ships that weren’t sunk and liquidated the steamship line . He later liquidated his line .
 Masferrer, who had fied Cuba the same day as Batista, was spirited to Jackson Memorial Hospital after his arrest . He was placed under guard and placed under a guard .
 Grand jury indicted Masferrer on charges of conspiring to outfit and send a military expedition against Cuba . Two days later a Federal grand jury indicted him . The charges are a violation of United States neutrality laws .
 Masferrer’s character and reputation are irrelevant to the cynical manner of his arrest, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 Ten days after the Bay of Pigs disaster Federal Judge Emett C Choate ordered Masferrer released and accused the Federal Government of having shipped him off to a “government concentration camp” in Texas . Ten days later he was ordered released by a federal judge .
 Assistant United States Attorney Paul Gifford said the Immigration Service acted on direct orders from President Kennedy . The case was brought to the U.S. by President Kennedy in 1963 .
 The government quietly dropped the case against Masferrer without explanation . Seven months later, on November 9, 1961, the case was quietly dropped . The case was dropped without an explanation .
 “No activities engaged in by Cuban patriots which have been brought to our attention appear to be violations of our neutrality laws.” Build-Up ((47 final stage of preparation. ‘No activities ... appear to have been . violations of the neutrality laws’
 It was a case of a straight political arrest, something not normally associated with life in the U.S. It was the first time a political arrest has been seen in the United States .
 President believed that Masferrer’s arrest would demonstrate to the exiles and the world that the U.S. had no sympathy for Batista supporters .
 On April 10, at a White House meeting, the final decision was made to change the landing site from Trinidad to the Bay of Pigs . The final decision on April 10 was made at a meeting with the White House .
 CIA believed that this was a political and foreign-policy decision by the President, prompted by concern over potential world reaction . CIA believed this was the President's decision to withdraw from Syria .
 There would be no shooting of civilians at the Bay of Pigs because hardly anyone lived there, while at Trinidad there was a sizable local population . At Trinidad, at least half of the population was local .
 It was also thought that the landing at the Bay of Pigs would be virtually unopposed . The landing would have the appearance of an effort to resupply guerrillas, of being a smaller and more spontaneous operation .
 Joint Chiefs predicted the invasion would have an even chance at the Bay of Pigs . Despite the fact that the Joint Chiefs had a better chance, they went along with the choice . The decision was made to invade the U.S. at the end of the war .
 Chiefs normally make a distinction between the initial chances of success and ultimate success . Chiefs usually make distinction between initial chances and eventual success . The Chiefs normally don't make such a distinction .
 Success after establishment of beachhead depended upon certain psychological factors inside Cuba, military says . Success depends upon psychological factors which it was not the responsibility of the military to assess, they say .
 The CIA predicted there would be such an uprising if the beachhead could be established and held . The beachhead is expected to be established if it is established .
 It argued that all would depend on the success of the operation . Rather, it argued that success would depend upon success of operation .
 Bissell expected defections among Cubans, although he did not expect them for at least a week after the invasion . Bissell: "If the landing was THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT, it would have been a success"
 The plan was to establish a beachhead; then use the Bay of Pigs airstrip to strike at Castro’s communications, and other vital installations . Plan was to use the airstrip as a launchpad to attack Castro's communications .
 A new Cuban government would be declared at the beachhead by the Council members . The new government would then be recognized by the United States .
 Some of them were irritated by the continual changes in the invasion plan . Some of the soldiers were annoyed by the constant changes in their plans .
 They were bewildered by what they considered the informality and lack of procedures of the new administration . They were accustomed to the strict discipline of an Eisenhower administration .
 Admiral Arleigh Burke has declined to comment on the Bay of Pigs . He was disturbed at the way the plan was being constantly modified .
 At one point Burke was told that the Navy would have to stay outside the three-mile limit off Cuba . The Navy was told by the U.S. that it would not be allowed to go outside the limit .
 He was first told that the Navy would not make contact with the invasion fleet at all; then that three destroyers could escort the ships, then two destroyers . He was told that he would not be able to escort any of the ships . The invasion fleet was escorted by two destroy
 The Chiefs were told that the invasion was not a Pentagon operation and that they could give advice only when called upon . The chiefs were told they could only advise when needed .
 Because of the secrecy involved, they were not allowed to take their staffs into their confidence . This, of course, cut down on their overall effectiveness . Because of this, they weren't allowed to talk to staffs .
 It was made crystal-clear to the Pentagon that no U.S. armed forces were to be used in the actual invasion . Burke’s destroyers could escort the exile fleet to a point offshore . If the ships were spotted en route to Cuba from Puerto Cabezas,
 In this event, United States ships and aircraft had the authority to protect the fleet against attack as it returned to Nicaragua . The U.S. Navy was in control of the fleet .
 In April, Burke was acting as the executive agent for the Joint Chiefs . In that role, he ordered elements of the Atlantic Fleet to move into position off Cuba .
 Moving with the fleet was a battalion of Marines from their base at Vieques Island, off the eastern end of Puerto Rico . The fleet was moving with the base .
 The President had made it clear the Navy was not to take part in the invasion itself . The President has made clear that the Navy will not participate in the operation .
 If the landing ran into trouble the President would change his mind and order the Navy and Marines to help . But it is possible that if the landing runs into trouble, the President may change his course .
 For this reason Burke moved his ships into position off Cuba; he informed both Allen Dulles and the President of his action . Burke informed both Dulles .
 On April 12, he served notice that no U.S. forces would invade Cuba . The Cuban government says no United States forces would attack Cuba . President Barack Obama announced that no American forces would enter Cuba .
 Cuban crew members of the eight B-26s that were to fly in the April 15 raid went into security isolation at Happy Valley . The next day Cuban crew were put in security isolation . The raid took place on April 15 .
 If forced down outside of Cuba, the pilots were instructed to say they were defecting FAR pilots . The pilots were told they would defect if they were forced down .
 This was so that their statements would dovetail with Zuniga’s cover story in Miami . This was done so that the cover story would fit with the story of the day .
 They were warned not to land at the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo . The U.S. military base is located in Guantanamo Bay .
 Four days before D-Day, the CIA’s fleet sailed from Puerto Cabezas . Now, four days before the invasion, the fleet is in the air .
 The second and fifth battalions were crammed aboard the Houston, along with large quantities of ammunition . The Houston was the last ship to leave the U.S. in 1945 .
 The third and fourth battalions, both heavy-weapons detachments, and the sixth infantry battalion were aboard the Rio Escondido and the other ships . The third, fourth and fifth battalions were aboard .
 Giron Beach, on the eastern edge THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((50 of the wide bay, which pokes like a finger into the southern coast of Cuba, Cuba .
 First battalion, the paratroopers, would be going in by air behind the beaches . The first battalion would go by air by air, with the first battalion going by air .
 On Saturday, April 15, as the fleet steamed for Cuba, the B-26 bombers struck . The bombers struck in Cuba on April 15 .
 The CIA assembled the Cuban pilots on Sunday, April 16, at Happy Valley, California . Now, the CIA is trying to get them back to Cuba .
 The American advisers told the Cubans that Castro’s planes had been destroyed by the raid the previous day . The U.S. told the Cuban government that the raid had taken place .
 It showed gravel piled on the runways of the airstrip at the Bay of Pigs . It was the first time gravel had been piled up on runways .
 Private Mario Abril and the other men of E Company attended briefings by their commanders this Sunday . The men will be on board the Houston this Sunday for the first time since the deployment .
 They were shown aerial photographs to help them memorize landmarks . “They gave us whiskey in little cans, real bad, yeah, black,” says one of the soldiers .
 He told us not to smoke, not to light a light or anything, because we were getting near Cuba . "He told us don't smoke," he said, "because we were going near Cuba"
 "My squad leader woke me up, and when I got up, I saw the coast over there," he says . "I'm not going to be able to go to the beach," he adds .
 "I saw, on my right, some lights, like a storm, you know, and they told me those were the other guys," he says . "They told me they were the others," he adds .
 Lem Jones' East Side apartment was invaded by a group of men on the East Side of Manhattan . Lem Jones was one of the men involved in the invasion of the U.S.
 The CIA man dictated the first communiqué, to be issued to the world by Jones in the name of the Cuban Revolutionary Council . Jones was the CIA man who dictated the message .
 Jones received no advance inkling that midnight would be the start of D-Day . It had been a peaceful Sunday for Jones, and he had received no early inkling .
 He knew the Council had met during the early afternoon at the Hotel THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((52 Lexington on 48th Street and Lexington Avenue. The Hotel The Invisible Government (52 Lexington)
 In midafternoon Jones had called the hotel and tried to reach Miro Cardona . Jones had been trying to reach Cardona for several hours . Cardona died in a car crash on Tuesday .
 He was puzzled when he was told that there was no answer, but thought little about it . He said he thought little of it, but that he was puzzled .
 At about 3:30 P.M., CIA agents, avoiding the main exit, spirited Cardona, Hevia and the other members of the Council out of the hotel .
 The Cubans were told only that they were being taken to Miami for something important . They were taken to the U.S. for an important trip . The Cuban government says they are being held in Miami .
 They were driven by the CIA to Philadelphia, where they boarded a plane and were flown to Opa-locka . The group was driven by a CIA team and flown by a plane to the airport in Philadelphia .
 The men who were to lead a free Cuba were virtually held prisoner in a barracks-like house, all but barren of furniture . There, for three days, the men were held prisoner .
 The call from Washington had instructed him to take the communiqué across town to the Hotel Statler and show it to Antonio Silio, the secretary treasurer of the Council, and Emesto Aragon, Cardona’s right-hand man .
 He grabbed a taxi outside of his apartment at 39th Street and Second Avenue and took it to the Statler . He showed the announcement to the two Cubans, who he showed to them .
 At 2:00 a.m. he started distributing it, still by taxi, to the wire services . Then, at 2:30 a.M., he began distributing it to the media, still using taxi .
 At Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua, at 1:15 A.M. on Monday, April 17, six B-26 bombers were lined up on the runway, ready to carry out the second strike against Castro’s air bases . The invasion of Nicaragua was the first strike
 U-2 photos had shown more than forty heavy tanks lined up in the open . Their targets were Camaguey, Cienfuegos, San Antonio de los Banos, Camp Libertad, Santa Clara and Santa Clara .
 They would strike just before dawn, finishing the destruction of Castro’s air force that had begun with the first strike two days before . The strike would be the first to destroy Castro's air force .
 The men in the B-26s had not yet learned of Richard Bissell’s message from Washington, canceling the air strike on orders from the President . President Bissell had ordered the strike, but the strike was canceled .
 1:40 A.M. came and went with no clearance to take off, they realized something had gone wrong . The plane was supposed to fly from New York City to Washington, DC .
 At 1:55 A.M. the Cuban pilots were told their mission had been canceled on orders from Washington . The Cuban pilots had been on a mission to intercept a U.S. jetliner .
 They were to fly to the beaches to try to provide air cover for the landing . Instead, they were to . fly to . try to . provide air . cover for landing .
 Mario Abril noticed the ship had come almost to a complete stop . Mario abril was aboard the Houston when the ship came to a stop .
 My squad was one of the first to get there, Company E . We got in @ boat and run for the coast. We ran for the safety of the coast . We were in a boat and made a run for safety .
 It was a wood boat, like you might use for water skiing, with an Evinrude outboard motor, with gray paint, the motor I mean . The boat was a wooden boat with a gray paint and a wood engine .
 It stopped in the middle of the Bay of Pigs when we were two miles away from shore, so we had to start it up again and they were shooting . The film was shot at the end of the shoot-up, but it was not shot .
 An unexpected reef was encountered as the ships moved in, and it slowed down the landing operation . The operation was delayed by an unexpected reef .
 At Happy Valley, the disappointed B-26 pilots climbed down from their cockpits . The plane was one of the first to fly over the U.S. at Happy Valley . It was the last of the B.26 bombers to fly .
 New plans had to be drawn up on the spot because of the changed nature of the mission . New plans were drawn up in the wake of the changes in mission plans .
 It took a B-26 two hours and fifty minutes to fly from Happy Valley to the Bay of Pigs . It took two hours to fly .
 The bombers had enough fuel to stay over the beaches for two hours if need be and still make it back to base . The bombers were able to make it two hours over the beach without refueling .
 It was decided that the bombers would fly over the beaches in pairs, every half-hour . So it was decided to fly in pairs of bombers over the beach in pairs .
 As exile Brigade 2506 was moving ashore, Castro received word of the invasion . Castro was in exile when he received word that the invasion was imminent .
 He ordered his T-33 jets and Sea Furies to take off before dawn for the Bay of Pigs . The Cuban dictator ordered his forces to fly to the bay of Pigs in Cuba .
 Mario Abril’s E Company made contact with the enemy at 4:00 A.M. General Cabell was pleading with Secretary Rusk at the Sheraton Park Hotel in Washington, DC .
 An army of liberation is in the island of Cuba to fight with you against the Communist tyranny of the unbalanced Fidel Castro . "Attack the Fidelista wherever he may be found," says President Obama .
 Listen for instructions on the radio, comply with them and communicate your actions by radio . Listen to instructions from the radio and comply by communicating your actions .
 On the prow machine-gunner Manuel Perez Salvador had his hands full . The prow machine gunner had a big job to do .
 Perez Salvador, a former catcher for the Fort Lauderdale Braves, a Class C team in the Florida International League, was in Miami only twelve days before . Perez Salvador was a catcher for Fort Lauderdale . Salvador is now a minor league catcher in Miami, Florida .
 He was recruited for the invasion at the last moment and flown to Happy Valley on April 5 with forty-seven others . He had been recruited to the invasion by the last minute .
 Perez Salvador was assigned to the Houston, Texas, base after one day of training as a machine-gunner . After one day’s training, Perez Salvador became a machine gunner .
 At 5:30 A.M., he peered through his gun sights and saw the first T-33s and Sea Furies begin a series of attacks on the ship . Now, at 5:00 A.m. he peers through the gun sights to see the first
 Sergio Garcia had taken off from Happy Valley at 1:16 A.M. at the controls of a C-46 transport loaded with paratroopers . Sergio Garcia took off at 1.16 a.m. on Tuesday morning . Garcia was the first person to be shot down in
 Their target was the strategic Y-shaped crossroads at San Blas, inland behind Giron Beach . The Spanish capital is located on the coast of northern Spain .
 When all the cargo and all but the last paratrooper had been dropped, the cable running the length of the plane snapped . The cable ran from the plane to the ground, and the cable snapped .
 It broke the leg of a parachute drop officer, jammed the tail controls of the plane . One young paratrooper was left dangling helplessly from the plane at the end of the cable .
 He and another man managed to pull the paratrooper in and discovered he was only a young boy . They pulled him in and found he had only been a boy when he was found .
 Gomez cut open the boy’s boot and saw that his leg had been badly gashed when the cable snapped . An hour later, as they were winging back to Happy Valley, the boy's leg was gashed by the cable, Gomez said .
 Cuban Revolutionary Council members are now totally occupied with the dramatic events unfolding in Cuba . Their views will be made known to the press solely through the Cuban Revolutionary council’s spokesman, Dr. Dr. Josefina .
 The Council may have been totally occupied, but it was not totally free . The Council is now in full control of the world's most important city .
 Cuban leaders were chafing at being held in their barracks house at Opa-locka, Cuba . The Cuban leader was chafed by the situation .
 They were brought there so they could be flown to the beachhead as soon as it was secured . They were told they had been brought there .
 The Council leaders donned their khaki uniforms, in readiness . The United States would then recognize them as the legitimate government of Cuba . The U.S. would recognize them .
 The children were allowed to take walks along the hard-surface road in front of the house .
 Carlos Hevia was to be the foreign affairs minister of a free Cuba . CIA man warned him not to go very far in Cuba . Hevia had been due to become the country's foreign minister .
 The area was rough and wild, the CIA man insisted, and the surrounding shrubbery was full of rattlesnakes . The area is rough, wild and wild . The CIA man insists, "The area is wild"
 Mario and the men of E Company had pushed back the militiamen and seized a T-shaped crossroads near Playa Larga . Mario and his men pushed back militiamens and seized the crossroads .
 Jones and the Council later came in for some criticism for issuing press releases from a Madison Avenue office . The truth is that he did not write any of them. We shouted the .
 Each of the six bulletins was dictated directly to Jones by the CIA . Castro had realized the danger of this .
 Three women and two girls, little ones, that's all, in the truck, that’s all, said a witness . Then we saw there were three women, two girls and a couple of militiamen, the witness said .
 By dawn Castro’s air force was taking a heavy toll of the invasion fleet . By dawn the air force had taken a heavy hit of the invading fleet .
 Following a direct hit from the air, the Houston began to sink . About 9:00 A.M., following a . direct hit, it began to . sink . The Houston was hit by the air and sank .
 Captain Luis Morse managed to edge the transport onto a reef a mile and a half from shore to keep it from going under completely . The ship was a mile from shore when it hit the reef .
 The onetime professional baseball player stripped to his shorts, kicked off his shoes and jumped into the Bay of Pigs . The former pro baseball player is a member of the Cleveland Indians .
 CIA Director Allen Dulles spoke at 9:15 A.M. in San Juan, Puerto Rico, to the applause of the thousand members of the Young Presidents Organization . Dulles was speaking at the La Concha Hotel in Puerto Rico to the audience of thousands .
 Joaquin Varela, a slight, twenty-eight-year-old former Cuban Air Force pilot, led the relays of B-26s over beaches .
 With Castro's air force still in action, the bombers were flying straight to disaster . With Castro’s air force . still . still in . action, it was flying directly to disaster.
 They were just leaving the beach, after firing all their rockets, when their bomber was hit in one engine by a Castro fighter . The plane was hit by the Castro fighter in a one engine engine .
 Crespo feathered the engine, radioed Happy Valley and began limping home at low altitude . He then radioed back to Happy Valley .
 Chirrino Piedra, the twenty-five-year-old pilot so well liked by * The two words together mean black eagle . The two word together mean "black eagle"
 The B-26 was hit in the tail by a U.S. Air Force B-2 bomber . The plane was hit by the "invisible government" of the Soviet Union . The mission was the first to hit a B.26 bomber in combat .
 The plane exploded instantly, killing Piedra and his co-pilot, Jose A Fernandez . The plane explodes instantly . The explosion was the first time the plane exploded .
 Matias Farias, only twenty-two, tried to make a forced landing at the little airstrip now in exile hands at Giron Beach . He was only 22-years-old when he was forced to make the landing attempt .
 The piles of gravel that had alarmed the CIA when spotted by the U-2 on Sunday had been cleared away . The piles were cleared away by the CIA on Sunday .
 Farias, coming in for a landing, flipped over and his B-26 lost its tail . The plane was coming into a landing when it flipped over . The pilot was killed in the crash .
 Farias, slightly wounded, survived and was flown out in a C-46 two days later . He survived and survived .
 Crispin Garcia, a short, dark-haired pilot, fought over the beaches but ran short of fuel . Crispin L, Garcia, was a pilot who fought over beaches in the Battle of the Atlantic .
 He landed at Key West, refueled and took off for Happy Valley with his co-pilot, Juan M Gonzalez Romero . Gonzalez Romero is a former Air Force pilot .
 Crispin Garcia’s mangled B-26 was found on a hillside eighty miles northwest of Happy Valley . About a year later, during a search for a missing P-51, he was found dead in a crash .
 Antonio Soto, a small chestnut-haired ex-Cuban military pilot flew as “Paloma II” and was hit in one engine . Soto was hit by a single engine in one of his aircraft .
 He and his co-pilot, Benito R "Campesino" Gonzalez, were flown back to Puerto Cabezas, but their plane remained behind on British territory .
 Demetrio Perez rode the co-pilot seat of one of the bombers as he crossed the south coast of Cuba en route to the Bay of Pigs . Perez was riding in one of Cuba's bombers .
 He and the pilot, thirtyfour-year-old Raul Vianello, were only two minutes behind schedule . The plane landed in the air just two minutes after takeoff .
 The two fliers had been plagued by bad luck since Saturday . One engine of their bomber burst into flames as they were taking off for the first strike against Castro’s bases .
 The plane made it off the ground on April 17, but had a persistent smell of gasoline in the cabin . The plane was carrying passengers and crew members . It was the first time the plane had ever taken off the plane .
 Remembering their previous embarrassment, the two did not want to return to Happy Valley to face their friends . Remembering the incident, the pair decided not to go back there .
 They radioed Soto to come closer for a look, but when he did, he was unable to spot the trouble . Soto radioed the team to say it was a mistake .
 Perez and Vianello met Varela as the squadron leader was reInvasion (59 turning from the beaches) Perez, Vianelli and Varella met as a squadron leader during the reinvasion . Perez was a member of the Italian squadron leader .
 As they reached the beach, another pilot warmed that a ‘T-bird’ was loose in the area . Another pilot warmed that a T-bird was loose .
 The bomber turned inland, flew low over the swamps and blew up a Castro machine-gun nest that commanded a highway to the beach . The bomber then turned inland and flew low .
 The two fliers spotted a large convoy about to enter the sugar-mill town of Australia . Then they spotted the large convoy of people entering the sugar mill town .
 By the time the bomber received radio confirmation that it was, the convoy was in the town . The bomber was able to get to the town by the time it was in .
 Rather than shoot at civilians, the fliers waited until the convoy emerged on the other side of the border .
 As it came out, Perez saw a white ambulance with a red cross on its roof, followed by a jeep, a truck and a tank . Perez saw the white ambulance come out of the hospital . Perez: "It's a miracle that we're here now"
 Castro’s militia waved their caps and guns at the plane in greeting . Castro's militia waved the guns and caps as they swooped low over the convoy .
 The only distinguishing marks between the exile bombers and Castro’s B-26s were the blue stripes under the wings . Then they realized the militiamen hadn’t noticed the markings . The blue stripes were the only distinguishing mark between the two planes .
 Some of the militiamen were still waving when the bomber made a second pass, this time with its .§0-caliber machine guns blazing . The bomber made its second pass with its guns blazing.
 Perez claimed the attack was justified because the ambulance had armed militiamen in and around it . Perez later claimed the ambulance was attacked because it was surrounded by armed men . Perez said the attack justified the attack because of the ambulance's armed security .
 At 2:15 P.M., its ammunition gone and fuel running low, the bomber turned for home . The bomber's ammunition had run out of ammunition and fuel ran out .
 T-33 caught the bomber with a storm of bullets . Vianello attempted to climb into a bank of clouds for cover, but was hit by a T-34 .
 Vianello, who has a wife and three children, reached over and shook hands with Perez . Then, before Perez jumped, the two men shook hands . Perez jumped and Perez jumped . Perez had a wife, three children .
 As he plummeted through the air he was unable, at first, to find the D-ring on his chute .
 The parachute billowed open, and the orange and white silk overhead was a beautiful sight to Perez . Perez said it was a "beautiful sight" for Perez .
 He looked up in time to see the bomber burst into flames and nose-dive into the ocean . He looked THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT. He looked like a member of the government .
 Mario Zuniga flew support over the beaches with Oscar Vega Vera, his co-pilot . Mario returned secretly from Miami the previous day, flying support over beaches . Oscar Vega-Vera returned secretly to Miami the next day .
 The B-26s were flown by Gonzalo Herrera, Varela, Mario Alvarez Cortina and Rene Garcia . They returned safely, as did the four others .
 Crespo, with one propeller feathered and no compass, maintained radio contact as Happy Valley tried to guide him home . Happy Valley was trying to help him find his destination .
 Crespo was also in contact with a C-54 pilot who attempted to persuade him to land at Grand Cayman Island . The pilot was also attempting to land in the Cayman Islands .
 They were never told why their mission had been changed at the last moment from an air strike against Castro’s bases to air support over the beaches .
 Their valiant efforts at such a high cost had not really been very effective over the beaches . The beaches were not very effective at all, says the author .
 With the Houston out of action, the men of the second battalion were Critically short of the ammunition and supplies the ship car* Perez followed orders and stuck to his cover story that he was a defecting Castro pilot . Perez was the pilot of the Houston .
 He was smuggled across the bay in a launch to the main Navy base and grilled by Navy Intelligence . From there he was flown to Guantanamo, he was interrogated by Navy intelligence . He was exasperated by repeating his CIA cover story .
 Only after the Navy threatened to send Perez ‘back’ to Havana, did he tell the truth . Only after he told the truth, he said he would be sent back to Havana .
 He met General Maxwell D Taylor, the President’s military representative, and even made it to the White House . He met the President's military representative .
 Perez was being kept in a luxurious Alexandria, Virginia, motel . Perez was kept in the hotel room .
 Still wearing the boots in which he had jumped, Perez returned to Miami . Perez was still wearing the parachute boots he jumped .
 Mario Abril, with no food and little ammunition, skirmishes with the enemy on Monday afternoon . Invasion ((6r ried, In the Zapata swamps Mario
 "They were only ten or fifteen guys, but they were giving us a hard time because they didn’t shoot all the time. They were only 10 or 15 guys," he says .
 "This guy in a tree, I shot him down, he kept hanging from there. And so this guy in . a tree," he said. "He kept hanging" from there . "And so this man in a . tree, he shot him."
 Grim-faced and chain-smoking, he charged that the CIA had poured $500,000 a month into the invasion preparations . He said the CIA was pouring $500k a month in preparation for the invasion .
 Adlai Stevenson rose and denied the Cuban’s allegations on Monday afternoon . On Monday afternoon, for the second time in forty-eight hours, he denied the allegations .
 Bundy briefed Stevenson that morning in the office of the United States mission to the UN . Then he donned his hat and coat and flew back to the White House . Bundy, following developments on developments on the AP ticker, had hastily briefed Stevenson .
 The American people are entitled to know whether we are intervening in Cuba or intend to do so in the future, the U.S. government says .
 Nikita S Khrushchev conferred with his impassive Foreign Minister, Andrei Gromyko, at his Black Sea villa near Sochi, near Sochi .
 They drafted a note threatening to come to Castro’s aid unless Kennedy halted the invasion . The note was drafted by the Cuban government .
 In the Roman era persecuted Christians would draw a fish to indicate a clandestine meeting was to be held . Christians would use the fish to signal a meeting was about to take place in secret .
 To Cubans, a phrase about fish rising or standing could have an earthy and much more graphic meaning . The phrase has a graphic meaning: "Fish rises or standing"
 The principal battle of the Cuban revolt against Castro will be fought in the next few hours . The main battle is likely to be fought against Castro's regime .
 Before dawn the island of Cuba will rise up en masse in a co-ordinated wave of sabotage and rebellion which will sweep Communism from our country . Our partisans in every town and village in Cuba will receive the message which will spark a tremendous wave of internal conflict against the tyrant .
 When the fish is placed in a vertical position it is a sign that internal revolt is in full swing . Fish is placed vertical position when placed in vertical position, a sign of revolt .
 By this hour of Monday night, Dulles was hurrying home from Puerto Rico .
 In Washington, the full disastrous effect of the cancellation of the second air strike was being felt . The cancellation of a second strike is being felt in Washington .
 The exiles had, in the two days since April 15, lost ten of their original force of 16 B-26s . The exilees had lost 10 of them in two days .
 Daniel Fernandez Mon, Gaston Perez, Jose A Crespo, Lorenzo Perez, Chirrino Piedra, Jose M Fernandez, Crispin L Garcia, Juan M Gonzalez Romero, Eddy Gonzalez and Raul Vianello are all set to return to action .
 Under the circumstances, Washington permitted a second air strike against Castro’s bases to be reinstated . A second strike was also reinstated .
 The whole point of that strike had been to catch Castro’s air force on the ground before dawn . Castro's air force was caught on the night of the strike . The strike was meant to catch the air force before dawn.
 The strike was led by Joaquin Varela, despite the fact that he and his co-pilot, Tomas Afont, had flown that morning . The strike began in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Under orders to hit only military targets, he dropped no bombs and returned to Happy Valley . Under orders, he returned to his base in Happy Valley, California .
 Second plane, piloted by Ignacio Rojas and Esteban Bovo Caras, developed engine trouble and turned back before reaching the target .
 Third plane was piloted by Miguel A Carro and Eduardo Barea Guinea . The third plane was flown by Miguel Carro, who was killed in the crash .
 Two hours later, at 10:00 P.M., two more B-26s took off from Happy Valley . Two hours after takeoff, the two more took off .
 The start of Tuesday, April 18, found the exile brigade strung out along three separate beachheads on Cuba’s southern shore . The exile brigade is based in Havana, Cuba .
 To the east of the Bay of Pigs, the exiles held Giron Beach and had moved inland behind it . The exiles had been holding Giron beach in the past week .
 The men of the fifth battalion, swimming ashore from the Houston, had been carried by the current to a point about twelve miles farther south of Playa Larga . The battalion was alone, because the men were carried by a current .
 Second and fifth battalions never joined up as planned as planned . As a result, the second and fifth battalion were never able to join up . The second and third battalions did not join up in the first place .
 Castro tanks moved into position on both sides of the road . The first Castro tank showed up with its lights on and the hatch closed . Castro tanks were the first to arrive in Cuba .
 "One of our tanks shot him and stopped him right in the middle of the road," says one of the soldiers . "One tank shot him," says the soldier . "He was stopped by a tank and stopped by the road"
 "Our tank had no ammunition, so it started pushing him on the side and threw him out of the road," says the driver of the tank . The driver was killed by a rocket launcher, but his tank was able to shoot him .
 "The guys came out of the tank with their hands up and that was real great. The guys came from the tank," coach said . "That's real great," he said .
 "Electronic plants must not supply power today to the few industries that the regime is trying to keep in operation" "Help the brave soldiers of the liberation army . Help the brave . soldiers of liberation army." "Electricity plants must must be kept in operation," he writes .
 Today at 7:45 A.M., when we give the signal on this station, all the lights in your house should be turned on . All electrical appliances should be connected to your home .
 Mario and the second battalion got the bad news; they would have to retreat . Mario and his troops were forced to retreat from the battlefield . Mario's battalion was forced to withdraw .
 I think we won that battle during the night against tanks with no ammunition, no support, no fifth battalion, which was in another place . The battle took place in the middle of the night with tanks without ammunition and no support from the fifth battalion .
 "I got on a truck and I was riding to Giron Beach, twenty miles away down the line of the coast," he says . "I was riding twenty miles from Giron beach," he adds .
 There we got rest and I got a couple of crackers and a bottle of water. There were crackers, water and crackers. There was rest and rest, he said .
 The exile air force was still in action, despite the long odds against it . Despite the odds, it was still fighting for the U.S.
 A thunderstorm swelled the little river behind the airstrip at Happy Valley on Tuesday afternoon . It sent scorpions and snakes near the operations building scuttling for cover . The scorpion and snakes scuttled for cover.
 Their target was a large Castro armored column moving toward the shrinking beachhead at Giron . Castro's armored column was moving toward a large armored column .
 Mario Zuniga flew in one of the bombers, with the chief of the exile air operations, Manuel Villafana, as his co-pilot . Manuel Villafiana was the chief air operations chief in exile .
 Luis Cosme, Villafana’s deputy, took over as the operations officer at Happy Valley . Villafano’ve been in charge of Happy Valley since 2007 .
 Rene Garcia, Antonio Soto and Gustavo Ponzoa flew three of the B-26s in the strike force . The strike force was based in Puerto Rico .
 The other two bombers were flown by American CIA pilots . Despite the pledge that no Americans would participate in the fighting, the other two were flown in by Americans .
 Gustavo Villoldo, a Cuban, was the co-pilot of the plane . He was shot down by the U.S. government .
 Alberto Perez Sordo, a twenty-twoyear-old exile, flew as co-pilot with the other American . Alberto Perez . Sordos was an exile in the U.S. and is now living in exile .
 It took the six bombers only twenty-five minutes to destroy the Castro convoy on the road to the beach . The six bombers were able to destroy Castro's convoy .
 The same day, April 18, the exile air force received four P-51 Mustangs from the Nicaraguan Government . The exile force received the four Mustangs .
 Cuban freedom fighters in the Matanzas area are being attacked by heavy Soviet tanks and Mig aircraft . Soviet tanks have destroyed sizable amounts of medical supplies and equipment . Cuban liberation fighters are fighting for freedom .
 Khrushchev had drafted a note at Sochi the day before . The note was sent to Washington . The Soviet-era leader drafted the note .
 Soviet Premier charged the United States had armed and trained the exiles . The Soviet Premier said the U.S. had trained and armed them . The United States denied the charge .
 President Obama threatened to give Castro Castro “all necessary assistance” unless Washington stopped the invasion . He threatened to help Castro if the U.S. stopped the attack .
 Soviet Ambassador Mikhail A Menshikov was handed a note by Rusk at the State Department . The Soviet ambassador was handed the note at the time .
 In the event of outside intervention, Kennedy declared, the U.S. would “immediately” honor its treaty obligations to the hemisphere . Kennedy declared that the United States would ‘immediate’ honor the treaty obligations .
 In the UN, Soviet Ambassador Zorin mocked Stevenson’s continued denials of U.S. responsibility for invasion . The Soviet ambassador mocked Stevenson for his continued denial of responsibility .
 Castro admitted to newsmen that his forces had made the error of advancing on the open road that cuts through marshes . As a result, his forces were an easy target for the exile air force .
 Invasion of Cuba had landed in Cuba had not been trained in Guatemala and had not come from Guatemalan territory . Invasion had landed on Cuba and did not have trained Guatemalan troops in Guatemala .
 Guatemala had never allowed and would never allow its territory to be used for the organization of acts of aggression against its sister American republics . Guatemala, Alejos assured the UN, that Guatemala would not allow such an act of aggression .
 At the White House, that Tuesday night, more than a thousand guests gathered for the President’s traditional reception for members of Congress and their wives .
 At 10:15 P.M. the President and Jacqueline Kennedy descended the main stairs . At exactly 10.15 p.m. Kennedy was seen leaving the White House at the time of the morning .
 Kennedy wore a sleeveless floor-length sheath of pink and white straw lace with matching pink slippers . Kennedy wore the lace to the occasion .
 Vice President Lyndon B Johnson and his wife Lady Bird joined in . Vice-President Lyndon B. Johnson joined in with his wife in her salmon-pink gown .
 The Kennedys and the Johnsons switched partners midway through the first number . Midway through first number the Kenneds switched partners with Johnsons .
 Still in formal dress, the President met at midnight at the White House with his highest military and civilian advisers .
 Richard Bissell maintained that the operation could still be saved if the President would authorize the use of Navy jets from a carrier then stationed offshore between Jamaica and Cuba . The invasion was now near collapse .
 The President had repeatedly stated that no U.S. armed forces would be used in Cuba . But the President has repeatedly stated, both privately and publicly, that no United States armed forces will use in Cuba.
 Bissell argued desperately in favor of U.S. airpower to save Cuban operation now . Bissell: "The Cuban operation has been so deeply engaged in the Cuban operation"
 General Lemnitzer, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, supported Burke’s plea for Navy jets over the beaches . General White, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, also supported the request .
 Burke suggested that Navy planes be allowed to fly over the beaches, but that there be no United States markings on the planes . Burke also suggested that no U.S. markings be allowed on Navy planes flying over beaches .
 The clock ticked past midnight and into Wednesday, April 19 . As the group talked, the clock ticks past midnight . The group talked to each other as the clock passed midnight .
 The President authorized the unmarked Navy jets from the carrier Essex to fly over the Bay of Pigs for one hour just after dawn . The unmarked jets flew over the bay of Pigs in unmarked airspace .
 They were to support an air-toground strike that morning by the B-26s from Happy Valley . They were in support of an air strike that day by the U.S.
 The Navy jets were to fly “dead cover’s” which meant they were to interpose themselves between the bombers and any enemy aircraft .
 In this way they were to try to protect the B-26s against attack by Castro planes . The planes were used to protect them from attack by the Castro planes.
 Under the President’s authorization, however, they could fire back if fired upon . The President's authorization for the use of force is limited .
 If the Castro planes fired, the Navy jets would not be able to make the fine distinction of whether the attackers were firing at the bombers or at them . Navy jets could not distinguish between the attackers and the bombers .
 By interposing themselves between the B-26s and Castro’s planes, the planes would draw fire and be able to fire back . The planes could draw fire from Castro's planes and fire back, the author says .
 It was telephoned to the Joint Chiefs communication center at the Pentagon, sent immediately to CINCLANT, in Norfolk, Virginia, relayed from there to the Commander, Second Fleet, and thence to the carrier .
 At Happy Valley a 1:00 A.M. meeting was also in progress in the building that served as the air operations center . The meeting took place in the same building as a meeting at Happy Valley .
 Among those present were General Doster, Riley W Shamburger, Jr., a CIA pilot who was a close friend of Doster’s and on leave from the Alabama Air National Guard .
 All realized that the situation was grim and that something had to be done . Invasion ((69 All realized . that the . situation was . grim . and that . something must be done. Invasion (((69)
 The American advisers agreed to fly night missions starting that night, to relieve the weary Cubans . U.S. advisers agreed that night missions would start that night .
 The Americans were not ordered to do so; they volunteered, although it was understood when they signed up with the CIA that they might at some point have to fly combat missions . The Americans volunteered, not ordered, but they were not told they might have to .
 The pledge that no United States armed forces and no Americans would be involved was doubly violated . American CIA pilots were flying in the invasion and Navy jets were to screen them against attack .
 Two more Americans, Thomas Willard Ray and Leo Francis Baker, flew in another . Two more American men were killed in World War II .
 One pilot was a tall, skinny pilot known simply as “Joe,” whose co-pilot was also an American . Another pilot was an American pilot known as ‘Joe’ and the pilot was also a pilot .
 Three more Cubans, including Zuniga, were scheduled to fly, but operations were halted before they took off . Operations halted before the flights were able to depart .
 Bissell left the White House meeting with the understanding that the Navy jets would appear over the beaches at dawn simultaneously with the B-26s . Bissell: The Navy jets will appear in the same way as the B.26s. Bissell says .
 What happened next has since become clouded in a welter of conflicting interpretations . The incident has since been shrouded in controversy over what happened .
 Bissell did not have the responsibility of ordering the Navy jets into the air, but he did have the task of notifying the exile air force .
 CIA B-26s were available for one hour at dawn to support the air-to-ground strike by the CIA . U.S. air cover would be available for the one hour, CIA says .
 He repeated it verbally to the colonel on duty at the CIA office, who in turn transmitted it to Happy Valley . He repeated the request to the CIA, who then sent it to the Happy Valley, California .
 Bissell’s message reached Happy Valley shortly before Shamburger, Gray, Ray and Baker took off . Bissell's message was reached shortly before the group took off from Happy Valley .
 Somewhere along the line there was a fatal mix-up between the CIA and the Navy . The CIA and Navy have been at odds for years over the years .
 CIA thought that the President’s order had reached the carrier so conservatively worded that the jets were unable to take hostile action against Castro's planes because the jets had not been fired upon . At first the CIA thought the order had been so conservative that the . INVISIBLE
 In secret post-mortem over the Bay of Pigs, it was concluded that the bombers had arrived after the jets had already come and gone, after the clock had run out on the one hour of air support .
 Evidence pointed directly to the incredible conclusion that the mix-up had occurred because of confusion over time zones . How this happened may never be entirely unscrambled, but there has been no public explanation .
 The Bay of Pigs and Washington were both on Eastern Standard Time, but Nicaragua time was an hour earlier . Nicaragua was the first time it was on the island nation .
 Because of the difference in time zones, it was 7:30 A.M. at the Bay of Pigs —an hour too late . But because of the time zone, the Bay was an hour late for the day .
 The CIA and the Navy did not co-ordinate their respective orders to the fleet and to Happy Valley . The Navy and the CIA were not in touch with each other's orders .
 Burke simply sent his order to the fieet and Bissell sent an order to Happy Valley . Bissell then sent the Happy Valley order to Burke .
 Navy pilots reported they never made contact with CIA bombers . In any event, the Navy pilots said they never met up with the CIA .
 He heard the cries for help of the four American fliers as they were shot down, and he turned back . He turned back, but he heard the screams for help .
 The pilots were called together by Luis Cosme, the Cuban operations deputy . The pilots are called together to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Cuban revolution .
 They were willing, but since another trip over the Invasion ((71 beaches meant almost certain death, they understandably demanded to know why they were being sent out . The invasion was the first time they had been sent to the beaches .
 It was the sort of vague promise that the Cubans, by this time, were fed up with . The promise was vague, but it was a vague promise . The Cubans are fed up to the vague promises .
 In four days of combat, the exile air force had flown more than thirty-six missions, against overwhelming odds . The exiled air force flew more than 30 missions, despite overwhelming odds, in four days .
 It had fought an air battle against faster, more maneuverable planes, jets and conventional fighters that were supposed to have been destroyed on the ground . The battle was meant to have destroyed conventional fighters .
 It had suffered fifty-percent losses—twelve of its twenty-four B-26s were gone . Twelve of its 20-24 aircraft were gone, and 12 of its B-25s were also gone .
 The final day of the invasion found Mario Abril with his battalion west of Giron Beach fighting against the militia . The perimeter was gradually pushed back as the perimeter of the beach perimeter was eventually pushed back .
 At that time Erneido Oliva, the battalion commander, he told us everything was real bad and we were doing pretty bad, no support from the Americans . At the time, he said, "we were doing very bad" at the time .
 "At Giron Beach I got water, and with a couple of friends of mine, I started running for the woods," says Simon Tisdall . "I got water at Giron beach, but with a few of my friends, I went to the woods"
 This would have been long after the one hour of air cover at dawn ordered by the President, however . The President ordered the President to cover the area at dawn .
 Castro's forces were engaged in mopping-up operations at the Bay of Pigs . Castro’s forces were fighting for the Cuban government in Cuba .
 At the same hour the Cuban Revolutionary Council were meeting secretly with Kennedy at the White House . The Cuban revolutionary Council was meeting with Kennedy . The White House hosted the meeting .
 The Council was flown to Washington for a meeting that was both emotional and difficult . Adolf Berle and Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., the Harvard historian and assistant to the President, had flown to Miami to placate the Cuban leaders .
 Regretfully we admit tragic losses in today’s action among a small holding force which courageously fought Soviet tanks and artillery while being attacked by Russian Mig aircraft .
 We did not expect to face, unscathed, Soviet armaments directed by Communist advisers . And it was certainly true that we did not . expect to . face . Soviet armament directed by . Communist advisers, he says .
 Mario Abril, together with hundreds of his fellows, was captured the next day . Mario abril was captured by police in the early hours of the morning . Mario, along with dozens of others, were captured the day after .
 He returned to the U.S. with the rest of the brigade in the prisoner exchange of Christmas, 1962 . He was captured in December 1962 .
 Manuel Perez Salvador lived for ten days on land crabs and muddy water after he had swum ashore from the Houston, Texas, area . Salvador swam ashore from Houston and swam into the water .
 He still bears round black scars the size and shape of kitchen-faucet washers . Invasion ((73) washers are the shape and size of a kitchen faucet .
 He and a companion had just found a tin of Russian canned meat on the beach . They were trying to open it when a militia speedboat rounded the bend with a machine gun trained on them .
 A few managed to escape in small boats and were later picked up at sea by the American Navy and merchant ships . The survivors were rescued by the U.S. Navy and Merchant ships .
 Sergio Garcia, the pilot who refused to drop the wounded young paratrooper over San Blas, was assigned to a final mission . Sergio Garcia was the pilot of the last mission in the Spanish capital . Garcia died in a helicopter crash at the end of the war .
 The leaflets were meant to have been dropped over Cuba ahead of the advancing and victorious invaders . They were intended to be dropped by the invading army .
 Garcia banked and began the last air drop of the Bay of Pigs . Hundreds of miles off the Nicaraguan coast, out of sight of land, he banked off the coast of Nicaragua .
 Four wibows whose husbands had died at the Bay of Pigs were living in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1963 . The Case of the Birmingham Widows is based on the case of four women whose husbands were killed in the war .
 During the long, hot summer of that year, Birmingham was a city of fear and violence . During the summer, the city of Birmingham was known for violence .
 Some widows lived in a special atmosphere of fear that had nothing to do with the city’s racial troubles . But some of the widows were not afraid of the city's racial troubles. They lived in an atmosphere that didn't have to be linked to the troubles .
 There was danger that if they said too much, the same invisible hand might cut the payments off . There was also danger that the payments might be cut off if they spoke too much .
 Margaret H Ray was a soft-spoken, attractive brunette . Fears of lie-detector tests, suspicion that her telephone was being tapped, that she was under surveillance .
 For The Case of the Four Birmingham Widows is, in some respects, a twentieth-century tragedy . For The case of the four Widows, the case is a tragedy for the first time .
 The husbands of these four women were Thomas Willard Ray, Leo Francis Baker, Riley W Shamburger, Jr., and Wade Carroll Gray, the American CIA airmen who died on April 19, 1961, while flying in combat at the Bay of Pigs .
 One key to the mystery of widows could be found in a small two-story building in Miami Springs, Florida . The building is located on a quiet palm-lined street not far from Miami International Airport .
 Alex E Carlson is the law office of Alex E. Carlson, a law firm that specializes in law practice . Carlson's law firm was founded by Carlson in 2007 . Carlson was the first person to file a lawsuit against Carlson .
 Carlson was a big, blond, heavy-set man, towering well over six feet . Carlson saw three years of combat during World War II in New Guinea, the Philippines and Okinawa . Carlson: "I'm a hero. I'm not afraid to die"
 Most of his clients appeared to be obscure airline and air-cargo firms operating out of Miami International Airport .
 Carlson’s most intriguing business activity was the DoubleChek Corporation . Carlson was the founder of the company, which he founded in 1973 .
 The "resident agent" was listed as “Wesley R Pillsbury,” at the same address . The “resident agent” was listed in the same name .
 In 1960 the CIA was given the green light by President Eisenhower to organize the Cuban exiles . The CIA was looking for American pilots to serve as PIs—pilot instructors . In 1960, the CIA began looking for U.S. pilots to teach ex-Cuban pilots .
 Cubans would be flying the CIA B-26s, the agency wanted Americans who had flown the plane in wartime . The agency also wanted Americans with the experience of flying the plane .
 The CIA decided to do its recruiting through Alex E Carlson and the Double-Chek Corporation . The agency is recruiting for the CIA through the company .
 The agency uses cover of this THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (76) when it recruits pilots for a covert operation . The agency also recruits pilots to be part of the covert operation.
 The CIA turned to the Air National Guard in Alabama, Virginia and Arkansas to find the pilots . The last state units to fly the obsolescent B-26 were in the National Guard . The CIA is looking for pilots to pilot the B26 .
 Two dozen pilots were signed up by the CIA, acting through Double-Chek . From these states, some two dozen pilots have been signed up .
 The majority were from Alabama, and, in turn, the bulk of these were from Birmingham area .
 General Reid Doster, the commanding officer of the Alabama Air National Guard, was a key man in the CIA operation at Retalhuleu . Doster was the commander of Alabama's National Guard during the attack .
 The Alabama Air Guard was under the supervision of the oth Tactical Air Force at Shaw Air Force Base, South Carolina . Doster went to see Major General David W Hutchinson, the commanding general there . He said he was impressed by the general's assessment of the situation .
 Hutchinson approved the leaves of absence; the men, including Doster, joined the CIA as civilians . Doster and Doster are now working for the CIA in Washington, D.C. Doster is a senior CIA official .
 Each of the American pilots was sworn to secrecy by the CIA, with the exception of Doster, who gave his word as a general officer . The pilots were sworn in secrecy .
 All pledged they would never talk about what happened in training camps or at the Bay of Pigs . All pledged to never discuss what happened .
 Thomas Willard Ray, age thirty when he died, was born in Birmingham on March 15, 1931 . Ray was a member of the Birmingham Symphony Orchestra .
 He began dating Margaret Hayden while he was still in Tarrant High School . The couple has been together since 2008 .
 He served in the Air Force from 1950 to 19§2 and was discharged as a staff sergeant . He was discharged from the service in 1966 .
 In December of that year “Pete” Ray joined the Hayes International Corporation, a large aircraft modification company with its main plant at the Birmingham airport . The company's main plant is at the airport .
 Ray kept up his pilot’s proficiency by flying the B-26s and F-84s at the Alabama National Guard . Ray was a technical inspector at Hayes, but he kept up pilot's proficiency . Ray is a flight instructor at Hayes Air Force Base .
 Thomas, a crew-cut blond-haired boy of eight when his father died, was eight when he died . Janet Joy, six, was six when her father died . Thomas was eight at the time of his father's death .
 Hutchinson later retired from the Air Force and became an oilman in Oklahoma City . Five years before the Bay of Pigs, the Rays built a stadium for the first time . Hutchinson was an Air Force Air Force officer .
 He said, on March 8, 1963, that five, not four, American pilots had died flying in the Cuban operation . But he implied that the fifth pilot was not lost in combat .
 The Case of the Birmingham Widows (77) is a handsome brick home in Center Point, a Birmingham suburb . The Widows' home is a beautiful brick home .
 Ray did not particularly like flying jets, and, with several buddies, switched to the Army Reserve . Ray joined several friends in the reserve in the Army .
 Margaret wrote to her husband c/o Joseph Greenland, and he wrote back . He wrote back with his letters bearing the return address of different Air Force bases . The letters were returned to Greenland by the Air Force .
 Pete came home only once, on April 10, for a two-day visit; he had a deep suntan . Pete came back to the U.S. only once for a visit, April 10 .
 During that time he did not tell his wife what he was doing, but she had begun to piece it together from newspaper stories and her own suspicions . He didn't tell her what he did .
 He indicated that ‘they’re doing this in order to check on whether there had been any security leaks from the wives in Birmingham . He indicated ‘this might be a good idea to check’s security leaks .
 Margaret was fixing a girl friend's hair at her mother’s house when her friend showed her a newspaper telling of the B-26 strike against Cuba . Margaret recalls the strike on April 15, 1945 .
 Leo Baker, thirty-four at the time of his death, was a native of Boston . Baker died at the age of thirty-three .
 A short, dark-haired, handsome man, he was thought to THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (78) by many of his friends because of his appearance and the fact he owned two pizza shops in Birmingham .
 He was the son of a French mother and a Newfoundland father who came from Newfoundland . He was born in France and Newfoundland .
 He entered the Air Force in 1944, served as a flight engineer and was discharged as a technical sergeant . He was discharged from the service in 1945 .
 Baker flew in the Korean War, then joined Hayes as a flight engineer . Baker flew on Lincoln's Birthday, 1957, on Lincoln’s Birthday .
 The following year an attractive, blue-eyed brunette walked into Leo’s Pizza Shop . Following year, the following year, a brunette appeared in the shop .
 Although born in Kentucky, she was raised in Birmingham . She graduated from Woodlawn High School there .
 He worked hard—he could not abide lazy people—and his small restaurant business prospered . He could not tolerate lazy people, but he worked hard, and his business thrived .
 He told Cathy he was expecting a phone call and it came while he was gone . Cathy says he was surprised by the unexpected call .
 He told her she could write to him c/o Joseph Greenland at the Chicago address . Greenland told her to write to her to send a letter to him .
 His return mail came once from Washington, but usually it was postmarked Fort Lauderdale, Florida . He returned mail from Washington to Fort Lauderdale .
 Post-cards show a motel with a tropical-fish pool . One picture post card from that city showed a tropical fish pool .
 One weekend Leo returned to Birmingham carrying a plastic bag full of tropical fish . Leo returned with the fish in the plastic bag .
 Baker told his wife he was dropping supplies over Cuba and training pilots . During this period Baker told her he was training pilots to fly over Cuba . Baker was in Cuba during the time .
 He arrived on a Saturday and left on a Sunday, and that was the last time Cathy ever saw him . Cathy says she never saw him again . He arrived in the U.S. at the end of the weekend .
 Cathy believed he then went to Guatemala . The Case of the Birmingham Widows (79-79) was the subject of a series of investigations . Cathy believed that her husband was killed in Guatemala .
 She learned he had won $300 in a poker game in Central America before the invasion . She later learned he'd won money in Central American poker game .
 Riley W Shamburger, Jr., the oldest of the four fliers, was born in Birmingham on November 17, 1924 . Riley was born on November 18, 1924, in the city of Birmingham .
 They dated for twelve years before their marriage, through grammar school and Woodlawn High . They had dated for 12 years .
 Shamburger was a combat pilot in World War II and Korea . He was a big breezy extrovert who loved to fly . He served in Korea and the Air Force .
 A test pilot at Hayes, he was also a major in the Alabama Air National Guard . He was its operations officer at the Birmingham airfield .
 The Shamburgers were part of a beer-and-barbecue, happygo-lucky crowd of Air Guardsmen and their wives . They frequently socialized together .
 Riley liked nothing better than to sit in front of the TV set with a case of beer, eating his favorite food, “parched” peanuts .
 He did not say where he was going, but about once a week he returned to Birmingham, He and Doster would fly in together . Doster: "Once a week, he would fly into Birmingham together"
 Sometimes they would bring news of other Birmingham acquaintances, such as Colonel Joe Shannon, who were part of the mysterious operation . Sometimes they brought news of the operation . The operation was a mystery to the city .
 The boys had rigged up a beer joint in Central America named after their favorite bar in Birmingham . Riley returned for a visit when he returned to see his friends .
 Over the makeshift saloon a pair of red panties flew in the breeze as a cocktail flag . The pair were used as a bar in a makeshift bar in New York City .
 Wade Carroll Gray was born in Birmingham on March 1, 1928, and thirty-three when he died . He had also once been employed at Hayes, as a radio and electronics technician .
 They settled down in Pinson, a suburb where Wade had lived all of his life . Wade and his wife had lived in the suburb all of their lives .
 Gray left home on February 5, 1961, the same day that Pete Ray said good-bye to Margaret . Pete Ray left home that same day as his wife .
 Some of the letters Violet Gray wrote were returned to her with her husband’s effects after his death . The letters she wrote to her husband were returned with his effects .
 Matchbooks indicate he had been in Guatemala and Nicaragua . Matchbooks indicated he had visited both Guatemala and Nicaragua .
 This is the background of the four Americans, and of how they came to be in Happy Valley on April 19, 1961 . This, then, is a look at the history of Happy Valley, California .
 All four volunteered to fly B-26s over the beaches to relieve Cuban pilots . On that day all four volunteered .
 The four CIA fliers were told they would receive air support from the carrier-based Navy jets . Shortly before they took off, they were told that they would be receiving air support .
 Because of the mix-up over time zones, the B-26s got to the Bay of Pigs after the Navy jets had already gone . Because of a time zone mix, the planes arrived at the bay of Pigs in time zones .
 Most versions agree that Shamburger and Gray crashed at sea and that Ray and Baker crashed inland . Ray, Baker and Gray were shot down in the early 1940s . The two planes were both shot down .
 The plane carrying Shamburger and Gray was shot down by a T-33 jet . Albert C Persons, managing editor of the weekly Birmingham Examiner, said on March 8, 1963 .
 Doster canceled his mission because Persons had experience flying carrier aircraft rather than the B-26 . Persons had no experience flying a carrier aircraft . Persons was the only person to fly a carrier plane .
 His documents reveal his flight license number, 08323-LM, which expires 24 December 1962 . His documents also reveal that he had a flight license issued in 1962 .
 The registered address of the Yankee pilot is 48 Beacon Street, Boston, Boston .
 A Havana wire-service dispatch identified the pilot as Leo Francis Berliss . The pilot of the plane was identified by a Havana dispatch .
 In Oklahoma City the Federal Aviation Agency said it had no record at its headquarters there of the pilot’s license .
 Reporters in Boston who checked the Beacon Street address found an apartment house . Reporters say the address was a house .
 The State Department says it has no one by that name in either the civilian or military branch of the government . State Department in Washington said it had no such person in either of the military or civilian branches .
 Castro had in his hands, of course, was Leo Baker’s CIAprepared credentials, made out with a fake last name . Baker's credentials were made out of a fake name. Baker was the CIA's most successful CIA operative .
 The papers were recovered from Baker’s body after the bomber crashed inland .
 Margaret Ray received a visit from Thomas F McDowell, a Birmingham lawyer who was the law partner of Frank M Dixon, a former governor of Alabama . One week later, on April 26, she was visited by Thomas McDowell .
 Ray told his wife that it was believed her husband had been lost at sea in a C-46 transport plane . Ray said he was believed to have been lost in a plane that crashed in the ocean .
 For the next week Margaret Ray went about her normal life, going to church, to the PTA, and the supermarket . The Invisible Government of the U.S. has been revealed .
 He brought with him with him a big blond man he introduced as an attorney from Miami . This time he brought him with with him, he introduced him as a Miami attorney . The man is a big blonde, blond man from Miami.
 Ray Ray's wife visited the C-46 to find out what happened to her husband . Ray is believed to be dead, but his wife says there is no longer any hope that her husband is alive . Ray Ray is the son of Ray Ray, who was killed in a plane crash
 Carlson says he would tell the same story to the Birmingham newspapers the next day . Carlson said he would continue to do so . Carlson: "I'm not going to let it slide down"
 Carlson and McDowell visited Margaret for about thirty minutes at her mother’s home . Carlson, McDowell visit Margaret for a thirty minute .
 He announced that the four fliers were missing and presumed dead after their C-46 had left on a cargo mission from an airstrip somewhere in Central America . The plane was carrying a cargo cargo cargo .
 Carlson said he was an attorney representing the Double-Chek Corporation of Miami . Carlson says he was a lawyer representing the company in Miami .
 Double-Chek put some anti-Castro Cubans in touch with the fliers early in April, he said . He said Double-chek had put some of the anti-Cuban fliers in touch in April .
 The Double-Chek Corporation contacted the four on behalf of an organization which requested that its identity remain confidential . The organisation requested that the identity of the four be kept confidential .
 Double-Chek had hired the four at a monthly salary to fly cargo . The four were hired by the airline at a salary of $1,500 a month .
 The CIA was willing to imply that the four dead Americans were mercenaries . To cover its role, the CIA implied that they were mercenaries to cover their role . The four Americans were killed by the CIA .
 He was an operations officer for The Case of the Birmingham Widows . The case was the work of the Air National Guard . He was a member of the Alabama National Guard.
 Gray told a newspaper interviewer her husband was no soldier of fortune either . Gray told an interviewer that her husband had no wealth of fortune .
 She said he was paid $1,990 a month during the short period of time he was away .
 He said they had spotted one of the plane’s engines floating in the water . He said the engine was seen floating in water .
 Three days after he returned to Miami, Carlson told the press he was sure the C-46 had been flying a support mission for the Cuban invasion . Three days later, Carlson said he was certain the plane was flying a mission .
 The mission is not connected to the main exile organization, the Democratic Revolutionary Front . But he says it's not connected with the main exiled group, the DPRF .
 Carlson’s partner in Double-Chek, Raymond W Cox, told Miami newsmen that the corporation originally was formed to buy a race horse . Cox said that the company originally intended to purchase a horse .
 Shortly after Carlson’s appearance in Birmingham in May, 1961, mysterious checks began arriving for the four widows . Shortly after the appearance, the widows received mysterious checks .
 At first the checks were issued by the Hialeah-Miami Springs Bank and were signed by Carlson . Carlson was signed by the bank . Carlson signed the checks .
 Widowed widows get more than $6,000 a year for each of the widows . Later they were increased to $245, or $245 a year .
 The checks from Bankers Trust were simply signed by an officer of the bank . The checks were signed by a bank officer .
 On May 17, 1961, Carlson wrote to Cathy Baker on his law-office letterhead . Carlson's letter was sent to Baker on the same day as a friend .
 Double Check Corporation has decided to extend the regular monthly salary through the 4th day of June, 1961, but is regretably convinced of the finality of your husband's fate .
 Beginning June 5th, on a monthly basis, you will receive regular benefit allotments, as provided for by your husband’s employment contract . Nevertheless, beginning June 5st, on . a monthly .
 I express my sincere feelings of condolance in your time of bereavement, and should you have any questions or problems, please feel free to call upon our attorneys in Birmingham for help .
 Peculiarly, Carlson seemed unsure both in this letter and in numerous public statements of whether the firm of which he was president was called Double-Check or Double-Chek . As it was incorporated in the State of Florida, he seemed unsure of whether it was Double-
 By “our attorneys in Birmingham,” Carlson meant McDowell, who continued to act as a sort of self-appointed overseer of widows’ affairs .
 The widows were under the impression that McDowell had a background in Navy Intelligence, and believed he had something to do with the checks that they receive . McDowell was found dead at the scene .
 Riley Shamburger’s mother began to try to do something about it . Riley's mother says she is trying to get her daughter to get involved in the case .
 Riley’s father was a retired city fireman, a semi-invalid who moved about their Birmingham home in a wheel chair . Riley's father is a retired fireman who moved around in a wheelchair .
 Riley’s mother, who refused to believe her son was dead, carried on an energetic correspondence with the Federal Government . Riley was found dead at the scene of his death in 2009 .
 She wrote to the Swiss Government, which handled affairs for the U.S. in Cuba after the break in diplomatic relations between Washington and Havana .
 She received a reply, dated August 11, 1961, from Denman F Stanfield, acting chief of the Protection and Representation Division .
 Reference is made to your letter of July 9, 1961, concerning the welfare and whereabouts of your son . The letter was made in reference to the welfare of the boy .
 If you will provide your son’s full name, date and place The Case of the Birmingham Widows ((85 of birth, last known address here or abroad, and any other pertinent information that would assist in locating him, the Department would be pleased to make inquiries . If you
 A few weeks later she received a letter, dated September 14, 1961, from Major Sidney Ormerod, U.S. Air Force, Division of Administrative Services .
 Your letters to the Department of State concerning your son have been referred to me for reply . Your letters have been sent to the State Department for consideration .
 The records in this office do not contain the circumstances surrounding your son’s accident . The records are confidential .
 Hayes Aircraft Corp.,* Birmingham, Alabama, was under their jurisdiction at the time of the incident . For more detailed information it is suggested you contact the Hayes Aircraft Corporation .
 She received a letter in reply, dated July 14, 1962, on CIA stationery and signed by Marshall S Carter, Lieutenant General, United States Army, Acting Director of the CIA .
 In Mr McCone’s absence, I am replying to your letter of June, 1962, requesting information concerning your son . In Mr. McCone's absence, he is .
 I am sorry to disappoint you, but this agency is unable to furnish you any such information . I'm sorry to disappointed you, this agency cannot provide any information .
 We have made inquiries of other government departments, and these, too, have no pertinent information . Also, we have made enquiries of other departments, including the government, who have not made any pertinent information, we said .
 Hayes was not notably communicative . We have every sympathy for you in your natural concern . Hayes was a good Samaritan, not a bad guy .
 The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT. (86 for the fate of your son, and I am sorry as I can be that we cannot help. The Invisible Government. cannot help your son .
 Please be assured that if at any time we are able to furnish information we will contact you promptly . We are happy to provide information to the public if we are unable to provide it .
 On October 4, 1962, Brigadier General Godfrey T McHugh, the Air Force aide to the President, wrote back . McHugh wrote back: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure it was a mistake"
 If any information is ever obtained on the circumstances surrounding the loss of your son, you will be informed immediately . If you have information regarding the circumstances of the son's death, it will be provided .
 "At present neither CIA nor any other government agency possesses the slightest pertinent information on your son’s disappearance," says the mother .
 Shamburger’s correspondence with Washington, of course, was behind the scenes .
 After the Bay of Pigs, the story of the four missing Americans dropped out of the news for almost two years . The story reappeared dramatically on February 25, 1963 . The four Americans were captured in the Cuban invasion of 1961 .
 Senator Everett McKinley Dirksen revealed that four American fliers had been killed at the Bay of Pigs . Four Americans were killed in the attack on the U.S. in 1961 .
 He said he had learned this in the course of a one-man inquiry into the Cuban invasion . He said it was a result of an inquiry into what happened in Cuba .
 Dirksen’s disclosure was extremely embarrassing for the Kennedy Administration . The disclosure was embarrassing for Kennedy Administration, but it was necessary .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, the President’s brother, had said in an interview with David Kraslow of the Knight newspapers that no Americans died at the Bay of Pigs . In the second place, on January 21, 1963, Attorney General . Robert F. Kennedy had said
 Andrew T Hatcher, the assistant presidential press secretary, issued a statement . Hatcher said the president's office has been briefed on the situation .
 The White House carefully did not make public the actual text of its letter to Mrs. Obama . However, the White House did not reveal the text .
 Senator Mike Mansfield, the Democratic leader of the Senate, tried to blunt Dirksen’s political thrust . Senator Mansfield is the current Democratic leader .
 The clearest statement by the administration was made by President Kennedy in an interview with the three major TV networks on December 17, 1962 . He noted that Carlson’s statement was made in the same interview in 1962 .
 Mansfield said he did not know how the fliers met their deaths . Mansfield also said that a few, selected members of Congress had been told at the time that four Americans were killed in the invasion .
 A Central American group authorized Double-Chek to set up a trust fund for payments in case the men died . Carlson told newsmen who inquired about widows’ checks that a “Central American group’s” fund was authorized .
 Carlson backed away from his “nest egg’s remark of two years earlier . Carlson: The four men, he said, “never were considered soldiers of fortune.”
 The administration finally made its first oblique admission about the real role of the four airmen . Two days later, on March 6, the administration, under pressure, finally admitted it had been involved in the attack .
 A Well, I would say that there are a good many Americans in the last fifteen years who have served their country in a number of different ways . A good many of them have served in the U.S. in a variety of ways, including abroad .
 The flight that cost them their lives was a volunteer flight, and that while because of the nature of their work it has not been a matter of public record, I can say that they were serving their country . The flight they died in the plane crash was not a public record .
 The Case of the Birmingham Widows ((89 do so would be to admit that it had misled Mrs. Mrs. Widows . It could not admit very much more about the four fliers because to the . Case of The . Widows (89) would be the .
 If it opened up the record on the four fliers, this would lead directly to questions about why the carrier-based Navy jets and the B-26s had not arrived over the beaches together . The four Americans died in the crash in June 1944 .
 President said in 1961 that armed forces would not be used “under any conditions,” but relented seven days later . This, in turn, would raise the question of why the President, having stated on April 12, 1961, that “United States armed forces”
 In March of 1963, the case of the four CIA fliers, in short, held the key to a host of difficult questions for the White House . In March 1963, President Richard Nixon faced a series of questions about the case .
 Suppression of information about the fliers was justifiable only if national security was involved . Suppression was justified only if it was national security involved .
 The need for security before the Bay of Pigs operation was understandable, once the President had committed himself to the invasion . The need is understandable, but it was understandable when President committed himself .
 It might be argued that in the immediate aftermath of the invasion it was still necessary to protect the position of the U.S. by fuzzing up the role of the fliers .
 The role of the U.S. and the CIA was freely conceded by Robert Kennedy in the two interviews in 1963 . It is difficult to see how security could any longer have been a factor in cloaking the story of the four Birmingham fliers .
 It had already informed her, in writing, that it knew nothing about her son . The company had already told her, she had already been informed, she said .
 He said he continued to feel the four men were, basically, flying for money . In a private interview in Miami Springs in the summer of 1963, he said he felt the men were flying for cash .
 Shamburger and Ray had been paid $2,200 a month, Gray $1,500 and Baker $1.700 a month . Gray and Baker were paid more than $3,000 a month each .
 Carlson says he was recommended by “someone at the Miami airport,” whom he declined to identify . Carlson: They had been recommended to him by someone at the airport, who declined to name .
 Carlson said Double-Chek was formed to hold real estate for a client . Carlson said it was originally formed as a client's real estate firm .
 Double-Chek then proceeded to recruit pilots for the “Central American front,” he said . Double-chek: "Central America front" is the "central American front" of the operation .
 Carlson says he got a telephone call from Central America and was told that a C-46 cargo plane had gone down with the four men . Carlson: "Next thing he knew, said Carlson, was that a cargo plane with four men went down with them"
 Carlson professes to know nothing about the source of the money for the widows’ checks . Carlson professed to be unaware of the fact that the money comes from the widow's estate .
 There had been no written notification to the wives that their husbands died while employed by, and fighting for, the U.S. The wives were not notified of the deaths .
 They had nothing Official to show their children to explain their fathers' deaths . They had no official documents to explain the deaths of their fathers .
 The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT was born December 7, 1941, in the smoke and rubble of Pearl Harbor . A History of the Invisible Government was born in 1941 .
 It was still a child when the Cold War began after World War II, an adolescent during the 1950s . It reached its majority a year after President Kennedy took office . The Cold War was still an adolescent when it began in 1950s and 1960s . The U.S. has
 The U.S. was badly in need of a centralized intelligence apparatus, the author says . Pearl Harbor proved that the United States needed a central intelligence apparatus .
 There were plenty of warning signs before Pearl Harbor of the coming Japanese attack, but they were not pulled together, analyzed and brought forcefully to the attention of the government . Pearl Harbor was the first major U.S. attack on Japan .
 The United States shed its isolationist traditions and emerged from World War II as the leader of the West . The U.S. emerged from the war to emerge as the world's leader in 1945 .
 Regardless of Pearl Harbor, its new global responsibilities and objectives would have led to the creation of a global American intelligence network . The U.S. would have, in any event, have created a global intelligence network.
 The early emergence of the Soviet Union as an adversary almost before the V-J celebrations had ended made the growth of an Invisible Government in the U.S. virtually inevitable . Added to this, the emergence of an emerging Soviet Union made it virtually inevitable. Added to the growing influence of
 Even in the absence of a clash between Western democracy and international Communism, the conduct of U.S. foreign policy in the postwar world would have required intelligence information upon which the policy makers could base their decisions .
 Truman stole away from the White House to deliver a talk behind closed doors at a CIA training session . Truman delivered the talk shortly after President Eisenhower’s election in November .
 No central intelligence organization existed when he became President in 1945, Truman said . Truman continued: "No central intelligence organizations existed when I became President" Truman continued .
 Out of this emerged the Office of Coordinator of Information, with General Donovan as its head . General Donovan is now the head of the agency .
 On June 13, 1942, this was split into the Office of Strategic Services, under Donovan, and the . Office of War Information . The Office of Information was later divided into the OWS .
 By 1944 Donovan had prepared for Roosevelt a plan to establish a central intelligence agency . Donovan prepared a plan for Roosevelt to establish the agency in 1944 .
 Truman sent for Admiral William D Leahy to look into the problem after Truman became President . Admiral Leahy was the first to look at the problem .
 There they formed the nucleus of what became the Bureau of Intelligence and Research . It was an important branch of the Invisible Government .
 The Authority’s members were Secretary of State James F Byrnes, Secretary of War Robert P Patterson, . Secretary of the Navy James V Forrestal and Admiral Leahy .
 Truman selected Rear Admiral Sidney W Souers, the deputy chief of Navy Intelligence . Souers was chosen to head the intelligence operation .
 The nation’s first Director of Central Intelligence once headed the Piggly Wiggly Stores in Memphis, Memphis .
 Souers was anxious to get back to his business interests . Five months later, Truman named Air Force General Hoyt 8.8 . Souers died of a heart attack .
 Truman appointed Rear Admiral Roscoe H Hillenkoetter in 1947 . He served until May 1, 1947, when he was replaced by a Rear Admiral .
 An Annapolis graduate who spoke three languages, Hillenkoetter had several years’ experience in Navy Intelligence . Hillenkoet had THE INVISIBLE GOVERMENT.
 He was wounded aboard the battleship West Virginia at Pearl Harbor . He had been wounded in the attack .
 Later he set up an intelligence network for Admiral Chester W Nimitz in the Pacific . He set up a network of intelligence networks for Admiral Nimitz .
 Hillenkoetter was the CIA's first director when it was created by the National Security Act of 1947 . He was the first director of the CIA . The CIA was created in 1947 .
 The Act is the same as that which established a Department of Defense and unified the armed services . The Act was passed in 1996 .
 On the face of it, the law appeared simply to give the CIA the task of correlating, evaluating and co-ordinating intelligence collection .
 As constituted in 1964 the NSC was composed of the President, the VicePresident, the Secretary of State, the . Secretary of Defense and the Director of the Office of Emergency Planning . The answer lies in the “other functions” which the CIA may do .
 The National Security Council can perform under the 1947 Act, at the discretion of the national security council . A History of the U.S. National Security Security Council .
 Almost from its inception, the agency has engaged in special operations, sometimes on a military scale . Almost from the inception of the agency, special operations have been conducted .
 James Forrestal became alarmed at signs that the Communists might win the Italian elections . Forrestal was the first Secretary of Defense of Defense in 1948, after the take-over in Czechoslovakia .
 In an effort to influence the elections to the advantage of the U.S. he started a campaign among his wealthy Wall Street colleagues to raise enough money to run a private clandestine operation . The operation was a clandestine operation, he says .
 Allen Dulles felt the problem could not be handled effectively in private hands . Dulles: "The problem is a problem that can't be dealt effectively with by private hands" Dulles said the problem was a problem for the future .
 He urged the government establish a covert organization to conduct a variety of special operations . He urged strongly that the government established a covert operation to conduct various special operations.
 There was no specific provision for covert political operations spelled out in the 1947 Act . The National Security Council issued a paper in the summer of 1948 authorizing special operations in Czechoslovakia and Italy .
 A decision was reached to create an organization within the CIA to conduct secret political operations . A decision to create a secret political operation was reached, a decision was made .
 Frank G Wisner, an ex-OSS man, was brought in from the State Department to head it . Wisner's cover title is a cover title of his own invention .
 Under this innocuous title, the U.S. was now fully in the business of covert political operations . The United States now has a history of covert military operations .
 This machinery was in the CIA but the agency shared control of it with the State Department and the Pentagon . The CIA was in charge of it, but shared control with State Department, Pentagon and State Department .
 On January 4, 1951, the CIA merged the two offices and created a new Plans Division . The Plans Division has had control over secret operations of all types since that date .
 It is doubtful that many of the lawmakers who voted for the 1947 Act could have envisioned the scale on which the CIA would engage in operational activities all over the world .
 President Truman maintained that he had no idea that this was going to happen . Truman said he had 'no idea' that this would happen .
 CIA has been diverted from its original assignment, says CIA chief . CIA chief: "For some time I have been disturbed by the way CIA is diverted" CIA chief criticizes CIA for being diverted from mission .
 Allen Dulles submitted a memorandum to Congress back in 1947 . Dulles' office was established in 1948, but the machinery was not established until 1948 .
 The ‘other functions” proviso of the National Security Act has been stretched to encompass activities by the CIA that are not even hinted at in the law . Like the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, the commerce clause has been extended to include activities by CIA .
 It is not generally realized that the CIA conducts secret political warfare under interpretations of that law . The CIA conducts political warfare in accordance with interpretations of the law .
 Under the law and subsequent presidential fiat, the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency wears two hats . Not only is he the head of the CIA, but more important, as Director of Central Intelligence he is in charge of the entire intelligence community .
 It granted him the unique right to spend the hundreds of millions of dollars in his secret annual budget simply by signing his name . The secret budget allows him to sign his name and spend the money .
 The Intelligence Advisory Committee was created as a board of directors of the covert government . In that year, the Intelligence Advisory committee was created .
 Later its name was changed to the present United States Intelligence Board . The board was later renamed the United States intelligence board .
 The main components of the secret government have remained fairly constant . The names of the men represented on the board have changed, but the main components remain constant .
 Code-breaking and cryptology were consolidated in 1952 in the new National Security Agency . It was established by presidential directive as part of the Defense Department .
 Military intelligence agencies were brought together under the newly created Defense Intelligence Agency in 1961 . The agency was created under the name of the Defense intelligence Agency .
 What has really changed since 1947 is not the general amorphous shape of the Invisible Government, but its size, technology, scope, power and importance have increased in geometric progression with a minimum of Congressional or public examination .
 During the first three years of the CIA’s life Admiral Hillenkoetter remained its director . The CIA was founded in 1945 by President Nixon .
 U.S. Army never graduated from West Point or any other military school . President Obama has been criticized for his lack of knowledge of West Point .
 The agency became more aggressive under “Beedle’s” Smith, who played an important role in the Korean conflict . Smith played a key role in intelligence post-mortems .
 Allen Welsh Dulles' personal stamp upon the Invisible Government more than any other was that of Dulles . The Invisible Government was created by Dulles in 1953 .
 Truman named him to head the three-man committee to see how well the new agency was working . The next year he was named to head a committee to look at the agency's effectiveness .
 President Eisenhower appointed Smith as Under Secretary of State in 1953 . On February 10, 1953, Dulles named Dulles as Director of Central Intelligence . Smith was appointed as the Under Secretary State of State .
 He brought a brilliant reputation as the wartime OSS chief in Switzerland . To the post he brought a . brilliant reputation . to the post .
 The emergence of the Invisible Government in the 1950s to a position of unprecedented strength cannot be comprehended unless a word is said about the Dulles brothers' relationship .
 Mathias F Correa, a former OSS man and a special assistant to Forrestal. Whitney & Co. Correa. Whitney . Correa is also a former special assistant for Forrestal .
 A History of Subversion and Secret manipulation practiced by the Communist enemy. A History . A History. of Subversity. The Communist enemy . The Communist World War II .
 In this, Foster Dulles reflected the American ethic; the world as we would like it to be . Dulles reflects the American spirit of the American values, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Brother was free to deal with nastier realities, to overturn governments and to engage in backstage political maneuvers with the CIA’s almost unlimited funds . While he took this public position, his brother was free . The CIA's nearly unlimited funds were used in the CIA's almost unlimited
 He was, as Allen Dulles once put it, “fight fire with fire”‘ in a less than perfect world . He was able to "fight fire" with fire" in a world of imperfect conditions, Dulles said .
 Allen Dulles was equally dedicated in his own secret sphere . Under his stewardship, the CIA enjoyed its greatest expansion, particularly in the field of governmentshaking .
 In pursuing this dual foreign policy, these special operations were largely kept secret from the U.S. people . The special operations have been kept secret for years .
 The exception, of course, was when something went wrong, as at the Bay of Pigs . The exception to this is when something goes wrong .
 This is not to say that the same two-sided foreign policy would never have evolved had the director of the CIA and the Secretary of State not been brothers .
 The State Department and the CIA were at the center of the Cold War . The CIA and State Department worked together in the 1950s and '60s . But the close working relationship of the Dulles brothers was reduced because of their close relationship .
 In a sense, one might say the Dulles brothers were predestined to take over the levers of power in the conduct of U.S. foreign affairs . The Dulles Brothers are the sons of former President Richard Nixon .
 Their mother’s father, John Watson Foster, was Secretary of State under Benjamin Harrisont in 1892-3 . The Foster family was born in 1918 .
 Robert Lansing, an uncle by marriage, was Secretary of State under Woodrow Wilson . Robert Lansing was secretary of state under Wilson under Wilson .
 Some evidence of the closeness of Foster and Allen Dulles was provided even after the Secretary of State had died . Another uncle, John Welsh, was Minister to England under Foster's government .
 President Kennedy had been thinking of changing the name of Washington's new jetport from Dulles, so designated in honor of Foster, to Chantilly . Dulles was named after Foster, and Foster is the name for the Virginia community where the airport is located .
 Allen Dulles and his sister, Eleanor Lansing Dulles, heard about it and raised it with the President . Dulles' sister was a former official in the German section of the State Department .
 Kennedy called it Dulles Airport . Later a private adviser to the Empress of China, Tz’u Hsi .
 He taught English for a time in an agricultural school in Allahabad, India, and in China and Japan . He also taught English at a school in India and China .
 He joined the diplomatic service in 1916, serving in Vienna and Berne . During the war, he served as an intelligence officer in Berne and Vienna . Then he served in the Diplomat Service of the War in Switzerland .
 Two brothers were staff members of the American delegation to the Versailles Peace Conference . Three years later the two brothers were together in Paris as staff members .
 Their uncle, Secretary of State Lansing, was a member of the delegation . The children's uncle was the secretary of state of state .
 As an international lawyer, he knew the political and industrial elite of Europe, and of Germany . He knew the world's top politicians and industrialists .
 General Donovan assigned Dulles as chief of the OSS mission in Switzerland . This became useful during World War II . General Donovan gave Dulles the title of chief OSS chief of Switzerland .
 He had diplomatic cover as an assistant to the minister in the American Legation in the U.S. He had been working in the United States .
 He operated from a fifteenth-century house in Berne overlooking the Aar River . He operated as a master spy from a 15th century house overlooking the river .
 He has been credited with two outstanding feats for the OSS . First, penetrating the German Abwehr, Hitler’s intelligence service, and second, negotiating the surrender of German troops in Italy .
 Allen Dulles would soon gravitate away from his law practice into the more exciting world of espionage . Dulles was natural enough that he gravitated away from law practice after the war .
 It is impossible to make any definite judgment about the talents of a man who operated, for the most part, out of view . The constant and bitter personal attacks by the Communist bloc provide one significant indication of his effectiveness .
 President Hayes had assured Senator Simon Cameron of Pennsylvania that he would appoint anyone Pennsylvania wanted to be appointed to the London post . Hayes had promised Cameron that he'd appoint anyone he wanted .
 CIA director projected a deceptively grandfatherly image, with his white hair, rimless glasses, his pipe and his sense of humor . A History of the CIA director is published on CNN.com .
 Mr Chips was fascinated by the world of intelligence, by secret operations and by espionage and all of its ramifications . Beneath this outward Mr Chips demeanor was a man fascinated by espionage .
 Mr Dulles perhaps quietly enjoyed the incongruousness of his appearance and his vocation . Although he seemed to fumble a good deal with his pipe and his tobacco .
 Dulles was occasionally accused of being too much of a public figure for the head of the secret service . Dulles died at the age of 65 at the time of his death .
 The CIA was run in a relaxed, relaxed, pipe-and-slipper manner under Dulles . It was also true that morale was high, and he was well liked within the agency as well as outside of it .
 Few people knew of the great personal tragedy in Dulles’ life . Except for his closest friends, few knew of his personal tragedy .
 His son, wounded in Korea, suffered brain damage that left him with very little recognition of people or events . He was finally placed in an institution in Germany on Lake Constance, just over the Swiss border .
 Charles Pearre Cabell, a gray-haired but youthful-looking fourstar Air Force general and West Point graduate, was his deputy director . Cabell is a fourstar general and a West Point grad .
 Texan from Dallas was the former head of Air Force Intelligence . His brother Earle was the mayor of Dallas, Texas .
 Richard Bissell, the CIA's deputy director for plans, joined the CIA in 1954 . Bissell was a member of the CIA staff in the 1950s and '60s .
 Robert Amory is the brother of the writer Cleveland Amory . He is a former Harvard Law School professor . Amory was a Harvard law school professor .
 This was the group which led the CIA during its period of greatest expansion in the 1950s . The CIA was led by this group during the CIA's greatest expansion .
 The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT was involved in a wide range of activities in many parts of the world . But even before this, it was evident that the agency was involved .
 Six months after the CIA had come into existence, it found itself under fire for what would become a familiar complaint over the years . The CIA was accused of failing to predict a major international upheaval .
 Jorge Eliecer Gaitan, the popular Liberal Colombian leader, was assassinated on April 9 in Bogota . The popular Liberal leader was shot dead on a street in Colombia .
 The shooting touched off the ‘Bogotazo,’ two days of bloody riots that disrupted the Ninth Inter-American Conference . Secretary of State George C Marshall, who headed the American delegation .
 In the first place, expecting the CIA to forecast an assassination, is, in most instances, to endow it with supernatural powers . Expecting an assassination prediction is, most of the time, is to be skeptical of the CIA .
 Admiral Hillenkoetter read the text of secret CIA dispatches into the open record for the first and only time in history . In the second place, he was hauled before a House Executive Expenditures Subcommittee .
 This action, which raised hackles at the time, would, if done today, cause pandemonium . This action would, by contrast, would cause pandemonium today, would have caused pandemonium .
 The admiral maintained that although the Communists seized on Gaitan’s assassination, the Colombian leader was slain in “a purely private act of revenge” by one Jose Sierra, the admiral said .
 CIA chief said Gaitan had just successfully defended in a murder trial the killer of Sierra’s uncle . CIA chief: As an attorney, he had just defended in the murder trial of the killer .
 Hillenkoetter testified that, furthermore, the CIA had predicted trouble at Bogota as far back as January 2 . He testified that the CIA predicted trouble in Bogota back in January 2, 2002 .
 A March 23 CIA dispatch from Bogota, warning of Communist agitation, was withheld from Secretary Marshall by Orion J Libert, a State Department advance man in Bogota .
 Communist-inspired agitators will attempt to humiliate the Secretary of State and other members of the United States delegation to the PanAmerican conference in Bogota, Colombia .
 Libert, who has been apprised of above, does not consider it advisable to notify the State Department of this situation, since he feels adequate protection will be given by police . Libert does not want to alarm delegates unduly .
 Hillenkoetter was egged on by the fact that a few hours before he testified, Truman had told a news conference that he was as surprised as anyone about the Tiots .
 The government had received information that there might be picketing or demonstrations . The government received information about picketing and demonstrations .
 There had been no indication that anyone was going to get shot, he said . But, he added, there were no indications that anyone would get shot .
 At the State Department, Lincoln White said it was “inconceivable” that the department had suppressed any CIA communications . Lincoln White: It is ‘inexceptible’ that the State Dept. suppressed any such communications .
 It did not, however, end the recurring question of the adequacy of the CIA’s forecasting abilities .
 The CIA's role in the Korean War became clouded and fuzzed because it was caught up in the emotional storm touched off when Truman finally decided to fire General Douglas THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (104 MacArthur)
 What the CIA had or had not predicted, and its freedom or lack of freedom to operate within MacArthur’s command, became a subject of dispute between the imperious general and the angry chief executive .
 The main outline of the CIA’s performance and the precise issues in dispute are not difficult to pinpoint from the record . Yet the main outline is the CIA's performance, and the exact issues are in dispute .
 Secretary of State Dean Acheson called to say that the North Koreans had invaded South Korea . Achesons was in South Korea at the time of the invasion .
 Admiral Hillenkoetter summoned to the White House on Monday . He assumed that he should have had the most advance knowledge of what had happened .
 It was something like Bogota all over again, although of course much more serious . The Colombian capital was in the midst of a civil war in the 1990s .
 The intelligence agency again had to defend itself for not precisely predicting a future event .
 Once again the CIA had become a subject of domestic political controversy . And once again, it had become an issue of controversy .
 Hillenkoetter told reporters at the White House that his agency had predicted the possibility of such an attack for a year . He said his agency predicted the attack for one year .
 He then hurried to Capitol Hill to give the same explanation to the Senate Appropriations Committee .
 Before testifying, he talked to newsmen about the Communist build-up along the 38th parallel .
 Hillenkoetter had read a series of reports on troop and tank concentrations in North Korea, a member of the group says . Hillenkoet had been briefed on North Korean troop concentration, a source says .
 Truman replaced Hillenkoetter with Walter Bedell Smith . The question became crucial just about the time Truman replaced him with Smith . It became crucial in the decision to appoint Smith as the president .
 The conclusions of the estimators were that it was a toss-up, but they leaned to the side that under certain circumstances the Chinese probably would not intervene . Under certain circumstances, the Chinese are unlikely to intervene, they say .
 Truman says CIA warned of 200,000 Chinese troops in Manchuria in November . Truman: China's entry into Korea might push UN forces back . Truman says the CIA did warn of the threat in November, November .
 Truman also wrote that MacArthur had * Actually, the Chinese had begun crossing the Yalu four days earlier . Truman also said MacArthur had also said he had crossed the river .
 The CIA summary was made available to the general that very day . He launched his ill-fated home-by-Christmas offensive on November 24 .
 The summary, Truman went on to say, had warned that the Chinese were strong enough to force the UN armies back into defensive positions . The summary of the summary was published by Truman in 1945 .
 Truman fired the general on April 9, 1951 . Truman had been gingerly dealing with the general almost as with another chief of state .
 Truman: If the CIA ever made any such optimistic report in November, replied Truman, it was news to him . Truman: "If the CIA made such an optimistic report, it would be news to me"
 Bogota and Korea raised, but did not answer, the fundamental question of how much should be expected of the CIA .
 Political officers of the visible government almost invariably would say they had no advance warning . They also set a pattern that has since become familiar — when trouble came, the overt political officers would say .
 The public would be left to take its choice, provided it could we weave its way through the maze of self-serving semantics from both sides .
 During the Korean War, another war was waged in secret against Communist China . Air-Drops over Red China were dropped by U.S. forces in secret .
 On November 23, 1954, a broadcast from Peking announced the capture and sentencing of two Americans . John Thomas Downey and Richard George Fecteau were captured and sentenced .
 At Yale, John Thomas Downey was liked and respected for his strength, moral and physical . At Yale he was well respected for strength and physical strength .
 He was a quiet, clean-living, athletic lad, an honor student as well as a varsity football player . He was also the captain of the wrestling team .
 He spent a good deal of time at home, in nearby New Britain, Connecticut, where his mother taught school . He spent most of his life at home .
 Richard George Fecteau, of Lynn, Massachusetts, had less of an academic background . Richard George . Fectaau had a less of a academic background. He was the first person to be charged with murder .
 Downey was recruited off the Yale campus in 1951, at age twenty-one . Downey joined the Yale team at age 20, and was recruited from Yale in 1951 .
 Thousands of young men were being shipped to the Far East . That did not seem unusual; with the Korean War on, it was not unusual . Thousands of men were shipped to war camps .
 Jack Downey and Richard Fecteau were captured by the Communist Chinese in 1952 . They were captured on November 9, 1952 . The two men were captured in a Chinese raid .
 This was not revealed by Peking, however, until the announcement more than two years later . The announcement was made two years after the announcement .
 They were charged with having helped to organize and train two teams of Chinese agents . They were accused of helping to organize, train and organize Chinese agents in China .
 Downey and Fecteau were air-dropped into Kirin and Liaoning Provinces for “subversive activities,” Peking said . They were captured when their plane was downed as they attempted to drop supplies and contact agents inside Communist China .
 It is claimed nine Chinese working for the CIA men were taken prisoner with them . It is also claimed that nine Chinese workers were also taken prisoner .
 American consul general at Geneva was instructed by the State Department to make the “strongest possible protest” to Pe Pe . The State Department instructed the consulate general to make a strong protest .
 They were believed to have been lost in a flight from Korea to Japan in November, 1952 . The plane was believed to be lost in an air crash in November 1952 .
 “Downey and Fecteau” were Department of the Army civilian employees, the Defense Department says .
 The passengers were authorized passengers on a routine flight from Seoul to Japan in a plane which was under military contract to the Far East Air Force .
 Messrs, Downey and Fecteau were presumed to have been lost . A search instituted at the time failed to produce any trace of the plane, and a search was launched .
 In September, 1957, a group of forty-one young Americans on an unauthorized trip to Red China visited Downey and Fecteau in prison . Downey was sentenced to life in prison for his role in the Chinese revolution .
 The following month Charles Edmundson, a former USIA official in Korea, left the government in a dispute over foreign policy, wrote an article for the Nation . Edmundson indicated that Downey and Fecteau were CIA operatives .
 On August 2, 1955, Communist China notified the United States at Geneva that the eleven airmen had been released on July 31 . Communist China informed the U.S. that the 11 airmen were released .
 CIA operated on Formosa as Western Enterprises, Inc. During these years, the CIA operated in Formosa, Taiwan .
 This cover was so thin it became a source of some merriment on the island . This cover became the subject of some of the island's most famous photographs .
 The experience of one State Department employee who arrived on Formosa in 1953 is typical . The experience was typical of a State Department worker .
 A fellow employee was showing her the sights as they drove in from the airport . The couple was greeted by a fellow employee at the airport in Florida .
 State Department employees on Formosa did not get along very well with their counterparts in Western Enterprises, Inc. State Dept. employees on formosa got along well with Western Enterprises . State Department workers were unhappy with the relationship between them and their counterparts .
 State Department workers felt that CIA people were being paid far too well and had special privileges . State Department employees felt that the CIA people had too many privileges . CIA people are paid too much and have special privileges, State Department says .
 Yale graduate Campbell “Zup” James was a Yale graduate who affected an English accent, mustache and fancy walking stick . James was one of the CIA operatives who turned up on Formosa .
 To anyone asked, he told the outrageously phony story that he was a wealthy Englishman managing a family tea plantation on Formosa . He told anyone who asked, 'I'm not a rich Englishman. I'm a rich man'
 James James became a legend throughout Southeast Asia . By continuing to maintain this pose, even though almost everyone knew he worked for the CIA, he was a legend .
 He turned up later in Laos, still masquerading as a pukka Englishman straight out of the pages of Kipling . Kipling turned up in Laos later in the country .
 He was spotted in Bangkok as recently as the summer of 1963, with a mustache, cane and Mayfair accent intact .
 Some observers say he was an effective agent . Despite his unlikely cover, some observers said he was effective .
 There is reason to believe that at least in the past, the CIA trained, equipped and financed Chinese Nationalist commando raids on the mainland, launched from the offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu .
 Early in 1963 a spate of interesting stories appeared from Formosa about renewed Nationalist guerrilla raids on the mainland .
 The Chiang Kai-shek government announced that the frogmen and commando teams were most active in Kwangtung Province, near Formosa .
 But guerrilla raids are small actions compared to an operation that changes a government, Tran Tran says . Tran: "Small actions are small ... but small actions can change a government"
 CIA organized and directed the 1953 coup that overthrew Premier Mohammed Mossadegh and kept Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlevi on his throne . CIA organized, directed the coup, which overthrew the Shah, kept him on the throne . The CIA was involved in the coup .
 Few Americans know that the coup that toppled the government of Iran was led by a CIA agent who was the grandson of President Theodore Roosevelt . The CIA agent led the coup in Iran was Theodore Roosevelt's grandson .
 Kermit “Kim” Roosevelt, a seventh cousin of President Franklin D Roosevelt, is still known as “Mr Iran” around the CIA for his spectacular operation in Teheran more than a decade ago .
 He later joined the Gulf Oil Corporation as “government relations” director in its Washington office . He later left the CIA and joined the oil giant Gulf Oil .
 Roosevelt led the attack with a gun at the head of an Iranian tank commander as the column rolled into Teheran . One legend that grew up inside the CIA had it that Roosevelt had it .
 General Fazollah Zahedi,* the man the CIA chose to replace Mossadegh, was also a character worthy of spy fiction . General Zahedegh was also the man chosen by the CIA to replace the Iranian prime minister .
 He fought the Bolsheviks, was captured by the Kurds, and, in 1942, was kidnaped by the British, who suspected him of Nazi intrigues . A six-foottwo, handsome ladies’ man, he fought the Bolsheviks, and was kidnapped by
 During World War II the British and the Russians jointly occupied Iran . The British and Russian occupied Iran during the war . Iran was occupied by the British during World War Two .
 After the war Zahedi rapidly moved back into public life . A History of the Prostitutes in Iran .
 Mossadegh nationalized the British-owned Anglo-Jranian Oil Company in April . He seized the huge Abadan refinery on the Persian Gulf . The Iranian leader also seized the UK-owned British oil company in April and seized the refinery .
 The refinery was shut down; thousands of workers were idled and Iran faced a financial crisis . The refinery shut down . Thousands of workers idled . Iran's financial crisis forced the country to close the refinery .
 British, with the backing of Western governments, boycotted Iran’s oil . Local workers were unable to run the refineries at capacity without British technicians .
 Mossadegh feared that the Russians would end up with Iran’s vast oil reserves flowing into the Soviet Union, which shares a common border with Iran . Washington and London feared that Russia's oil reserves would flow into Iran's borders . Iran and Russia share borders and share oil reserves
 Mossadegh, running the crisis from his bed, had broken with Zahedi, who balked at tolerating the Tudeh party . Mossadgh claimed he was a very sick man, but Zahedis said he was sick .
 CIA and Kim Roosevelt moved in to oust Mossadegh and install Zahedi in Iran . CIA moved in against the background of the coup and ousts the Iranian leader .
 At the time of the coup Roosevelt, then thirty-seven, was already a veteran intelligence man . Roosevelt was already an intelligence officer at the time .
 Kim was graduated from Harvard just before World War II . He taught history there and later at the California Institute of Technology . Kim was also a teacher at Harvard .
 He left the academic life to serve in the OSS, then joined the CIA after the war as a Middle East specialist . He left academic life after serving in OSS and CIA .
 His father had died in Alaska during the war; his uncle, Brigadier General Theodore Roosevelt, died on the beaches of Normandy a year later . Roosevelt's uncle died in Normandy, a year after his father died .
 The British and American governments had together decided to mount an operation to overthrow Mossadegh . The operation was part of an attempt to overthrow the Iranian leader .
 The CIA’s estimate was that it would succeed because the conditions were right; in a showdown the people of Iran would be loyal to the Shah . The CIA's estimate of success was that the conditions would be right .
 The task of running the operation went to Kim Roosevelt, then the CIA’s top operator in the Middle East . Kim Roosevelt was then the agency's top operator .
 He drove across the border, reached Teheran, and then dropped out of sight . He was seen driving into the country's border with Iran .
 Roosevelt operated outside of the protection of the American Embassy . Shifting his headquarters several times to keep one step ahead of Mossadegh’s THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT .
 He did have the help of about five Americans, including some of the CIA men stationed in the embassy .
 There were seven local agents, including two top Tranian intelligence operatives . In addition to the agents, there were also two top local agents .
 Roosevelt never saw the two men during the entire operation . They communicated with Roosevelt through cutouts, cutouts—intermediaries—and he never saw them during the operation .
 Brigadier General H Norman Schwarzkopf, who used to appear on radio’s ‘Gang Busters,’ turned up in Teheran . Brigadier general H Norman . Schwarzkopef used to be a member of the ‘gang Busters
 He was best known for his investigation of the Lindbergh baby kidnaping case when he headed the New Jersey State Police in 1932 .
 On August 13 the Shah signed a decree dismissing Mossadegh and naming Zahedi as Premier . The Shah signed the decree on August 13 . On August 14, the Shah sacked Mossadeighi as Prime Minister of Iran . The decree was signed by the Shah .
 The unco-operative Mossadegh arrested the unfortunate colonel who brought in his notice of dismissal . The colonel was the only one to bring in notice of his dismissal from the Iranian government .
 Shah and his queen fled to Baghdad by plane from their palace on the Caspian Sea . Mobs rioted in the streets; the thirty-three-year-old Shah was the only son of the Shah .
 For two chaotic days, Roosevelt lost communication with his two chief Iranian agents . Roosevelt lost contact with them for two days . For two days, he lost communication .
 Allen Dulles flew to Rome to confer with the Shah . Meanwhile, the Shah had made his way to Rome . The Shah had traveled to Rome, where he was met with Dulles .
 Princess Ashraf, the Shah’s attractive twin sister, tried to play a part in the international intrigue, but the Shah refused to talk to her . The Shah was the prime minister of Iran in the 1970s and 1980s .
 In Teheran, Communist mobs controlled the streets; they destroyed statues of the Shah to celebrate his departure . Communist mobs control the streets .
 Early on August 19 Roosevelt, from his hiding place, gave orders to his Iranian agents to get everyone they could find into the streets . Roosevelt ordered the Iranians out of their hiding place .
 The agents went into the athletic clubs of Teheran and rounded up a strange assortment of weight-lifters, muscle-men and gymnasts . The agents rounded up the odd assortment of sportsmen and women .
 The odd procession made its way through the bazaars shouting proShah slogans . The pro-Shah pro-government slogans were chanted by pro-shah protesters .
 By mid-morning it was clear the tide had turned against Mossadegh and nothing could stop it . It was clear that nothing could be done to stop the Iranian leader's march .
 In August, 1958, an international consortium of Western oil companies signed a twenty-five-year pact with Iran for its oil . Iran is one of the most powerful countries in the Middle East .
 Under it, the former Anglo-Iranian Oil Company got 40 percent, a group of American companies* got 40 per cent . Royal Dutch Shell got 14 percent and the Compagnie Frangaise des Petroles got 6 percent . The deal was signed by the French government in 2007
 Iran got half of the multimillion-dollar income from the oil fields under the deal . Anglo-Iranian was assured a compensation payment of $70,000,000 .
 The United States, of course, has never officially admitted the CIA’s role in the CIA .
 The former CIA chief also hinted at the CIA’s Iran role in his book The Craft of Intelligence .
 Iran remained pro-West after the 1953 coup . Little was done to alleviate the terrible poverty in that ancient land . Little has been done since the coup .
 A total of $1,300,000,000 in United States aid poured in during twelve years since 1951 . Much of it appeared to stick to the fingers of the hopelessly corrupt officialdom .
 A typical Iranian scandal involved a close friend of Princess Ashraf, Ehsan Davaloo, the “Caviar Queen” who earned the sobriquet by paying officials to get a $450,000-a-year caviar monopoly .
 Gulf Oil, Standard Oil of New Jersey and California, The Texas Company and Socony-Mobil. Gulf Oil . The Texas . Company . The . Texas Company . Socony .Mobil. The Texas. Company .
 Iran remained a ripe breeding ground for Communism. The Invisible Government remained in charge of Iran . Iran was a key ally of the Soviet Union in the West.
 With the help of a President’s swashbuckling grandson, the Invisible Government had brought about a political coup d’état . The Invisible Government was brought about by a President's grandson . With the assistance of a . President's swashuckling grandson .
 The United States seems unable to follow this up with badly needed social and economic reforms . But the U.S. seems to have failed to follow up with a major overhaul of the country's economy .
 Kim Roosevelt turned up across the Red Sea in a mysterious episode in a new setting . Two years after his operation in Iran, Kim Roosevelt turns up across Red Sea .
 Egyptian Premier Gamal Abdel Nasser announced to the world that he had concluded an arms deal with the Soviet bloc . The deal was made in 1955 .
 Washington had been unwilling to sell weapons to Egypt on Nasser’s terms . Nasser turned to the East after the Arab leader was denied access to weapons .
 John Foster Dulles had not been inclined to take too seriously the reports coming from his brother . It was one case, however, where he was not inclined to be taken too seriously .
 The State Department and the CIA had agreed to send Roosevelt to Cairo for a first-hand look . The State Dept. and CIA had planned to send him to Cairo .
 Roosevelt, by now the assistant director of the CIA for the Middle East, did so, and reported back that the negotiations were about to be completed . Roosevelt, who was by now a CIA director for the Mideast, returned the news .
 Roosevelt fired back a pointed message advising the Secretary of State to read his morning papers, which would carry Nasser’s announcement . Roosevelt: “Read his papers. It would carry the announcement. He would be surprised to find out.
 On September 28, the day after Nasser’s defiant disclosure, George V Allen, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, was summoned to the office of Herbert Hoover, Jr. Herbert Hoover . Roosevelt was right,
 In George Allen’s presence, Hoover telephoned the Secretary of State; it was agreed that George Allen should be sent to see Nasser right away . Nasser was the President of the Arab Arab Republic in Egypt .
 George Allen carried a letter from Secretary Dulles warning that the arms deal could hand Egypt over to the Communists . With him, George Allen was carrying a letter .
 U.S. wire services speculates that Allen took with him an ‘ultimatum” to Nasser . Allen was winging his way to the land of the Sphinx . Allen died in 1953 in a plane crash .
 The CIA’s “Mr Iran” became the central figure in some shadowy backstage maneuvering in Egypt .
 British newspaper accounts of the episode later referred to a “Mr X” a mysterious American official .
 One version of the affair that became widely accepted was given by Nasser himself in a blood-and-thunder speech at Alexandria on July 26, 1956 . The same day he seized the Suez Canal, the same day Nasser seized the canal .
 I assure you that this note will have no effect because we shall be able to remove its effect . We shall remove the effect of this note from this article .
 A story circulated circulated in Washington that a certain “Mr THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((116 X” a high CIA official had undercut the official foreign policy of the United States . Nasser was told to forget whatever the special envoy told him, a CIA official said
 When Allen’s plane landed in Cairo, he was unaware of the storm kicked up there by reports that he was bringing an ultimatum from the Eisenhower Administration . Allen was unaware that the storm was kicked up by reports .
 Ambassador Henry A Byroade sprinted aboard the plane to warn George Allen of the situation . Ambassador Byroad sprinted on board to warn Allen that the situation had been under way .
 Assistant Secretary of State was cautiously noncommittal to newsmen who surrounded him when he stepped off the plane . Forearmed, the Assistant Secretary-of-State was cautious .
 He nodded to the CIA man, but they kept their distance from each other in public . The CIA man nodded to him, but kept his distance from the man .
 Before Allen’s arrival, Byroade and Roosevelt had agreed that it would be an intolerable loss of face if the envoy were refused an interview with Nasser . Nasser was the prime minister of Egypt .
 Roosevelt, Byroade and Johnston sat down with Allen and went over the letter from Dulles . Allen: "In seclusion of the embassy, in seclusion, they sat down to discuss the letter"
 They told Allen it was so patronizing that Nasser would take it as an insult and throw him out of the office . Allen was told he was patronizing and would be thrown out of office by Nasser .
 They urged that at the very least, he read the letter instead of handing it to Nasser formally . Nasser is expected to receive the letter .
 George Allen sent a cable to Secretary Dulles recommending that he deliver the tough message orally . Allen: As a result of this, George Allen . Allen's cable to Dulles recommended that he delivered the message orally.
 They maintain that he joshed Nasser, told him to act like a grown man and not blow up, and asked him to listen politely when George Allen read his letter . Nasser's family maintains that Allen told him not to blow up .
 Roosevelt did not, they say, ask Nasser to disregard Allen’s message, as Nasser indicated later . Nasser later indicated later, sources say, that Allen had asked him to disregard the message .
 At his own meeting with Nasser on October 1, Allen was accompanied by Byroade . Allen and Nasser met for the first time in October 1 .
 The story was sufficiently upsetting to Senator Paul H Douglas, an Illinois Democrat, so that he quietly investigated it later during a trip to the Middle East . Allen told Nasser that the United States recogated that the U.S. had recoiled .
 The U.S. refused to sell jets to Israel and was anxious not to escalate the arms race in the Mideast .
 Nasser was vague when asked whether the arms deal was a prelude to something bigger . Allen pressed to find out whether it was a precursor to something more .
 Allen pulled out the letter and formally read its text to Nasser . Allen then read the letter to the Egyptian president .
 There was no translation, since the Egyptian Premier’s English was adequate . Egyptian Premier's English was entirely adequate .
 The assistant director of the CIA saw Nasser ahead of the Assistant Secretary of State . What is clear, at any rate, is that Nasser was not seen by the CIA director .
 Eisenhower could not have known of this at the time, because he was under an oxygen tent in Denver, having suffered his heart attack there on September 25 . Eisenhower suffered a heart attack in Denver in September 25, and was under oxygen tent .
 If by this the Secretary of State meant that through this the intervention of “Mr X,” the Assistant Secretary . of State for Near Eastern Affairs had not been thrown out of the office of the . Premier of Egypt, he was correct. He said .
 With Soviet arms flowing into Egypt, relations between Nasser and Washington deteriorated rapidly . Suez was one of the key points of Nasser's relationship with Washington .
 On July 19, 1956, Secretary of State Dulles pulled the rug out of under the fiery Arab leader . The death of the Arab leader was the death of President Eisenhower .
 Israel invaded Egypt on October 29 and Britain and France joined in with a Hallowe’en Day attack . The attack took place on Hallowe'en Day .
 The U.S. condemned the invasion, Moscow threatened to rain missiles on London and Paris, and the assault was called off . The assault was canceled .
 All of this happened in the midst of the Hungarian revolt and the windup of the presidential campaign in the U.S. The Hungarian revolt took place in the middle of the campaign season .
 When the sands had settled in the Middle East, Allen Dulles was in a difficult position . The question, once again, was whether the CIA had failed to predict an event, the Suez invasion .
 Allen Dulles: Intelligence had guessed correctly, but could not advertise the fact . There were many times, said Dulles, when intelligence had guessed right, but couldn't advertise it .
 Intelligence was well alerted as to both the possibility and later the probability of the actions taken by Israel and then by Britain and France . Israel and Britain were alerted to the possibility of the action by intelligence .
 The public received the impression that there had been an intelligence failure . U.S. officials issued statements to the effect that the country had not been given advance warning .
 Our Officials, of course, intended to imply only that the British and French and Israelis had failed to tell us what they were doing, they said .
 On February 1, 1957, Secretary Dulles was being questioned by Senator Mansfield before a joint meeting of the Senate Foreign Relations and Armed Services committees . The secretary of state was questioned by Mansfield .
 He was asked whether Washington had knowledge of the Israeli attack on Egypt or of the British and French participation .
 It is true that this testimony, if taken alone, could be interpreted to mean that there had been no advance warning to Washington by the invaders . The testimony could be taken alone to suggest that there were no advance warnings .
 Secretary Dulles was more specific under questioning by Senator Henry M Jackson . Senator Jackson asked whether “the people within the executive branch of the government” knew of the impending Israeli attack on Suez .
 In England, France and the United States, there had been suggestions that the Eisenhower Administration had known in advance of the invasion plans, and had been hypocritical in its outraged reaction . Democrats felt the pre-election crisis had helped defeat Adlai Stevenson and re-elect Eisenhower .
 Jackson’s questions seemed designed to explore whether the CIA had known all along that the invasion was coming . Jackson's questions seemed to be aimed at exploring whether CIA knew about the invasion .
 If this had been the case, Secretary Dulles could ill afford, for political reasons, to say so . Dulles was secretary of state at the time of the war .
 Jackson's question and Secretary of State's answer are on the record . Jackson’s question and secretary of state's answer on record are on record .
 Dulles was clearly saying that “the executive branch of the government” had “no knowledge” in advance of the Israeli attack which began the Suez invasion . Dulles: “The executive branch, which includes the CLA, had no knowledge’ of the
 The truth is always elusive; the truth about a secret agency doubly so . The truth was always elusive, but it's always elusive. The truth about the Secret Service is doubly elusive .
 The Invisible Government’s activities have not been restricted to chaotic countries, dominated or threatened by Communism . Costa Rica is one of the most chaotic countries in the world .
 CIA agents intruded deeply into the political affairs of Costa Rica in the mid-1950s . Costa Rica is the most stable and democratic republic in Latin America . CIA agents invaded the country in the 1950s .
 The CIA’s purpose was to promote the ouster of Jose Figueres, the moderate socialist who became President in a fair and open election in 1953 . The CIA was behind the ousting of Figuere, a moderate socialist .
 His warning had no noticeable effect on the CIA’s anti-Figueres activities, however .
 Figueres had risen to national prominence as the leader of a guerrilla movement to install Otilio Ulate as President in 1948 . Figuere led the INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (120) guerrilla movement .
 Ulate had won the election, but a right-wing government and a packed legislature had refused to recognize him . Ulate's election had been held in 2010, but the government and the legislature had not recognized him .
 In April of 1948, however, Figueres forced them to back down and the following year Ulate was installed . The following year, Ulate is installed in the US .
 Ulate organized an opposition movement against his former political ally . Ulate is a former member of Ulate's political party . But Ulate has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Figueres recognized the right of asylum in Costa Rica for non-Communists and Communists alike . His major grievance was that he had scrupulously recognized the rights of asylum . The left's major grievance is that he did not recognize Communists' right to asylum in the country .
 The large influx of questionable characters complicated the agency’s job of surveillance and forced it to increase its staff . The agency has increased its staff to handle the large influx .
 An effort to produce evidence that Figueres had been in contact with leading Communists during a trip to Mexico was unsuccessful . An effort was unsuccessful to find evidence of the relationship .
 CIA agents had better luck with the first part of their strategy—stirring up trouble for the Communists . But CIA agents managed to avoid trouble with the Communist Party .
 Officials in the American Embassy held an urgent meeting to ponder the meaning of the letter . Unaware that the letter was a CIA plant, the leading officials in the U.S. Embassy were unaware of its true meaning .
 The political officer then dispatched a long classified report to Washington, alerting top policy makers to the possibility of a startling turn in Latin American Communist politics . The report was then dispatched to Washington .
 The CIA was plotting to get rid of Figueres during this period . Ambassador Robert F Woodward was urging President Eisenhower to lend his prestige to the Costa Rican President by inviting him to Washington .
 Figueres stepped down in 1958 when his candidate lost the Presidential election . He stepped down when he lost the election in 1958 .
 The agency has had one noteworthy success in obtaining a real Communist document . But the agency has not been able to obtain the document .
 He assumed there had to be one, because Khrushchev had spoken for seven hours . He assumed that there had been a one after Khrushchevitch's speech .
 Analysts determined what individuals and what Communist nations might have been given a copy of the book . They also determined where to go looking for it, including where to find it .
 One top CIA operator turned up in Belgrade with an intriguing scheme to bootleg him a copy . He would make a direct pitch to the Yugoslav Government to get a copy of the book .
 CIA man called on a certain high Yugoslav official . With the permission of Ambassador James W Riddleberger, the CIA man met with the official . The CIA man was in Yugoslavia at the time .
 For nearly two hours he argued his case, listing the reasons why Washington deserved a copy of the top-secret document . The document is a classified classified document .
 At one point the Yugoslav seemed ready to hand over a copy of the book . The sales talk was convincing .
 The man who made the deal to deliver the speech claimed he needed the money, not for himself, but to make arrangements to protect others who might be involved . The man said he needed to pay the money to protect other people involved in the deal .
 Dulles did not want to release the 26,000-word text unless he could be sure it was genuine . Dulles: "I'm sure it's genuine"
 For several weeks during May, 1956, the CIA had the text in hand, but said nothing . The CIA said nothing for several weeks until the end of that month .
 CIA analysts pored over the text, examining every word, each phrase in an attempt to authenticate it . CIA analysts examined every word in the text to try and authenticate its authenticity .
 Experts finally decided that the document contained information that only Khrushchev could have been in a position to know . Experts say the document contains only information that could only be known from a person in a 'position to know'
 Analysts believe the document was THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((122 bona fide) The document is believed to have been a government document .
 Dulles gave his approval, and on June 4, the State Department released the text . Dulles' approval of the text was approved by the U.S. State Department .
 The CIA does not know which it is because the text-asdelivered was never published by Khrushchev . The CIA has never been able to determine whether the text is from the text as delivered .
 CTA felt a deserved sense of satisfaction in having run the speech to ground . The CTA said they felt a 'deserved sense of . satisfaction' in having . run the speeches to ground.
 It was the first tangible evidence of the historic split between Communist China and the Soviet Union .
 The U-2 spy plane was developed by Richard Bissell, Trevor Gardner of the Air Force and Clarence L Johnson of Lockheed . It was initially turned down by the Pentagon on June 7, 1954, after initially being turned down .
 The Defense Department finally approved the ultra-secret espionage project in December of that year . The project was approved by the Defense Department .
 Eisenhower, Macmillan, De Gaulle and Khrushchev were scheduled to take place on May 16, 1960 . The summit conference was scheduled to be held in May 1960 .
 The U-2 program ran the U.2 program in the 1960s and '90s . It was the first time the program had a scheduled flight under the wire . The flight was the last of the program's final flight .
 Dulles had hinted at the CIA's role in the CIA in a speech in Washington in June, 1963, and in a television interview two months later . They feared the Paris meeting might result in a de* meeting .
 It was one of the few times that the CIA had openly taken credit for an espionage feat. It was a startling statement, because it was a rare statement .
 The feeling was that a successful conference, followed by Eisenhower's planned trip to Moscow, would make flying the U-2 impossible . The feeling within the intelligence community was that .
 Groupings allowed flexibility for a set number of missions to be flown within a given time span . These groupings allowed considerable flexibility for the missions .
 Francis Gary Powers, a CIA pilot from the hill country of Virginia, was downed in his U-2 over Sverdlovsk,* in the Urals in May 1960 . Powers was a U.2 pilot from U.S.
 At first, Washington insisted it was a NASA weather plane that had drifted over the border from Turkey when its pilot had oxygen trouble . Washington insists it was an oxygen-freezing plane .
 Khrushchev triumphantly revealed he had the pilot and the plane . After waiting two days for this explanation to sink in, Khrrushchev revealed he was still in control .
 The State Department admitted the spy flight, but said it had not been authorized in Washington . At that, the State Department said the flight was not authorized in D.C.
 Hisenhower reversed this position, taking responsibility for the U-2 program . Two days later, he issued a statement widely interpreted to mean that the flights over Soviet territory would continue .
 Eisenhower finally announced at the summit table that no more U-2s would be sent over Russia . Eisenhower: "No more U.2s will be sent out over Russia"
 Powers was instructed to blow up his plane in the event of trouble over Russia . Powers had been told to blow-up his plane if there was trouble .
 The U-2 contained a destructor unit with a three-pound charge of cyclonite—enough to blow it up . The U.2 was the first U.S. aircraft to carry a cyclonite charge .
 U-2 pilots were instructed in the event of trouble to activate a timing device and eject from the plane . Pilot was instructed to activate the timing device in the case of a problem .
 Allen Dulles was aware that some of the U-2 pilots were worried about the workings of the destructor mechanism . It would then explode, so they were told, according to Dulles . Dulles: Some of the pilots were told it would explode .
 "We were not really sure how many seconds they had to get out of the room," the government said . The government did not know how long it had to be released .
 Jt. Jt was obvious that the CJA did not relish any close scrutiny of the fascinating workings of the destructor mechanism . Jt .
 Some of the weightier political analyses of the confusion in Washington during the U-2 affair have failed to pay enough attention to the vital business of the destructor unit .
 The cover stories were based on the assumption that Francis Gary Powers had actuated those destructor switches . The cover story was based on an assumption that Powers had acted on the switches .
 A few days after his Senate testimony, Powers seemed less certain of this . 1963 was a banner year for spy cases, but one of the most significant received the least attention in the United States .
 In a radio interview at his home in Pound, Virginia, with James Clarke, he said he thought he had seventy seconds on that particular U-2 .
 The fact is that pilots did not know precisely how much time they had before the explosion, the pilot says . The plane was carrying passengers and crew when it exploded .
 Judge Kurt Weber sentenced three former West German intelligence agents to prison terms for spying for the Soviet Union . Judge Weber sentenced the three in a Karlsruhe courtroom July 11 .
 All three had been employed by the West German Federal Intelligence Agency . The agency's founder and chief, Reinhard Gehlen, was a mysterious ex-Nazi general .
 The defendants confessed they had systematically betrayed state secrets from 1950 until their arrest in 1961 . The defendants were accused of systematically betraying state secrets .
 Felfe and Clemens received citations for ten years of meritorious service from both of their employers .
 From General Gehlen they received a plaque bearing an illustration of St. St. Mary's St. Louis .
 From Alexander N Shelepin, then Chairman of the Soviet KGB,* they got a letter of commendation and a cash bonus . They were given a letter and cash bonus from the then-chairman .
 The Gehlen organization was financed and controlled by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency . The case meant that the CIA’s most vital European subsidiary had been penetrated at the top, virtually from its inception .
 The CIA poured millions into the Gehlen apparatus, but the 1963 case raised grave questions about the effectiveness and worth of the operation . The CIA spent millions on Gehlen .
 It raised moral and political questions in West Germany, where some newspapers were asking why exNazis were running the Bundesrepublik's intelligence service in the first place .
 It is one arm of the Soviet espionage apparatus, the GRU, or Glavnoye Razvedyvatelnoye Upravlenie, the Soviet Military Intelligence . The GRU is one of the two arms of the KGB .
 The KGB is the successor to the Cheka, OGPU, NKVD, MVD and other initials used over the years to designate the often reorganized, purged and renamed Soviet secret police and espionage network . The KGB was the predecessor of Cheka .
 Gehlen, a member of the German General Staff under Hitler, was placed in charge of wartime intelligence for Foreign Armies East . Gehlen was a German general staff member under Hitler .
 This meant that he ran Germany’s espionage against the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe . He ran Germany's espionage campaign against the Soviets and Eastern European countries .
 He is said to have surrendered his organization and files to the U.S. Army Counter Intelligence Corps in 1945 .
 Gehlen returned to the U.S. with his knowledge of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe . Gehlen was soon back in business, this time for the United States .
 When the CIA was casting about for a network in West Germany, it decided to look into the possibility of using Gehlen’s talents . Gehlen's talents were used for the CIA in the early 1950s .
 Henry Pleasants, CIA station chief in Bonn for many years, lived with Gehlen for several months . Gehlen is a former general who served in the U.S. Army in Germany during the Cold War . He is now a retired general .
 He also probably had the distinction of being the only top U.S. spy to become the center of a literary storm . He was the only spy to be the subject of a book storm .
 Agony of Modern Music caused considerable controversy for its attacks on all contemporary music except jazz . He had continued to write books after joining the CIA, and in 1955 he had continued writing books .
 Gehlen consolidated an intelligence network that operated in utter secrecy from a heavily guarded villa in Pullach, outside of Munich . Gehlen consolidated the network from a villa outside of the city .
 No picture of Gehlen has been taken since 1944 . Gehlen was bemedaled in his Wehrmacht uniform in 1944 .
 During the war Felfe ran the Swiss department of the Reich security service, and Clemens and Tiebel were his assistants .
 Felfe, while awaiting possible war crimes prosecution, suddenly was given a clean bill of health by a British Zone court and was hired by the Gehlen organization in 1951 . Felfe was hired in 1951 by Gehlen .
 Otto John was head of West Germany’s Office for the Protection of the Constitution . Otto John is now the head of the Office for Protection of The Constitution in West Germany .
 John was the head of West Germany’s official counter-intelligence organization . He was as astounding as if J Edgar Hoover had suddenly turned up in Minsk . John was head of the West German's official counter intelligence organization .
 Otto John chose the tenth anniversary of the unsuccessful bomb plot against Hitler to do his vanishing act . Otto John's vanishing act was the 10th anniversary of Hitler's failed bomb plot .
 He had been active in the plot himself and managed to escape afterwards; his brother Hans was executed . He escaped and escaped after his brother was killed .
 On the day of his disappearance he had attended memorial services at the site of the executions . He had been at memorial services on the day he disappeared .
 Washington, stunned by the news, described John as one of the “two or three best-informed persons in West Germany’s intelligence operations . John was one of ‘two or 3 best-in-West Germany” on intelligence operations, Washington said . Washington,
 Gehlen was the unchallenged spymaster of West Germany . With John’s defection and the official recognition of the FIA by Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, Gehlen became the unquestioned spymaker . Gehlen's defection to the FIA was the official
 He was tried, convicted of treasonable conspiracy and served nineteen months of his four-year sentence . He was convicted and sentenced to four years in prison .
 The three defendants admitted that they supplied the Soviet Union with the names of West German agents of the FIA as well as other secret information . The information was smuggled out in canned baby food, trick suitcases and special writing paper .
 Felfe and Clemens testified they were paid about $40,000 each during the ten-year period . Clemens and Felfe were paid $40K each during that period .
 He did not have to spell out the initials CIA to make his meaning clear . He said the CIA is the CIA .
 The extraordinary growth of the clandestine activities of the United States in all parts of the world has been pointed up in this brief review of the important operations of the Invisible Government in Germany, Korea, China, Formosa, Iran, Egypt, Costa Rica and Soviet Union .
 William J Sebald developed misgivings about his new post as Ambassador to Burma . Sebald had been ambassador to Burma for seven years . The Innocent Ambassador is published by Penguin Penguin, published in New York, New York .
 Sebald’s worries centered on a band of 12,000 Nationalist Chinese troops who were squatting on Burmese territory in defiance of the Myanmar Government .
 The Nationalist troops had fled to Burma in 1949 as the Chinese Communists advanced toward victory . The Chinese Communists had taken over Burma from the Nationalist forces .
 The troops made one concerted effort to return by force to Yunnan, their native province in China . The troops were in Yunnan province, Yunnan's Yunnan .
 They were easily turned back, and settled down in Burma to a life of banditry and opium-running . But they settled down there to live a life as banditries and opium runners .
 The Burmese Government demanded that they lay down their arms, but the Nationalist troops repulsed the sporadic efforts of the THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((130 Burmies Army) to subdue them .
 In the more recent fighting they had displayed new equipment and a greater sense of discipline . In the past two years they have shown a greater discipline .
 General Li Mi was spotted commuting between Formosa and Burma by way of a landing strip in Thailand . He has just acquired a new commander, general Li Mi, who was spotted flying across Burma’s southeastern border .
 Burmese Government burdened by catastrophic World War II destruction and continuous domestic rebellions, the Nationalist troops had long been an intolerable foreign nuisance . Nationalist forces were long a foreign nuisance to Burmies .
 Now, revived as a military force, they became a menace to Burmese independence . They became a threat to Myanmar's independence .
 The troops could provide a pretext for an invasion by the Communist Chinese or a coup by the 300,000 Burmese Communists . The troops might easily provide the pretext for a Chinese invasion .
 Burma pleads with the United States to apply pressure on Formosa to withdraw troops . Burma pleaded with the U.S. to pressure the Formosa government to withdraw the troops . Formosa is the largest Chinese territory in Taiwan .
 Ambassador Sebald had spent more than a third of his fifty years as a naval officer and diplomat in the Far East . He had spent over a quarter of his 50 years as an ambassador in Asia .
 He knew he would have trouble enough with the touchy new nation of ancient oriental ways without being undermined by another agency of his own government .
 Sebald demanded assurances from his superiors that the CIA was not supporting the Nationalist troops . Sebald was on home leave in Washington, D.C., when he returned to Washington .
 He was told emphatically that the United States was in no way involved in the incident . The U.S. was not involved, he was told .
 Sebald regularly warned Washington that the troops threatened Burma’s very existence as a parliamentary democracy which was friendly to the West . Sebald: Burma's very existence threatened by the troops .
 If U.S. relations were not to turn sour, he insisted, the Nationalists would have to be removed . If United States relations were to turn completely sour he insisted .
 The U.S. State Department says Burma should logically complain to Taipeh . The State Department responded that the United States was not involved in the incident .
 Dutifully, Sebald passed along these assurances to the Burmese Foreign Office . Sebald also passed along with the assurances that the government had assured them .
 He never succeeded in convincing the Burmese of American innocence . But he failed to convince them of their innocence .
 Ne Win confronted Sebald at a diplomatic gathering and angrily demanded action on the Nationalist troops . Ne Win was fresh from a meeting with his field commanders, Ne Win .
 When Sebald started to launch into his standard disclaimer of U.S. involvement the general cut him short . Sebald: "The United States has been involved in some of the world's most heinous crimes"
 As Sebald was to learn, and as high U.S. officials now frankly admit, Ne Win was indeed correct .
 The CIA was intimately involved with the Nationalist troops, but Sebald’s superiors, John Foster Dulles, were officially ignorant of the fact .
 Knowledge of the project was so closely held within the CIA, that it even escaped the notice of Robert Amory, the deputy director for intelligence .
 He was not normally informed about the covert side of the agency’s operations . But he usually received some information about major projects on an unofficial basis .
 President Obama could protest to colleagues in other branches of government that the CIA was innocent . Yet on Burma he could honestly protest to his colleagues that he was innocent, he said . The CIA was not guilty of any wrongdoing .
 Sebald discovered through personal investigation on the scene that the CIA’s involvement was an open secret in sophisticated circles in Bangkok, Thailand . Sebald was never able to secure an official admission from Washington .
 In Rangoon public resentment at the CIA’s role became so pervasive that the most irrelevant incidents were routinely ascribed to American meddling . The most insignificant incidents, an isolated shooting, a power failure, were .
 Burma threw the issue into the United Nations in March 1953 . Sebald persisted in his denials, but by March, 1953, they had turned so threadbare that Burma threw it into the U.N.
 Chester Bowles, the Ambassador to India, had also been beset by the rumors . Bowles was finishing his first tour as Ambassador to New Delhi .
 To silence the anti-American rumbling, Bowles sought assurances from Washington . Bowles, like Sebald, sought assurances .
 Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru convinced himself that the U.S. was not supporting the Nationalist guerrillas . Bowles conveyed this message to Prime Minister Nehru, who stated publicly that, on Bowles’ word, he .
 Taipeh says it has “some influence over General Li Mi” and would exercise its “moral influence” to resolve the problem . At the same time, it conceded paradoxically that TaipeH did have “Some influence over” General Li .
 With the UN on the verge of an embarrassing inquest and the Nationalist Chinese in more conciliatory mood, Sebald’s pleas finally began to be heard in Washington .
 He was instructed to offer the services of the United States in mediating the issue between Burma and Taipeh . The U.S. is expected to offer its services to help the situation .
 The United States suggested that Burma, Nationalist China and Thailand join with it in a four-power conference to discuss the problem . The U.S. suggested that the United States, China and the other nations join in .
 After first balking at sitting down with Nationalist China, Burma finally agreed to sit down with China . Burma first babbled at the idea of talks with China, but it has since agreed . Burma agreed to a sit-down with China in 2008 .
 The procedure called for the Nationalist guerrillas to cross over into Thailand for removal to Formosa within three or four weeks . The procedure was called for . the . Nationalist Guerrillas . to cross into Thailand .
 General said he would under no condition order his troops out of Thailand . General pleaded illness, then announced he would not order troops out . General said his troops would not be ordered out of Bangkok .
 Burma again brought the issue before the UN in September 1953 . Negotiations and fighting continued inconclusively throughout the summer of 1953 .
 Burma agreed reluctantly to a cease-fire when Nationalist China pledged to disavow the guerrillas and cut off all aid to them after those willing to be evacuated had started out by way of Thailand . If something more than that, such as the threat of an ouster from their
 The withdrawal, which began on November 5, was disturbing to the Burmese from the start . The withdrawal began November 5 and has lasted since then .
 The Innocent Ambassador (133 volved with the guerrillas in the opium trade trade) The Innocent ambassador was an opium smuggler .
 He refused to allow Burmese representatives to accompany other members of the joint military commission to the staging areas . And he refused to let Burmies representatives accompany other military officials to staging areas.
 The suspicions of the Burmese were stirred anew when “Wild Bill” Donovan, the wartime boss of the OSS and then Ambassador to Thailand, arrived on the scene to lead out the Nationalist troops .
 About 7,000 persons were flown to Formosa, but a high percentage were women, children and crippled noncombatants . It was largely bungled, in the view of U.S. officials in Rangoon, mainly because Washington failed to exert enough pressure .
 Li Mi announced from Taipeh the dissolution of the Yunnan Anti-Communist and National Salvation Army in 1954 . By July fighting had resumed between the guerrillas and Burmese Army .
 Sebald resigned as ambassador on November I, citing the ill health of his wife, citing her illness . Sebald returned to Washington as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs .
 He was to spend three years trying to open lines of communication between the State Department and the CIA . The left hand of the United States might know what the right hand was up to in its international dealings .
 The repercussions of the CIA’s operation remained to complicate U.S. relations in Burma . But the repercussions remain to complicate United States relations with Burma .
 Half of the Nationalist guerrillas, and the best of them, were still deployed in Burma . Despite the long and painful negotiations, half of the . Nationalist Guerrillas are still deployed to Burma .
 They joined other rebel factions and skirmished repeatedly with the Burmese Army . They joined forces with other rebel groups and fought with the army .
 It was not until January of 1961 that they were driven into Thailand and Laos . The U.S. was driven into Laos and Thailand in 1961 .
 President Kennedy left behind a new embarrassment to the incoming administration of President Kennedy . They left behind them, however, a new source of embarrassment .
 As the Burmese advanced, they discovered a cache of U.S.-made equipments . The following month they shot down a United States World War II Liberator bomber en route from Formosa .
 The captured arms included five tons of ammunition packed in crates which bore the handclasp label of the U.S. aid program . The arms were found in crates marked with the label of a United States aid program.
 The discovery sent 10,000 demonstrators into the streets outside the American Embassy in Rangoon . The discovery of the drug was the first to be discovered in the country .
 Three persons were killed and sixty seriously injured before troops brought the situation under control . Troops brought down the situation before bringing down the casualties .
 Premier U Nu blamed the United States for the continued support of the guerrillas . U Nu called a press conference and blamed the U.S. for the continuing support .
 Three United States military attachés were quickly dispatched to inspect the captured equipment . Three U.S. military attaches were sent in to inspect equipment .
 The ammunition crates bore coded markings, which were forwarded to Washington for scrutiny . They were sent to the U.S. for scrutiny, officials say .
 It insisted the weapons had been supplied by the ‘Free China Relief Association’ and flown to the guerrillas in private planes . It insisted it had supplied the weapons to the rebels .
 W Averell Harriman, the new Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, moved quickly and forcefully . Behind the scenes, however, he said: "Behind the scenes"
 Dulles committed the United States to rolling back the Bamboo Curtain in order to redeem his pledges to Nationalist China and the domestic right wing . Harriman felt that there was no hope of returning Chiang to the mainland but that Dulles was forced .
 With the full backing of President Kennedy, Harriman set out to reverse the situation without delay . President Kennedy had the backing of the president .
 U.S. pressed with the fact that such ventures were no longer to be tolerated by the United States. The Innocent Ambassador pressed the matter . The Innocent ambassador pressed the issue with the American government .
 The Nationalist Chinese quickly announced that they would do the utmost to evacuate the remaining guerrillas . The Chinese government quickly announced on March 14 that it would do their utmost to evacuee the remaining guerrilla fighters .
 Harriman's forceful action had little effect in dispelling Burma’s suspicions about U.S. policy . But it was not enough to dispelling Burial's suspicions about United States policy .
 General Ne Win seized the government in a bloodless army coup on March 2, 1962 . The coup took place in March 1962, when Ne Win took control of the country .
 In 1962, the general came to power with a determination to move the nation to the Left . He wanted to reduce ties of friendship with the West and reduce ties with the west .
 Burma, created in the image of the Western democracies in 1948, was turning toward Peking . Burma, which had been created in image of Western democracies, was, a decade and a half later, turning to Peking.
 Ne Win rebuked Sebald for the CIA’s role in support of the guerrillas . Burma was struggling to maintain its neutrality despite the ominous closeness of its neighbor .
 Burma found its independence increasingly threatened after Ne Win took control of the country . Ne Win is now in charge of Burma's government .
 The leftward turn of Burma’s policy might have baffled the American people, but it should not have puzzled the U.S. Government . Burma's turn of policy may have baffled people but it shouldn’t have puzzled them .
 The pilot, Allen Lawrence Pope, jumped clear and his parachute opened cleanly . The pilot was killed in the crash .
 Pope’s right leg was broken when he drifted down onto a small coral reef . The chute caught a coconut tree and he was killed . Pope's right leg broke after he drifted onto the reef .
 Pilot was killed in a bombing and strafing run on Ambon Island airstrip in the Moluccas, 1,500 miles from Indonesia’s capital at Jakarta . Pilot was 29 when he was killed .
 Eisenhower had emphatically denied charges that the U.S. was supporting the rebellion against President Sukarno . Three weeks before Pope was shot down, Eisenhower denied charges .
 People were going out looking for a good fight and getting into it, sometimes in the hope of pay, and sometimes just for the heck of the thing . People went looking for pay and getting in fights, sometimes even for the sake of the fight .
 He was flying for the CIA, which was secretly supporting the rebels who were trying to overthrow Sukarno . The CIA secretly supported the rebels in the Philippines .
 Neither Pope nor the U.S. were ever to admit any of this —even after his release from an Indonesian jail in the summer of 1962 .
 Sukarno and the Indonesian Government were fully aware of what had happened . But the Indonesian government was not aware of the tragedy .
 The U.S. is a major source of American influence in the Middle East . President Obama's administration has been criticized for its policies toward the U.K.
 Many high-ranking American officials—including President Kennedy—admitted it within the inner circles of the government . But it is not something that they were ever likely to give public voice to .
 "From boyhood he was active and aggressive, much attracted by the challenge of physical danger," he said . "I was always attracted to physical danger. From boyhood, I was very active," he added .
 He volunteered early for the Korean War . He fiew fifty-five night missions over Communist lines as a first lieutenant in the Air Force . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross .
 After the war, Pope returned to Texas, got married, had a daughter, and was divorced . Pope was in Texas when he died .
 He worked for a local airline but found it dull stuff compared to the excitement he had experienced as a combat pilot in the Far East . He found the excitement of flying in Asia was dull compared to flying in Europe .
 In March of 1954 Pope signed on with Civil Air Transport, an avowedly civilian airline . The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((138 based on Formosa)
 He spent two months flying through Communist flak to drop supplies to the French at Dienbienphu . He spent the rest of his life in the communist-controlled territory .
 CAT grew out of the Flying Tigers and inherited much of its technique and swagger . CAT was born from the same team that grew up in New York City . CAT grew up from the original Flying Tigers . CAT won't be the first team to win a World Series series .
 After Dienbienphu he renewed his contract, rising in three years to the rank of captain with a salary of $1,000 a month . He has been in charge of the national team since 2007 .
 He met his second wife, Yvonne, a Pan American stewardess, in Hong Kong . He met her in the 1970s .
 They settled down in a small French villa outside Saigon and had two boys . The couple married in 1968 and have two boys together .
 Big-game hunting in the jungles of South Vietnam was their most daring diversion . Big game hunting was their biggest diversion in the war .
 Pope was ready for an even more dangerous challenge when the CIA approached him in December, 1957 . The CIA approached Pope in December 1957 . Pope was the CIA's top secret agent for the CIA .
 The proposition was that he would fly a B-26 for the Indonesian rebels, who were seeking to topple Sukarno . He would fly the plane for the rebels who were trying to topple the government .
 In the Philippines the planes would be safe from counterattack by Sukarno’s air force . The planes would not be attacked in the Philippines by the Philippines . The Philippines would be the first country to attack the planes .
 His first mission, a ferrying hop from the Philippines to the North Celebes, took place on April 28, 1958 . He was the first to carry out a mission .
 Sukarno knew he was deeply distrusted by the conservative, businesslike administration in D.C. He knew he would be deeply disappointed by the conservatives .
 A mercurial leader, he was spellbinding on the stump but erratic in the affairs of state . He was also erratic in state affairs, but was erratic in affairs of the country .
 Indonesian publications spoke openly of his ‘partiality for feminine charm’ and quoted movie-magazine gossip linking him with such film stars as Gina Lollobrigida and Joan Crawford .
 Indonesia was a parliamentary democracy until 1957 . From the start of its independence in 1949 until 1957 Indonesia was an independent parliamentary democracy .
 Sukarno declared parliamentary democracy to be a failure in Indonesia in 1957 . The power of the central government was balanced and diffused by the local powers of Indonesia’s six major and 3,000 minor islands stretching in an arc from the Malayan peninsula .
 He said it did not suit a sharply divided nation of close to 100,000,000 people . He said the country is deeply divided and that it was not suited to a divided nation .
 It gave him semi-dictatorial powers while granting major concessions to the Communists and the Army . The deal was made with the Communists, the Army and the Communists .
 Eisenhower Administration feared Sukarno would fall completely under Communist domination . Eisenhower administration feared it would fall under Communist control . Eisenhower feared it could be impossible to predict the fall of the country .
 The U.S. would be a genuine disaster for the United States. And that, of course, would be for the U.K.
 Indonesia's per capita income of $60 was one of the lowest in the world . Indonesia’s bountiful supply of rubber, oil and tin made it potentially the third richest nation in world . Per capita income was $60 .
 Located in the Indian Ocean, the Pacific Ocean, Asia and Australia, it commanded one of the world’s principal lines of communication . Located between the Indian ocean, the . Pacific Ocean and Asia, it was one of . the world's principal lines .
 Many of Indonesia’s political leaders, particularly those outside of Java, shared Washington's apprehensions . Sukarno's compromises with the Communists led to the deaths of millions of people .
 Many in the CIA and State Department saw merit in supporting dissident elements . The CIA and the State Department supported these elements of the U.S.
 Even if Sukarno were not overthrown, it might be possible for Sumatra, Indonesia’s big oil producer, to secede . Sumatra could protect private American and Dutch holdings, experts say .
 The pressures of rebellion might loosen Sukarno’s ties with the Communists and force him to move to the Right . At the very least, the pressures might loosen the ties of the Communists .
 At best, the Army, headed by General Abdul Haris Nasution, might come over to the rebels and force wholesale changes to the liking of the U.S. The United States.
 On February 15, 1958, a Revolutionary Council at Padang, Sumatra, proclaimed a new government under the leadership of THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT . The Invisible Government was proclaimed by the Revolutionary Council in Padang .
 Moslem party leader and former governor of the Bank of Indonesia . Sjafruddin Prawiranegara, a forty-seven-year-old Moslem Party leader .
 A multiparty cabinet was established, with representation from Java, Sumatra and Celebes . The cabinet includes representatives from Sumatra, Indonesia and Indonesia .
 General Nasution promptly asserted his allegiance by dishonorably discharging six high-ranking officers who had sided with the rebels . Nasution then proceeded to fire the officers who sided with rebels .
 Indonesian Air Force planes bombed and strafed two radio broadcasting stations in Padang and another in Bukittinggi, the revolutionary capital forty-five miles inland . A week later, the Indonesian air force bombed two radio stations and a radio station .
 The attack, carried out by four old U.S. planes, succeeded in silencing the rebel radios . The attack was carried out with four old United States planes .
 Dulles reiterated the U.S. pledge of strict neutrality in March . Dulles testified in testimony to Congress early this year .
 Jakarta announced that it had launched a paratroop invasion of Sumatra on March 12 . The next week the rebels formally appealed for American arms .
 They have asked the United States and the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization to recognize the revolutionary government . They also asked the U.S. to recognize them as a government in Southeast Asia .
 "We try to be absolutely correct in our international proceedings and attitude toward it," says FIFA president Tony Pulis .
 Jakarta responded angrily that it had turned to the Communists only after the U.S. refused to allow Indonesia to buy $120,000,000 worth of American weapons . Jakarta says it turned to Communists after the United States refused to let Indonesia buy weapons . Indonesia says it has turned to
 2,000 Indonesian Army troops launched an offensive against rebels in northwest Sumatra . At sunrise on April 18, a paratroop and amphibious attack was hurled against Padang .
 Jakarta reported a series of rebel air attacks against the central government in April . It was not until April 30 that the U.S. was implicated .
 Premier Djuanda Kartawidjaja says he has proof of ‘overt foreign assistance’ to rebels . He says he had planes and automatic weapons in the form of planes and weapons .
 The Indonesian military command charged that the rebels had been supplied weapons and ammunition with the knowledge and direction . The rebels then moved their capital to Menado, which fell late in June . On May 7, three days after the fall of Bukittinggi, the Indonesian military .
 Robert Hirsch, head of the company, confirmed he had offered to sell arms to the rebels . Hirsch said he had done so without clearing it with the State Department .
 In any case, he said, the arms were of Italian make and none had been delivered . None of the arms have been delivered, he added .
 Our Secretary of State was emphatic in his declaration that this country would not deviate from a correct neutrality. He said the US 'wouldn't deviate' from its neutrality.
 Indonesian Government withheld for nine days the fact that an American pilot had been captured . However, the Indonesian Government did not reveal the capture .
 The Pope is now in Indonesia, Indonesia's first papal papal state . The Pope has been in Indonesia since 2009 . Pope Francis has been the Pope of Indonesia .
 Indonesian Army was not prepared to remain silent about Pope Francis . Indonesian Army is not willing to remain permanently silent about the Pope .
 On May 27 a news conference was called in Jakarta by Lieutenant Colonel Herman Pieters . Pieters was Commander of the Moluccas and West Irian Military Command at Ambon .
 Pope was shot down on May 18 while flying a bombing mission for the rebels under a $10,000 contract . He announced that Pope had been shot down in May 18 . Pope announced that he had been killed in May .
 Philippine pesos, 28,000 Indonesian rupiahs, and United States scrip for use at American military installations were also found on the pilot .
 Indonesian officials were outraged by Pope’s activities, and accused him of bombing the market place in Ambon on May 15 . Many Indonesian officials are outraged by the Pope's activities . The Pope is accused of bombing a market place on Ambon in Indonesia .
 A large number of civilians, church-bound on Ascension Thursday, were killed in the raid on the predominantly Christian community . The raid killed a number of people, including many Christians .
 Pope was given good medical treatment, and he could be seen sunning himself on the porch of a private, blue bungalow in the mountains of Central Java . Pope was treated with good treatment and given good treatment, according to reports .
 Sukarno also saw the advantages in sunning himself in the growing warmth of U.S. policy . The Communists were urging a speedy trial .
 Pope’s trial was delayed for nineteen months while Sukarno kept him a hostage to continued American friendliness . Pope‘s trial’ was delayed by nineteen months . Pope was found guilty of espionage .
 Sukarno found himself in a quarrel with Peking over his decision to bar Chinese aliens from doing business outside of the main cities of Indonesia . Late the next year, however, he also found himself .
 Pope was brought to trial before a military court on December 28, 1959 . Pope was tried by the INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT .
 He was accused of flying six bombing raids for the rebels and killing twenty-three Indonesians, 17 of them members of the armed forces . He was also accused of killing 23 Indonesians in the raids .
 During the trial, which dragged on for four months, Pope pleaded not guilty to the charges . Pope was found guilty of rape, sexual assault and other charges .
 The other flights, he testified, were of a reconnaissance or non-combat nature .
 Pope insisted he got only $200 a flight . Contrary to the assertion that he had signed a $10,000 contract, Pope said he got just $200 per flight .
 Pope contended it listed the activities of all the rebel pilots, not just his . Pope contended the list of rebel pilots was not only his but his .
 He replied to the same effect when confronted with a pre-trial confession, noting that he had refused to sign it .
 On April 29, 1960, the court handed down the death sentence, but it seemed unlikely that the penalty would be imposed . The death sentence was handed down in 1960, but the penalty was never imposed .
 It had not once been invoked since Indonesia gained its igdependence eleven years before . Indonesia gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Pope appealed the sentence the following November, and when it was upheld by the Appeals Court, he took the case to the Military Supreme Court . The case was heard in the military's highest court .
 Pope made a personal appeal to Sukarno on December 28 during the first of two trips to Indonesia . She was offered no great encouragement despite the prospect of improved relations between President-elect Kennedy . Pope made the appeal during his first visit to Indonesia in December .
 Sukarno received an invitation to visit Washington a month after Kennedy took office . He was invited to the White House by President Kennedy a month later .
 Indonesian leader had been feted by President Eisenhower during a state visit to the U.S. in 1956 . He had more or less forced a second meeting with Eisenhower at the United Nations in the fall of 1960 .
 The meeting went well enough, but Kennedy was preoccupied with the CIA’s latest failure at attempted revolution . Kennedy was not impressed with the meeting .
 Sukarno seemed favorably disposed toward the new Kennedy Administration . Still Sukarnos was favorably disposed of the new administration .
 The following February, during a good-will tour of Indonesia, Robert Kennedy asked Sukarno to release the Pope . The Pope was released in February 1963 during a visit to Indonesia .
 Sukarno's first reaction to Robert Kennedy’s request was to reject it out of hand, but when the Attorney General persisted, he agreed to take it under consideration . The President of the United States was assassinated in 1968 by President Kennedy .
 Pope was freed from prison without prior notice and taken to the American Embassy for interrogation by Ambassador Jones and other officials . Six months later, on July 2, 1962, Pope was released from prison and interrogated .
 Then he was put aboard a Military Air Transport Service plane and flown back to the U.S.
 Pope was hidden away for seven weeks and the State Department did not reveal his release until August 22 . Pope was released from prison on August 22 after seven weeks .
 The State Department says Pope asked that the release be kept secret so he could have a quiet rendezvous with his family . The State Dept. says Pope had asked for the release to keep it secret .
 Pope settled down to what outwardly seemed to be a happy relationship with his family in Miami . But in December, Mrs. Pope filed for divorce from her husband of 18 months .
 Pope testified that on his return from Indonesia, her husband insisted upon keeping a loaded .38-caliber pistol by their bedside, despite the potential danger to their two young boys . She testified that she and her husband kept a loaded pistol .
 She also asserted that Pope had sent her only $450 since he had left her seven months before . She also said he sent her $450 in total since leaving her .
 A security agent of the government had warned her that it would be detrimental to her case if she talked about her husband’s missions . The mother-of-two says she has been warned that her husband's missions will be detrimental .
 Pope won the divorce and custody of the children on grounds of cruelty . Pope and his wife were married for more than 20 years . Pope won custody of their three children .
 Pope was declared outside the jurisdiction of the court . But she received no financial settlement because she was declared out of court jurisdiction .
 On December 4, 1962, Pope had put his things in storage— some personal items, ten stuffed birds, four animal heads, one stuffed animal, antelope antlers and water-buffalo horns . Pope put his personal items in storage, including some of his possessions .
 The attorney was Alex E Carlson, the lawyer for the DoubleChek Corporation that had hired the American pilots who fiew at the Bay of Pigs . Carlson was the attorney for the company that hired the pilots .
 Brown had been Ambassador to Laos for less than three weeks when the right-wing military government, created by the CIA and the Pentagon, was overthrown without a shot . Kong Le, a 26-year-old Army captain, overthrown the government .
 Brown, a tall, thin, gray-haired Yankee, had been transferred from New Delhi on short notice . Brown had only a superficial knowledge of the long, tortured and expensive history of the U.S. experiment in Laos .
 CIA and its Pentagon allies were wrong in their assessment of the captain . Yet even a quick look convinced him that he was wrong in his assessment .
 They were tired of being the only fighting unit in the quasi-pacifist army of 25,000 . They had not been paid in three months and tired .
 Kong Le was outraged by the high-living, CIA-backed regime of General Phoumi Nosavan . Le was personally outraged by General Nosavan's regime .
 He decided to strike while Phoumi and his cabinet were out of town inspecting a sandalwood tree that was to be turned into a burial urn for the late king . The strike took place while the king was out inspecting the tree .
 Kong Le was considered to be Communist-inspired, despite his many battles against the pro-Communist Pathet Lao . Kong Le fought the pro~Communist Lao, despite being considered Communist-like .
 Laos is a pastoral land, blessed with magnificent scenery, and populated by a strange mixture of isolated tribes alike only in their distaste for physical labor . Laos is known for its mountains, swift rivers and verdant valleys .
 It is the “Land of the Million Elephants” whose only cash crop is opium, opium, and whose people are 85 percent illiterate . The land of the million elephants is known as the land of China . It is also known as China’s "Land
 Almost all Laotians are Buddhists, peace-loving by instinct and precept . The majority of Laotian Buddhists are peace loving by instinct, precept .
 In battle they were accustomed to aiming high in the expectation that the enemy would respond in kind . In battle, to the dismay of their American advisers, they often aim high in order to avoid retaliation .
 In 1960 the principal attraction of Phoumi’s royal army to a recruit was the pay—$130 a year, twice the average national income . In 1960, the main attraction of the army was the salary of $130 per year . The army's pay is $130
 United States aid had amounted to about $25 a head for the two million Laotians . Military pay was about all that filtered down to the average Laotian .
 More than three fourths of the money went to equip a modern, motorized army in a nation all but devoid of paved roads . The money was used to equip the army with modern motorized vehicles and modernized roads .
 All of this was meant to convert Laos from a neutral nation, vulnerable to left-wing pressures, into a military bastion against Communism . Dulles' plans were meant to turn Laos into a strong military force against Communism, he says .
 When the French withdrew in 1954, after an eight-year war with the Vietnamese Communists, a neutralist government had been organized under Prince Souvanna .
 He held power for four years, unsuccessfully trying to integrate the two Communist Pathet Lao provinces into the central government . He was succeeded by the National Socialist Socialist Party .
 He resigned after Communist election gains and signs of military infiltration by the North Vietnamese, he resigned . The Pacifist Warriors were known for their pacifism .
 Souvanna was followed by a series of right-wing governments in which General Phoumi emerged as the strongman . Souvannan was succeeded by a succession of governments in the 1970s .
 Phoumi then rigged the 1960 elections and settled in for a long, U.S.-financed tenure . Not one Pathet Lao was elected, he settled in after the 1960s . Phoum then rigged elections and went on to win power in Laos .
 He was unshakably convinced that the U.S. would put him back in power . And he was convinced that he would be able to win back in the United States again .
 Phoumi could point to the personal contact man the CIA kept by his side . As tangible support for that conviction, he could point out that he was kept by the CIA .
 Hazey would be challenged for being out of step with public statements of U.S. policy . Hazey is a former CIA director .
 The conflict between the public and secret definitions of U.S. policy on Laos was particularly pronounced in the summer of 1960 .
 Kong Le called back Souvanna Phouma to form a coalition government . Shortly after Phoumi and his puppet Premier were ousted, Kong Le .
 Souvanna then asked Phoumi to join the government as Vice-Premier and Minister of Defense . Souvann then asked him to join government as vice-premier and minister of defense .
 Ambassador Brown dashed off a cable to Washington urging unqualified support for Souvanna’s new government . Ambassador Brown: ‘Souvanna's new government is unqualified' Ambassador Brown says .
 The decision served to reinforce Phoumi’s conviction that the CIA and the U.S. mission would in the end put him back in power .
 Ambassador Brown persuaded himself that he had the complete backing of the CIA station chief, Gordon L Jorgensen, and the leaders of the military mission . Washington’s ambivalent policy put the ambassador in an embarrassing predicament .
 He tried to make the best of it by seeking out Souvanna and asking him if he had any objections to the continued support of Phoumi by the United States .
 No, the princely Premier replied, provided the equipment was not used against him . He would need Phoumi’s army to fend off the Pathet Lao . No, he replied .
 Brown then sent emissaries to Phoumi, assuring him that Souvanna was not scheming to deprive him of his United States aid . But this man who had been highly regarded by the CIA and the Pentagon for his fighting qualities was afraid of venturing beyond his closely
 Even under maximum security he wore a bullet-proof vest during all his diplomatic dealings . He had a broken line in the palm of his hand and a fortuneteller had once warned him that he would die violently, he said .
 Souvanna began to despair of his ability to carry on . Confronted by Phoumi’s intransigence, Souvana began to . despair of . his ability .
 He called in the Western ambassadors in mid-September and warned them that he urgently needed the support of the royal army .
 Souvanna’s government was also in dire need of rice and oil, which had been cut off by a blockade imposed by a Thai military strongman . The blockade was imposed by Prime Minister Sarit Thanarat, a close friend of Phoumi .
 Washington says it is entreating Sarit to lift the blockade, but the vise continues to tighten around Souvanna . Washington said it was entreating the Sarit government to lift its blockade .
 J Graham Parsons, former Ambassador to Laos and then Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, demanded that Souvanna sever his relations with the Pathet Lao . Parsons is a former ambassador to Laos . Parsons was also a former U.S. diplomat to Laos in the 1980
 This amounted to a demand that the neutralist government abandon its neutrality . It amounted to an attempt to impose a new regime on the Ukraine .
 A high-level mission from the Pentagon, including John N Irwin, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Affairs, arrived for secret talks with Phoumi . The mission was part of a secret meeting between the U.S. and Iran .
 Souvanna concluded that the United States was in the process of withdrawing all support from the neutralist government and again throwing its full power behind Phoumi . Souvann: The U.S. is in a process to withdraw all support and throw full power back on Phou
 Pacifist Warriors (1§2) made a final and unsuccessful appeal to Brown for rice and oil . The Pacifists made an unsuccessful appeal .
 Soviets started airlift from Hanoi on December 11, 1960 . Without delay the Soviets started an airlift . The airlift was the first to take place in Vietnam since 1968 .
 Souvanna fled to Cambodia and Kong Le retreated to the north, distributing close to 10,000 American rifles to the Pathet Lao along the way . Kong Le also fled the north and returned to Cambodia .
 Phoumi quickly established a government, naming Prince Boun Oum, a middle-aged playboy, as Premier . Prince Oum is a playboy playboy .
 Phoumi failed to pursue Kong Le despite his recent military success . Kong Le. Le. Kong Le .
 He bad never been within fifty miles of the front lines and he saw no need to break with this tradition . He had never been near fifty miles from the front line .
 The Russians were moving in substantial amounts of weapons by air and truck . The Russians, meanwhile, were also moving in large quantities of weapons . The U.S. military says it has been working with the Russians to get the weapons .
 North Vietnamese began to infiltrate crack guerrilla troops in support of Pathet Lao . North Vietnamese forces began to enter the country in the 1970s .
 Kong Le joined forces with them, and by early 1961 he had captured the strategic Plain of Jars with its key airstrip fifty miles from North Vietnam . Kong Le was one of the first Americans to join forces with Kong Le in 1961 .
 By the time President Kennedy was inaugurated, on January 20, it seemed as if only the introduction of U.S. troops could keep the Pathet Lao from overrunning Vientiane and the Mekong River Valley separating Laos from Thailand .
 Kennedy was so informed by President Eisenhower and Defense Secretary Gates, Jr., in his first Laos briefing on January 19 . Kennedy was told by Eisenhower and Gates in Laos briefing in Laos .
 Kennedy asked his military advisers to draw up a plan for saving Laos . One of Kennedy’s first official acts was to ask for a plan .
 Allied forces would take over the defense of Vientiane under the sanction of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization . They recommended that an Allied force, including United States troops, take over .
 The idea was to free Phoumi’s army for a full-fledged campaign in the Plain of Jars . The idea of the campaign was inspired by the idea of Phoum's army .
 Deputy Foreign Minister Georgi M Pushkin told Harriman at the Laotian talks in Geneva in 1961 that the airlift had been organized and executed on the highest priority of any peacetime operation since the Russian Revolution . While weighing the advice, Kennedy ordered the Seventh Fleet to fly
 The Invisible Government promised Phoumi substantial new support if his troops would show some determination to fight . Laos is now within striking distance of Laos and promised substantial support if he showed determination .
 Early in March, a royal army detachment was easily routed from a key position commanding the principal highway in northern Laos . The royal army was able to easily retake control of the key highway .
 The Allied occupation plan was further undermined when the British, French and other SEATO powers (with the exception of Thailand) balked at providing troops . Thailand was the only country to provide troops to the Allied occupation .
 The President could not obtain assurances from the Joint Chiefs of Staff that U.S. forces would be able to save Laos without resort to tactical nuclear weapons .
 Kennedy warned that the Western powers would “have to consider their response” if the Communist attack continued in Laos . In a nationally televised news conference on March 23 Kennedy said the West would consider its response if the attack continued .
 The clear implication was that the U.S. was prepared to intervene with military force . It was the clear implication that the United States was prepared for military intervention .
 President told Harriman he did not want to be faced with the prospect of using troops . But, privately, he wanted a political settlement, he said .
 On April 1 the Russians agreed in principle to a British proposal for a cease-fire . The Russians, apparently wary of a direct confrontation with the United States, agreed to the British proposal .
 The next month a fourteen-nation conference on Laos was convened in Geneva . Laos was the first country to hold a conference in Laos .
 In the only meeting of minds at their talk in Vienna in June, Kennedy and Khrushchev promised to work for a neutral and independent Laos . In the talks in Vienna, they said they would work for an independent Laos.
 Souvanna Phouma was to be recalled to create a neutralist government . The three Laotian factions, the proWestern royalists, the neutrals and the pro-Communist Pathet Lao. The pro-Western royalist royalists were to be included in
 He refused to relinquish the Defense and Interior Ministries, as was decreed at Geneva .
 If he held out long enough, he reasoned, the CIA and the Pentagon would again come to his rescue . He reasoned that if he kept out, he would again be rescued by the CIA .
 President Kennedy rebuked him in private messages, but Phoumi steadfastly refused to submit . President Kennedy sent him a private message to him .
 Washington was reluctant to yank out the CIA men abruptly . The Pacifist Warriors were reluctant to pull them out of Washington .
 Precipitate action could only diminish the agency’s prestige and usefulness, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Precipitates action only diminish agency's prestige, usefulness .
 McCone ordered Hazey out of the country early in 1962 . Phoumi was proving so intractable that McCone, acting on Harriman’s recommendation, had to leave .
 The Communists retaliated against the build-up, smashed into Nam Tha and sent Phoumi’s troops in wild retreat . The Communists responded to the build up, smashing into the city and sending the army in retreat .
 The Nam Tha rout convinced Phoumi that he could not go it alone . President Kennedy ordered 5,000 United States troops to take up positions in Thailand near the Laos border on May 15 .
 The three Laotian factions finally agreed to the coalition government on June 11 . The Geneva Accords were signed on July 23 . The three factions agreed to a coalition government .
 Communist North Vietnam failed to comply with the Geneva agreement . North Vietnam did not comply with a Geneva agreement agreed to a cease-fire agreement . The agreement was supposed to end North Vietnam's occupation of Vietnam .
 Laos refused to withdraw about 5,000 troops stationed in Laos in support of the Pathet Lao . It refused to pull troops from the country in order to protect its troops .
 On March 30, 1963, the Communists launched a new offensive which brought much of the Plain of Jars under their control . The offensive was launched by the Communists .
 The Russian leader reaffirmed his support for a neutral and independent Laos . He also reaffirmed support for an independent and neutral Laos .
 He also seemed to agree with Harriman that the Pathet Lao was responsible for the renewed fighting . He also agreed to Harrimans that the government was responsible .
 Moscow had lost control of the situation in Laos to Peking and Hanoi, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . It's clear that Moscow has lost control over the situation, says Putin .
 U.S. policy makers were becoming increasingly convinced that Laos was not the right place to take a stand in Southeast Asia . The assessment of the Kennedy Administration was that most of the country, particularly the northern regions, would never be of much use to anyone .
 The official plan was outlined at a briefing of Pentagon officials by Dean Rusk . In the event the neutralist government was about to be completely overwhelmed, the official plan, was outlined .
 This would be designed to provoke a diplomatic test of the Geneva Accords . It would be the first test of any attempt to test the peace deal .
 The U.S. was prepared to strike against North Vietnam as dramatic evidence that the Communist forces in Laos could advance farther only at the risk of a major war . Failing in that, the United States was prepared in Vietnam as evidence that North Vietnam could advance further, the U.
 When Nco Dinu DieM was deposed and assassinated in an Army coup on November 1, 1963, a bloody decade came to a close for the Invisible Government .
 For nearly ten years the intelligence and espionage operatives of the Pentagon, the CIA and the State Department had been intimately involved with Diem . They were attempting at every turn to shore him up as a buffer against Communism in Vietnam .
 In his last months the Buddhist majority rose against the repressive policies of Diem . The Invisible Government was forced to reconsider its single-minded support .
 With Diem dead, U.S. agencies accused by his supporters of having directed his downfall . Now, those very American agencies which had helped him stay in power for so long were accused .
 In 1954, at the age of fifty-three, the pudgy five-foot, five.156 inch aristocrat returned to Vietnam from a self-imposed exile to become Emperor Bao Dai’s Premier .
 He quit as Minister of the Interior when he discovered the government was a puppet for the French . He had served under Bao Dai in the early 1930s, but quit in the 1930s .
 The Japanese twice offered Diem the premiership during World War II, but he refused . Diem refused to accept the Japanese offer of the post .
 When the French returned after the war, he resumed his anticolonial activities . He resumed his anti-colonial activities .
 He lobbied against U.S. aid to the French in Indochina and warned against Ho Chi Minh . He also warned against the North Vietnamese Communist guerrilla leader .
 Shortly after Diem’s return to Vietnam, the French Army was routed at Dienbienphu . The Communists seemed on the verge of total victory in Indochina .
 President Eisenhower was aware of Ho Chi Minh’s popularity,* was looking for an anti-Communist who might stem the tide . President Eisenhower, aware of the popularity of the Vietnamese leader, was looking to stop the tide of Communism .
 Eisenhower and Dulles were impressed by Ramon Magsaysay’s successful campaign against the Communist Huk guerrillas in the Philippines . Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles .
 They thought the same tactics might work in Vietnam and requested a briefing by Edward Lansdale, an Air Force colonel who had been a key figure in the CIAdirected operation in support of Magsaysay .
 Lansdale was called back from the Philippines to appear before a special panel of intelligence and foreign-policy officials, including Foster Dulles . Lansdale will appear before the panel, including Dulles, in a special hearing .
 Dulles had a mandate to find a popular leader in Vietnam and throw the support of the Invisible Government behind him . He emerged from the meeting with a mandate from Dulles to find the leader .
 Lansdale arrived in Saigon just after the fall of Dienbienphu and found political chaos . Lansdale found political and military chaos in the city .
 He canvassed the various factions in the city and the countryside and concluded that Diem alone had enough backing to salvage the situation . He said Diem had enough support to salvage his country .
 He met with Diem almost daily, working out elaborate plans to bolster the regime . Diem met with him almost daily .
 Lansdale’s free-wheeling activities in Vietnam provoked a mixed reaction . Lansdale: "I’m not sure if I’ve ever been in Vietnam again" Lansdale's activities in the country have a mixed response .
 To some, he seemed the best type of American abroad, a man who understood the problems of the people and worked diligently to help them . He seemed to be the best of the American abroad .
 To some, he was the naive American who, failing to appreciate the subtleties of a foreign culture, precipitated bloodshed and chaos . To others, he failed to understand the subtletsies of an American culture .
 Graham Greene patterned the protagonist in The Quiet American after him . Graham Greene also patterned his protagonist after him in his novel .
 In the fall of 1954 he got wind of a plan by several high-ranking Vietnamese Army officers to stage a coup against Diem . Diem was assassinated by the end of the war .
 General J Lawton Collins, former Army Chief of Staff, was rushed to Saigon as Eisenhower’s personal envoy to help Diem put down the uprising . He alerted Washington, and General Collins was sent to put down Diem's uprising .
 The coup failed, but Collins became skeptical of the stability of the Diem regime . Collins was skeptical of Diem's stability in the 1970s .
 He favored a proposal to create a coalition government, which would represent all the power elements and factions in the country . He favors a proposal for a government that represents all power elements, factions .
 The proposal was sponsored by the French, who were maneuvering to salvage their waning influence in the affairs of Indochina . The French proposed the proposal in 1964 .
 In the spring of 1955 Diem moved against the Binh Xuyen, a quasi-criminal sect which controlled the Saigon police . Diem's government was overthrown in the fall of 1955 .
 He ordered his troops to take over the gambling, opium and prostitution quarter run by the Binh Xuyen . The gambling quarter is run by a group of prostitutes and gambling addicts .
 Elements of the French Army which had not yet been evacuated from the country intervened for the avowed purpose of preserving order and preventing bloodshed . The French Army had been ordered to leave the country but had not been evacuated .
 Lansdale fired off a message to Washington through the CIA channel, taking strong exception to Collins’ decision . Lansdale: “I’m not happy with the decision. It’s time to get back at the CIA,” Lansdale said .
 Lansdale argued that Diem’s move against the Binh Xuyen had broad popular support . Lansdale: Diem had broad support for his move against Binhuyen .
 Collins returned to Washington for consultation, then flew back to Saigon with the impression that his views would be sustained . Collins: "I was disappointed that my views would not be sustained"
 In his absence Lansdale had obtained a reaffirmation of the policy of support for Diem .
 At Lansdale’s urging, Diem agreed to hold a referendum designed to give the regime a popular legitimacy . The referendum was designed to help give the government legitimacy . Diem's regime was overthrown in the 1980s and 1991 .
 The ballot presented a choice between Diem and Emperor Bao Dai, who had been discredited as a tool of the French . Diem was elected president of Vietnam in 1968 .
 Diem polled 98 percent of the vote on October 23, 1955 . Diem was declared President of Vietnam in 1955 .
 His brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, was established as his official political strategist . His brother is also a political strategist for the Vietnamese government .
 Lansdale warned that the country would be plagued by conspiracy if legitimate parties were not permitted to operate openly . Diem and Nhu refused to grant political freedom to the Opposition parties, despite Lansdale's warning .
 Lansdale made a special trip to Washington in an effort to induce the Dulles brothers to apply pressure on Diem to institute political reforms in South Vietnam . Lansdale traveled to Washington to try to get the brothers to pressure Diem into reforms .
 He was told that it had been decided that Diem provided the only practical alternative to a Communist take-over . Diem was supported without qualification .
 Lansdale lost influence as unofficial emissary of the Invisible Government in Vietnam . Lansdale was overruled as an official in Vietnam by the government .
 Thereafter, the CIA took his place as the secret link with the Diem regime . The CIA replaced him as a secret link between the two sides .
 It was the start of an intimate relationship which was to last until 1963 . The couple were married at the end of that year .
 The U.S. committed itself increasingly to the support of the regime in Syria . During the next few years, the United States committed itself .
 More than a billion dollars in military and economic aid was provided between 1955 and 1960 . More than $1.2 billion dollars was given to the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In the early years of Diem’s rule the Communist Vietcong conducted only a hit-and-run guerrilla campaign against him . In the 1970s and 1980s, the Vietcong carried out a guerrilla campaign in Vietnam .
 The official theory of the State Department was that Diem was bringing off a political and economic “miracle” and the Communists could not bear the contrast to their bad showing in North Vietnam . The State Department's theory of Diem’s success was that he was bringing
 The Secret War (159 years old) was staged by the Communist Party in Vietnam . The populace had become so disaffected by Diem’s repression that the Communists decided the time was ripe for action .
 In 1960 a group of young, discontented Army officers felt the same way . In 1960, the British Army was in the midst of a war of discontent .
 They attempted a coup but Diem put them down without serious difficulty . They attempted to take control of the country . Diem's government was overthrown in 1971 .
 President Kennedy sent VicePresident Johnson to Saigon in May of that year . In May of 1968, Vice President Johnson was sent to Vietnam .
 On May 13 Johnson and Diem issued a joint communiqué stating that aid would be provided for Vietnam on an expanded and accelerated basis . The two nations agreed to provide aid on an accelerated basis in May .
 The United States agreed to underwrite the cost of an increase in the Vietnamese Army from 150,000 to 170,000 men . The U.S. also agreed to equip and support the entire 68,000-man Civil Guard and the 70,00-man Self-Defense Corps
 Kennedy sent General Maxwell D Taylor to make ‘an educated military guess’ as to what would be needed to salvage the situation . But the Vietcong continued to advance, and in October, 1961, Kennedy sent Taylor to help .
 Diem balked at Taylor’s reforms and implied he might turn elsewhere for aid . Diem said he may turn to other nations for aid in the future .
 On December 7 he applied for assistance, and the United States again came to his support . However, on December 7, the U.S. came to him again .
 The United States committed itself to a massive build-up for an undeclared war . No limit was placed on the aid either in terms of money or of men . In effect, the U.S committed itself .
 In April, 1963, at the start of the CIA’s reassessment of its links with the regime, Nhu accused the agency of being involved in the 1960 uprising . At the same time, the administration took great precautions to keep the build-up a secret .
 The United States did not formally subscribe to the Geneva Accords, which divided Indochina into Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam after Dienbienphu . The commander of the rebels, Colonel Nguyen Chanh Thi, who fled to Cambodia, said United States intelligence men tried to
 Bedell Smith, the delegate to the negotiations, declared the United States THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (160) as a cause of the domestic political danger if Americans were sent into another Asian war . Bedell . Smith declared the U.S. The U.N.
 Military Assistance Command was created on February 8, 1962 . About 4,000 U.S. military men were already serving secretly in Vietnam . Military Assistance command was created in 1962 .
 Additional thousands of troops poured into Vietnam, but the Defense Department continued the deception until June . The deception continued until June.
 In testimony before Congress he confirmed that 11,000 troops were in Vietnam . In testimony he confirmed he was in Vietnam for the first time .
 The Pentagon went to great lengths to obscure the fact that U.S. military men were involved in combat . The Pentagon also went on the cover of the Pentagon .
 The Pentagon insisted that American troops were firing only in self-defense . Despite eyewitness reports to the contrary, the Pentagon insisted it was in self defense .
 Military information officers forced to go to ludicrous extremes in denying the obvious . Military officials were forced to deny the obvious.
 In 1961 a campaign had been quietly started to put 90 percent of South Vietnam’s 15,000,000 people into 11,000 strategic hamlets or fortified villages . In 1961, a campaign was quietly started by the Vietnamese government .
 The program, patterned after the successful ‘new villages’ of the British anti-guerrilla campaign in Malaya, was designed to protect the peasants against Vietcong terror .
 Many claimed credit for introducing the strategic-hamlet idea to Vietnam, including Nhu . Nhu said he launched it with the blessing the United States would abide by them .
 By 1964 more than three fourths of the Vietnamese were listed as being protected by the hamlets . By 1964 three in four of Vietnam's hamlets had been listed as protecting them .
 Many of the peasants were forced into the program against their will and many of the forts were easily penetrated by the Communists . The Communists had also kept open a supply route from North Vietnam .
 Although the Vietcong’s best weapons were captured United States equipment, they received additional supplies by infiltration through Communist-held Laos . Laos borders on both sides of Vietnam .
 To cut supply routes, the CIA decided to train the Montagnards, primitive mountain tribesmen, as scouts and border guards . The Montagnardes were trained as scouts, border guards, and were used as border guards in the Vietnam War .
 The cost of the Montagnard program rose from $150,000 to $4,500,000 . Between 1961 and the start of 1963, the cost rose to $5,000 a year .
 The Montagnard training was carried out by the Vietnamese Special Forces, an elite corps created by the CIA along the lines of the U S, Army Special Forces .
 The CIA organized the Special Forces for the regime well before the 1961 build-up . The CIA supported them at the rate of $3,000,000 a year . The Special Forces were organized by the CIA .
 They were trained in airborne and ranger tactics . They were originally designed to be used in raids into Laos and North Vietnam . They are now used in operations in Laos and Vietnam .
 Nhu held the bulk of the troops in Saigon as storm troopers for the defense of the regime . But inevitably they fell under the control of Nhu, who held the majority of them .
 U.S. aid has reached $3,000,000 million, and is running at an average of $1,500,000 a day . United States aid has also reached $4 billion, the largest amount ever recorded .
 The government declared itself confident that victory was in sight despite the popular discontent with Diem’s rule . The government declares itself confident of victory .
 Two Vietnamese Air Force pilots had bombed Diem’s palace in THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (162 February, 1962) Diem's palace was bombed in 1962 .
 Admiral Harry D, Felt predicted the South Vietnamese would triumph over the Communists by 1966 . Admiral Harry Felt was the commander of the United States forces in the Pacific .
 Diem’s popular support, always tenuous, was rapidly disintegrating in Vietnam . This slogan reflected the awareness of many Americans in Vietnam that Diem's popular support was disintegrating . Diem died in 1975 at the age of 65 .
 May 8, 1963, a demonstration against the ban on the flying of their flag in Hue . The demonstration broke into the open in Hue, Vietnam, on May 8 .
 Buddhist monks burned themselves to death in the streets in a series of spectacular public protests . Buddhist monks responded by burning themselves in a bid to arouse world opinion . The monks responded to the protests by burning their bodies to death .
 Diem was warned privately that the U.S. would condemn his treatment of the Buddhists unless he redressed their grievances . The United States would condemn Diem's treatment of Buddhists if he did not change his treatment .
 The U.S. might be supporting the Buddhist repressions, it seems . But to all outward appearances it seemed as if the United States was supporting the repressors .
 On August 2 Nhu sent the Special Forces in a raid on the Buddhist pagodas . The raid was on August 2, 2014 .
 Hundreds of Buddhists were jailed and scores were killed and wounded in a brutal attack by forces which many Vietnamese knew were supported by CLA money . Scores were killed in the brutal attack in which many knew the forces were supported .
 Henry Cabot Lodge, the Republican vice-presidential candidate in 1960, arrived in Saigon to be the new ambassador . He replaced Frederick E Nolting, Jr., who had been closely identified with the regime .
 Lodge quickly made it clear to Diem that the U.S. wanted his brother and Madame Nhu removed from power . Lodge made clear that the United States wanted Diem's brother and Nhu to be removed . Nhu was assassinated in 2006 .
 After nearly a decade of support for the regime, the U.S. is reassessing its position . The United States was reassessing its position. After nearly 10 years of support, the United States is now considering its options .
 The CIA decided to continue its $250,000-a-month subsidy to the Special Forces during September . The funds were cut off in October .
 The CIA station chief in Saigon, John H Richardson, was recalled to Washington at Lodge’s request . On October 4, Richardson was recalled from Saigon .
 Richardson, a dapper, bald man with heavy horn-rimmed glasses, had served as the CIA’s personal link with Nhu . Richardson was the CIA's personal link between Nhu and Richardson . Richardson is a former CIA director of operations in China .
 He was close to most of the regime’s top officials, including those in the secret police . He was also close to the regime's top officials .
 Richardson directed the agency’s multifarious activities in Vietnam . From his small second-floor office in the U.S. Embassy in Vietnam, Richardson directed his agency's activities . Richardson: "It's been a very difficult time for the American people in Vietnam"
 A hard-liner, he had little use for Diem’s opponents, and was the very symbol of the Invisible Government . The hard-liners were seen as a symbol of Diem's commitment to the regime .
 As long as he remained in Vietnam, it was all but impossible to convince either Diem or his enemies of any change in U.S. policy . "As long as [Diem] remained in [Vietnam] policy, it would be difficult to convince him of any
 When Richardson was recalled, many took it as evidence that the CIA had been operating on its own in Vietnam in defiance of orders from Washington . Richardson was the CIA's most senior director of operations in Vietnam .
 Richardson’s recall reflected a shift in policy, not displeasure with insubordination . Richardson was fired from his post at the Pentagon in 2009 .
 He charged on October 17 that the CIA was plotting with the Buddhists to overthrow the regime . He said the CIA and Buddhists were plotting with each other to overthrow regime .
 The coup against the regime came on November 1, but it was by the Army, not the Buddhists . The coup was carried out by the army, not by the Buddhist monks, as well as Buddhists.
 He said he had feared for the personal safety of the two men if the military coup was successful in that country . He feared for his own safety .
 President Eisenhower made an inquiry of this nature . What was intriguing about this account was the statement that President Eisenhower found it necessary to make such a statement .
 Former President had intimate understanding of the tactics and workings of the Invisible Government .
 The unlikely ambassadorial quote was clearly recalled by one of the participants in the meeting . The scene was the American Embassy on Octava Avenida in Guatemala City, Guatemala .
 The CIA’s coup against the Communist-dominated regime of President Jacobo Arbenz Guzman had begun . The CIA's coup against President Guzman's regime had begun.
 Peurifoy, a tough but soft-spoken South Carolinian, was overly optimistic . The South Carolinian is a tough, but soft, but optimistic .
 His party to celebrate Arbenz’s downfall had to be postTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((166 poned for two weeks) The party was to be held post-Arbenz's downfall .
 What the CIA had planned as an overnight coup dragged on for twelve difficult days . What was planned was a coup that took place for 12 days .
 Before it had ended, Peurifoy was deeply involved in political cloak-and-dagger maneuvering . Before it ended, he had been involved in a political cloak and dagger operation .
 The President of the United States, over the objections of the State Department, found it necessary, clandestinely, to send in three more fighter planes to bail out the CIA’s banana revolt .
 Guatemala was one of the CIA’s early triumphs in the field of overthrowing governments . Like Iran the year before, the CIA overthrew the Guatemalan government .
 Dwight D Eisenhower made a little-reported but extraordinary speech on June 10, 1963 . Eisenhower made the speech in Washington, D.C. Eisenhower's speech .
 The former President for the first time conceded, for all practical purposes, that the United States had overthrown the government of Guatemala in 1954 . Guatemala was overthrown by the U.S. in 1954.
 Eisenhower was told that disaster had overtaken the CIA’s modest air force, which consisted of a few World War II P-47 Thunderbolts . Peurifoy's prediction to the embassy staff in Guatemala City .
 Thunderbolts had been bombing Guatemala City to encourage Arbenz to vacate the Presidential Palace . The Thunderbolting had been trying to get the President to vacuate the Presidential palace . Guatemala City was bombed by the U.S. military in the 1980s .
 Henry F Holland, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, was aghast . Henry F. Holland, assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, said he was shocked .
 Castillo-Armas was one thing before the invasion had actually started . Providing the CIA with planes for Castillo Armas is one thing .
 Holland felt it would expose the U.S. to the hated charge of intervention in Latin American affairs . But doing so now, Holland felt, would exposing the United States to that charge . Holland: "Doing so now would be embarrassing"
 Many months of careful preparation had gone into the Castillo-Armas invasion . Many months had been spent preparing for the invasion .
 CIA’s Banana Revolt (167 pilot) had enjoyed astonishing success in his raids on Guatemala so far . P-47s were flown by a pilot who was flying one of the planes .
 A White House meeting is scheduled in the afternoon to discuss the question of the planes .
 He thought we should stop right there, wash our hands of the thing and let it stand right there . He said, "I think we should wash our . hands of . the thing" He said .
 Morton’s remarks in Kentucky did not gain national attention, however, until he repeated them at a party dinner in Baltimore in February, 1963, and on a television program . Morton's remarks were first made public in Kentucky in 1963 . Morton: "I’m not a
 Whiting Willauer, Ambassador to Honduras during the Guate~mala coup, had openly discussed the CIA’s role as far back as 1961 . Willauer was ambassador to Honduras .
 Willauer said he received a telegram from Allen Dulles after the Guatemala coup . Dulles said the revolution could not have succeeded but for what he did, he said .
 A Yes, Jack was on the team over in Guatemala; that is the principal man . Bob Hill, Ambassador Robert Hill, in Costa Rica . Ambassador Tom Whelan in Nicaragua, where a lot of the activities were going .
 CIA was helping to equip and train the antiCommunist revolutionary forces . A Well, the CIA was helped to train and equip the anti-Communist forces .
 I certainly was called upon to perform very important duties, particularly to keep the Honduran Government in line . The Honduran government was scared to death about the possibilities of themselves being overthrown . I was able to keep them in line so they would allow this revolutionary activity to continue .
 The former ambassador was amazingly explicit in his testimony about the coup in Guatemala . Guatemala is best known to the outside world for coffee, bananas and the quetzal, which is both its national bird and its monetary unit .
 The Indians are Mayas, descendants of the Mayas who ruled all of Central America from the Guatemalan city of Antigua . The Mayas are descendants of a highly sophisticated culture that flourished before the Spanish conquistadors came .
 The Indians are largely illiterate; they provide a cheap labor force and have little communication with the ladinos . The Indians provide a poor labor force . They provide a little communication between them and their fellow Indians .
 About 2 percent, of the population owns more than 70 percent of the land . The land is owned by about 2 percent of population .
 For decades, the most important two words in Guatemala have been la Frutera, the United Fruit Company . The company is the largest fruit company in the country and has been a major fruit company .
 The American banana company owned and ran as a fiefdom hundreds of square miles of land in Bananera and Tiquisate . The company was owned by American banana farmers .
 It was also a major stockholder in the country’s railroad—and a ready-made gringo political target . The railroad was also stockholders in Mexico's railroad .
 When Arbenz took office in March, 1951, one of the first demands he faced came from coffee workers .
 This might seem unreasonable except for the fact that their pay was forty cents a day . This might be unreasonable except that they were paid forty cents per day .
 The labor unions also demanded more for United Fruit’s banana workers, who were paid $1.36 a day . United Fruit's banana workers were paid just a fraction of the $1 a day rate .
 President Juan Jose Arevalo, a socialist who turned violently anti-American, paved the way for Arbenz and the Communists . After that, Arevalos and the Communist Party took control of the country . The U.S. Embassy in Cuba is located in Cuba .
 Jacobo Arbenz Guzman, a professional Army officer, was the son of a Swiss father who migrated to Guatemala and became a druggist . Guzman was born in Switzerland and later moved to Guatemala .
 As President, Arbenz in 1952 tried to do something about the country’s lopsided land ownership . The country's land ownership has been lagsided for decades .
 He pushed through a land-reform program, but, predictably, it ended with small farmers, large finca owners and the United Fruit Company up in arms . The land reform program was pushed through by President Obama .
 With his high-pitched voice and bad temper, Arbenz was no crowd-pleaser . With his voice and temper, he wasn't a crowd pleaser at the time .
 The students, always a powerful factor in Latin America, ridiculed him, he says . He says the students are "a powerful factor" in Latin American politics .
 The students had an annual lampooning parade, the Huelga de Dolores, of which Guatemalan officials lived in horror . The students' annual parade is known for its macabre humor .
 Not long before Arbenz’s fall from power, the students paraded by with a float that showed Uncle Sam poking a Guatemalan Indian lady with a banana . The float also showed a hypodermic needle behind a Russian bear, prodding the Guatemalan lady from
 There has been some dispute over the political evolution of Arbenz . Just as there is debate over whether Castro started out a Communist or became one later, there has also been some debate over the evolution of the Cuban leader .
 By 1954 the Communists were running Guatemala . But there is little dispute that by 1954 the Communist Party was in control of the country .
 The Guatemalan Army is an essentially peace-loving organization little inclined to unnecessary strife and combat . President Guillaillailla says he trusted the Guatemalan army to avoid unnecessary strife .
 Unlike Castro, Arbenz did not penetrate the Army politically, and when he needed it most, the government turned on him . The INVISIBLE GOVERVERVERment ((170) turned against him when he was needed .
 Late in the game he had placed spies, popularly known as orejas, in various Army posts, but it was too late . Late in this year's campaign he placed spies in various army posts .
 He expropriated 225,000 acres of United Fruit’s best Pacific-slope holdings . He made one other big mistake: expropriating 225,00 acres of Pacific-Slope land .
 The Arbenz regime charged that the United States had supported the CastilloArmas invasion to protect la Frutera’s $40,000,000 investment in Guatemala . Later the Arbeniz regime claimed that the U.S. supported the invasion to . protect la
 In the era of the Cold War, keeping Soviet power and influence out of the hemisphere was far more important to Washington than old-style banana diplomacy .
 The seizure of United Fruit’s holdings without adequate compensation forced Eisenhower to take action . Eisenhower took action after the seizure of the company without compensation .
 Guatemala has been hit hard by a wave of violence in recent years . Guatemala has seen a surge in support for the country's anti-terrorist movement .
 Peurifoy, known as ‘Smiling Jack’ around the embassy in Guatemala, was a small-town boy from Walterboro, South Carolina, who had enjoyed a phenomenal rise in the State Department .
 His father was once an associate of the powerful James F Byrnes, who was a senator at the time Peurifoy landed his first job with the State Department in 1938 .
 Peurifoy was proud of the fact that he once ran the Capitol elevator and equally proud of his small-town background . He was proud that he ran the elevator at the Capitol .
 Peurifoy was just the man to have on the scene if there was to be trouble in the land of the quetzal bird . Fresh from Greece, where he had helped shore up that country after its war with the Communists .
 Miguel Ydigoras Fuentes, who later became Guatemala’s President, was in exile in E] Salvador early in 1954 . He was later exiled to El Salvador .
 They said they wanted to lend their assistance to overthrow Arbenz . They said that I was a popular figure in Guatemala and that they wanted their assistance . The Guatemalan government said they were willing to lend assistance to overthrowing Arbeniz .
 When I asked their conditions for the assistance I found them unacceptable, I found it unacceptable . I asked them to explain why they had to be forced to give up their services .
 Ubico was to promise to favor the United Fruit Company and the International Railways of Central America . He was to destroy the railroad workers labor union; . . . to establish a strong-arm government, he wrote .
 CIA went to Peurifoy and persuaded him to join the operation as Ambassador to Guatemala . The CIA was able to convince him to take part in the operation . The operation was successful .
 Peurifoy was leery of the idea, but a persuasive CIA official convinced him . The operation offered him a chance to revitalize his career, Peurfoy says .
 Eisenhower called in a former high U.S. diplomat to serve as a secret civilian adviser to the operation . In February, 1954, Eisenhower called the operation in secret .
 Milton Eisenhower did not participate in the clandestine operation . Milton Eisenhower asked Milton Eisenhower to join the operation, but he did not . Milton, pleading his wife’s serious illness at the time, didn't participate .
 Henry Holland, as the State Department Latin Chief, was privy to the operation . Henry Holland was State Dept. Latin Chief of the Latin America .
 Senator Thruston B Morton, then Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations, was on the panel . Morton was also on panel for the panel, but Morton was not . Morton is now on the board of the National Security Council of the United States .
 CIA deputy director for plans was Frank Wisner . Wisner was in charge of carrying out the Guatemalan operation .
 Wisner, a dedicated and hard-driving “black” operator, was an old hand in the intelligence business . Wisner was a dedicated, hard-working "black" operator, Wisner said .
 In World War II he had been the OSS mission chief in Istanbul and Bucharest . He had been OSS chief in Turkey and Romania .
 After the war, commuting from his home in the suburbs to his Manhattan law firm, Carter, Ledyard & Milburn, seemed dull compared to wartime intrigue along the Bosporus .
 Frank Wisner was named Deputy Assistant Secretary of State of State in 1947 . Wisner is credited with being the first person to be named in the Cabinet . He was named the Deputy Assistant State of the Department of State .
 In 1954, Wisner and the CIA needed someone to serve as a leader of the coup and a focal point around which anti-Arbenz Guatemalans could rally . Now, in Guatemala in 1954, what Wisner needed was someone to lead the coup .
 The man chosen was Colonel Carlos Castillo-Armas, a dapper, dedicated and ascetic-looking officer who had tunneled his way out of prison to freedom .
 Castillo-Armas set up headquarters in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, and with the CIA’s help, began plotting to return to his homeland . He set up his headquarters in Honduras, where he plotted his return to Honduras .
 The first evidence that the plot was afoot came on January 29, 1954, when Guatemala released intercepted correspondence between Castillo-Armas and Ydigoras .
 Guatemalan charges had a basis in fact because the two exile leaders had been in touch and had signed a Pacto de Caballeros at the border between El Salvador and Honduras . The two leaders signed a pacto de caballeros on the border with Honduras .
 The Arbenz government surmised that the “government of the North” had endorsed the plan . The government also surmished that the North had endorsed it, the government of the north .
 It charged that the operation was known by the code name El Diablo . Training of rebels was going forward at El Tamarindo, President Somoza’s plantation, and Puerto Cabezas .
 Castillo-Armas’ forces were in fact taking place on Momotombito, a volcanic island which earned its name from the sound the Indians thought it made when it rumbled .
 “Tacho” Somoza, Nicaragua’s President, was heavily involved in the plans to overthrow Arbenz . ‘Tacho,’ was indeed heavily involved with the overthrow of Arbenez .
 The most powerful military element in the coup was the CIA’s air force . The CIA's air force was the most powerful part of the coup, the author says .
 The handful of P-47 Thunderbolts and C-47 transports operated out of Managua International Airport . The P-46 Thunderbolats were the first to fly out of the country .
 Jerry Fred DeLarm, a slim, short, hawk-featured man who liked to lay a .45 down on the table in front of him when talking to a stranger . DeLarm was one of the most daredevil men in the world to use a gun .
 DeLarm was a barnstorming, adventurous flier well known in Central America . DeLarm, a native of San Francisco, was a well-known flier in the region . He was a pioneer of the aviation industry .
 DeLarm had been flying in the area since he was nine, with his father, Eddie DeLarm . DeLarm was a pioneer pilot in the 1930s, when he was a teenager . He was the son of a pilot who died in a plane crash .
 He was discharged as a captain and shortly thereafter set up an airline in Costa Rica . He set up his own airline in the country .
 In 1948, when Otilio Ulate was elected President of that highly democratic nation, Calderon Calderon tried to block him from taking office . Calderon was elected president of the Philippines in 1948 .
 Jose Figueres battled Calderon-Guardia, and emerged as head of a victorious junta . In the revolt that followed, he fought Calderon Guardia and became head of the government .
 He flew a DC-3 rigged up with a machine gun in the co-pilot seat and another poking through the floor of the rear bathroom, for ground strafing .
 During the election of 1950 he took a job doing sky-writing and aerial broadcasts for Arbenz . During the 1950s he worked as a sky-writer and aerial broadcastist for the government .
 Arbenz was promised $20,000 by the man he later helped to overthrow . He was understandably disturbed when the money did not come through after he won .
 DeLarm says he first began to suspect Arbenz was a Communist . DeLarm: "That's when I first started to suspect that he was Communist" DeLarm later said, "That was when he began to think about the Communist"
 Until shortly before the invasion, he remained behind in Guatemala City, giving flying lessons and using this and an automobile dealership as cover as cover .
 John Foster Dulles and Henry Holland led the American delegation to the tenth Inter-American conference at Caracas in March . Dulles led the U.S. delegation to Caracas .
 Dulles pushed for an anti-Communist resolution aimed squarely at Guatemala . Dulles also pushed for a resolution aimed at Guatemalan Communism .
 The American resolution passed, seventeen to one, with Guatemala in opposition . Guatemala was in opposition to the American resolution .
 2,000 tons of rifles, machine guns and other armaments were aboard the Swedish freighter M/S Alfhem, en route from the Polish port of Stettin on the Baltic Sea .
 The Alfhem operated out of Uddevalla, Sweden, and her owner was Angbats, Bohuslanska & Kusten, Inc. It was the Alfhem, a Swedish band of sorts .
 Czech funds paid for a ‘straw charter’ of the Alfhem, through a British firm of E E, Dean in London . Czech funds also paid for the charter, through the British firm .
 The ship was taking a route to Guatemala as roundabout as its intricate charter arrangements . And the ship was heading to Guatemala .
 CIA’s Banana Revolt docked on May 15 at Puerto Barrios, on the east coast of Guatemala, where it docked May 15 .
 The CIA had a difficult time tracking the arms ship across the vast Atlantic Ocean . The CIA was unable to find the ship because of its size .
 The freighter was playing hide-and-seek when it went missing . That made tracking difficult, since the freighter had been playing hide and seek .
 The CIA lost the ship as it was going south along the African coast . Although the CIA had the help of the Navy, the agency lost it .
 The Alfhem was found at the end of the journey in Guatemala . It didn't catch up with the Alfhem until it turned up at dockside in the country .
 The U.S. began shipping arms to Nicaragua in giant Globemaster planes . The United States announced that as a countermeasure, it had begun shipping arms in giant planes .
 At least fifty tons of small arms and machine guns were flown in to “Tacho” Somoza . At least 50 tons of weapons and ammunition were flown into Somozia .
 Eisenhower's efforts to get the Western Allies to join a quarantine on arms shipments to Guatemala met with less than a rousing success . The U.S. drew a protest from the Dutch when it searched the freighter Wulfbrook at San Juan, Puerto Rico .
 On June 7, with the invasion date approaching rapidly, a strange event took place in Guatemala . The invasion date is approaching rapidly .
 Ferdinand F Schupp, identified as a “former deputy chief of the United States Air Force Mission” in Guatemala, fled the country along with Colonel Rodolfo Mendoza Azurdia, the ex-chief of the Guatemalan Air Force . It was disclosed .
 The United States Embassy announced that Schupp had “resigned” his embassy post in 1952 to go into a “farming project” in southern Guatemala . The U.S. Embassy said Schupp resigned to go to a ‘farming’ project in
 Later, Schupp turned up in Guatemala City, like Jerry DeLarm, giving flying lessons . Schupp later turned up to give lessons .
 A few days before CastilloArmas crossed the border, DeLarm also slipped out of Guatemala, aboard a regular Pan American flight . DeLarm is believed to be the last person to leave Guatemala .
 Foster Dulles branded “totally false’s” Guatemalan charges that the United Fruit Company was at the heart of the disdisparity . The Invisible Government (176 pute between Guatemala and Washington)
 Thruston Morton was invited to a White House meeting by the Secretary of State days before the invasion . Morton was a key member of the U.S. anti-invasion team .
 As Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations, Morton was aware of the CIA operation, since it had been his task to brief a few key senators about its true nature . Morton was briefed on the operation by key senators .
 The breakfast meeting with Eisenhower took place in the second-floor dining room of the White House . Morton went along, and the breakfast meeting took place with Eisenhower .
 Eisenhower, the Dulles brothers, representatives of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and other aides were present . Morton later recalled it as Morton recalled the events .
 At no point in invasion planning did Eisenhower ever discuss sending in U.S. armed forces should the CIA operation fail, participants say .
 On June 18 Castillo-Armas and his small “Army of Liberation’s” crossed the border into Guatemala from Honduras . Castillo Armas is the leader of the “armed forces” in Honduras .
 He drove in a battered station wagon, leading his men down the road to Esquipulas . He led his men to the town, where he was taken hostage .
 Before dawn the P-47s had bombed San Jose, Guatemala’s major port on the Pacific coast . San Jose is a major city on the coast of the country .
 In Washington the State Department said it had been in touch with Peurifoy . The State Department has also said it has spoken to Peurfoy .
 CIA’s Banana Revolt (177 Christ Christ) is the country's major religious shrine . CIA's BananaRevolt is the work of the CIA .
 With the Army of Liberation bogged down just inside the Guatemalan border, “Tacho” Somoza invited Ydigoras to lunch with him at the Presidential Palace in Managua .
 The Nicaraguan President was bitterly complaining about how slowly the freedom forces were advancing . The President of Nicaragua was also complaining of how slowly he was advancing .
 The most active of the planes represented by the pins on “Tacho’s” map was that of DeLarm . DeLarm was one of the most active planes in the history of World War II .
 On the first day of the invasion, he dropped propaganda leaflets on Guatemala City, but had orders not to fire or drop any bombs .
 On subsequent raids on the capital, however, he bombed and strafed several targets, effectively demoralizing the government leaders . The government leaders were demoralized .
 The CIA’s planes became known among the Guatemalan populace as Sulfatos—the Guatemalan word for laxative—because of the alleged effect their appearance had upon the Arbenz officials . The CIA's planes were known among Guatemalan citizens as Solfatos .
 The CIA's force of P-47s was shot full of holes and another cracked up . The CIA says one of the planes was shot with holes, and the other cracked up.
 Guatemalan Government charged in the UN that two American fliers had crash-landed in Tapachula, Mexico, after having bombed Coban . The Guatemalan government said in June that the two Americans had crashed in Mexico .
 President Obama categorically categorically said that his government was behind the invasion of Iraq .
 Allen Dulles made an urgent appeal for more airplanes . Dulles appealed for more planes to be brought in .
 Eisenhower, Allen Dulles and Henry Holland overruled their legalistic objections . This led to a meeting of Eisenhower, Dulles, and Holland, whose objections were overruled . It led to the meeting of the three men at the White House .
 As cover for the transaction, Nicaragua had to put down $150,000 in cash to purchase the planes . The planes were purchased by Nicaragua as part of a deal with the government .
 Nicaraguan Ambassador to Washington came up with cover payment . The new planes were dispatched to Nicaragua . After some interesting financial legerdemain, the new planes arrived .
 One of the P-47s had been shipped to Nicaragua minus a landing-gear wheel . General Cabell, the CIA deputy director, learned that one of the planes was missing a landing gear wheel .
 Air Force rushed the part down and the Thunderbolt flew in the invasion . The part was part of the Thunderbolt that flew during the invasion of Vietnam .
 On June 24, two days after the secret White House meeting, a P-47 swooped over Guatemala City, strafed gasoline stores and knocked out a radio station . Two days later, the plane strafed gas stations, knocked out radio stations .
 It was not, as luck would have it, the Communist station, but a Protestant missionary station . Harold Von Broekhoven, an evangelist from Passaic, New Jersey, operated it .
 He said they were keeping in close touch with the company manager in Guatemala City, Almyr Bump .
 The CIA's Banana Revolt has been in the news for a week . Bigart Bigart reported, clearly did not want them hanging around Esquipulas . He said the CIA was not happy to see them in the jungle .
 Evelyn Irons, a corre~ spondent for the London Evening Standard, rented a mule and loped to Esquipulas .
 He would not allow her to proceed to the front, which had by now moved to Chiquimula . He refused to allow her access to the back of the crowd .
 Mule prices in Nueva Ocotepeque soared . Nevertheless, Miss Irons had scooped her competitors, and mule prices soared .
 The defection of Mendoza, the Air Force chief, was proving to be a key factor, because it demoralized the Guatemalan Air Force . The defector is proving to have been key to the success of the military in the country .
 At the front, Arbenz’ reluctant Army commanders sent back messages saying that their forces were being overwhelmed by the invaders, It wasn’t true, but it had a psychological effect on Arbeniz . At the end of the war, the British Prime Minister sent back
 The CIA was reading the traffic from the front, and it knew what messages Arbenz was receiving . The CIA knew what it was receiving from the public, and the messages it received .
 CIA clandestine radio operators intercepted the military communications and fed back false messages on the same wave length to further confuse the situation . The CIA intercepted the messages and fed them back to false messages .
 On June 27 Arbenz capitulated, following a long day of maneuvering by Peurifoy . The two-year-old had been in power for more than a decade .
 The American ambassador first met at the palace with Foreign Minister Toriello . The Italian ambassador is a former ambassador to the Italian government .
 The Guatemalan president met with the military chief of the armed forces . He conferred with Colonel Carlos Enrique Diaz and a group of ranking colonels . Then he conferred with the Guatemalan armed forces chief and a number of ranking generals .
 Diaz was operating on the radical assumption that it was his duty to fight when his country was invaded, Peurifoy instantly recognized that this would be a disaster . Diaz was not the only man to be killed in the first World War II .
 If the junta, to which the State Department’s ambassador had given THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (180 at least his tacit blessing, went out to fight the CIA's Army of Liberation, it would be a fine spectacle . The State Department's ambassador gave the
 Peurifoy put on a “siren’s suit, strapped a .45 to his belt, and began maneuvering to topple Diaz . Diaz .
 CIA felt Peurifoy was making himself too conspicuous for the good of the operation . The CIA wanted Diaz out, but still felt he was too conspicuous to make himself .
 He knocked out the radio station and then dropped two bombs right in the middle of Fort Matamoros, the major installation of the Guatemalan Army . The Guatemalan army is a major military installation in Guatemala .
 Diaz, President for one day, was ousted at the point of machine guns by Colonel Elfego Monzon . Diaz was ousted by Colonel Monzon at the end of the day .
 Monzon took over as head of a less bellicose junta, acceptable to Peurifoy . With two other colonels, Monzon became head of new junta . Monzon has been in charge of a new government .
 CIA and State Department were worried that it might break out again at any moment . The CIA and the State Department was worried that the CIA and others were worried about the situation .
 Peace talks between Monzon and Castillo-Armas were scheduled to take place in El Salvador . Peace talks are scheduled for later this month . The two sides are scheduled to hold peace talks .
 Washington gave Peurifoy carte blanche to bring the junta and the CIA’s Castillo-Armas together .
 With the Papal Nuncio, Monsignor Gennaro Verolino, the American ambassador flew off to El Savador for the talks . The American ambassador was accompanied by the papal nuncio .
 On July 2, with tearful if cautious embraces, Monzon and CastilloArmas signed a peace pact . The two men signed a tearful but cautious embrace .
 Monzon top man, but only until junta votes formally on a chief . Monzon left top man but only till junta voted formally on chief chief .
 The deal was signed in the Hall of Honor in the Presidential Palace . Castillo-Armas then flew back to Chiquimula to convince his followers that it was not a sellout to Monzon .
 The next day Castillo-Armas came home to a huge welcome in Guatemala City . Castillo Armas returned to Guatemala City, where he was greeted by a crowd .
 He arrived not at the head of his conquering troops, however, but in Peurifoy’s embassy plane . He arrived at the end of the war in a plane from the embassy .
 John Foster Dulles addressed the U.S. on radio and television . Dulles spoke to the United States on television and radio and radio .
 As its first act, the ruling junta canceled the right of illiterates to vote, thereby disenfranchising in one stroke about 70 percent of Guatemala’s population . Almost all the Indians were illiterates, almost all of them Indians .
 The ideological basis of the coup was undercut when the chief CIA man in Guatemala quit the agency and went into the cement business there . The chief CIA official quit the CIA in Guatemala and moved to the cement industry .
 The free election Castillo-Armas promised when Arbenz fell turned out to be ‘sé’ or ‘no’ vote on whether to continue as President . The free vote was a "sé" or "no" vote on who will continue Cast
 In rapid succession, the new regime set up a Robespierre-like Committee for Defense Against Communism with sweeping police-state powers . The new regime has sweeping police powers .
 The government took back 800,000 acres of land from the peasants, returned to United Fruit the land Arbenz had seized . The government also repealed amendments to a 1947 law that had guaranteed rights to workers and labor unions .
 Within a week of Castillo-Armas’ election as head of the junta, the new government announced it had arrested 4,000 persons on suspicion of Communist activity . The new government said it had been arresting 4,500 people .
 Defense Committee could declare anyone a Communist with no right of appeal . This set up the Defense Committee, which met in secret and could declare a Communist .
 Those registered by the committee could be arbitrarily arrested for periods up to six months . Those registered could not own radios or hold public office or own public radios .
 Within four months of the new government registered 72,000 persons as Communists or sympathizers . Within just four months, the government registered more than 70,000 people as Communist sympathisers .
 Castillo-Armas was generally regarded as an honest, proud and rather simple man who genuinely loved his country . He was also regarded as a proud, honest and simple man .
 President Obama had a covey of advisers, and some of them were less dedicated than their chief . But some of the most important advisers were not dedicated to the president .
 After the 1954 coup American gambler types began drifting into Guatemala, and certain of the liberator’s lieutenants were cut in . American gamblers began drifting in after the coup .
 Castillo-Armas could not bring himself to THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((182 realize that some of his followers were treacherous) Castillo Armas could no longer bring him to the Invisible Government of Spain .
 A gambling casino was built in which various Army officers shared a heavy financial interest with the Americans . The gambling casino in the U.S. was built by the Army .
 Castillo-Armas closed down the casino, and shortly afterward, he was assassinated by a member of the palace guard . He was assassinated on July 26, 1957 .
 The crime was first blamed on Communists, then on Castillo-Armas’ enemies within the government . Castillo Armas was killed by a bomb blast in 2009 .
 The following year, Ydigoras was elected President and settled down for a term that was at least never dull . It has never been solved .
 At one point, when rumors of official corruption were rife, he went on television with his ministers . He went on TV with ministers to discuss corruption .
 A newspaperman accused Ydigoras of being a viejo enclenque, or enfeebled old man . Another time, a newspaperman said he was a 'viejo enclaveenque' Ydigora was a "enfeebled" man .
 Then he proceeded to skip rope and juggle Indian clubs before the amazed Guatemalan audience .
 CIA asked for Guatemalan bases for Bay of Pigs training in 1960 . CIA came to him in 1960 asking for bases for training, he said yes . He was aware he was risking his political neck .
 The November, 1960, uprising (which CIA pilots helped to put down) was partly blamed on the issue of the Cuban training bases in Guatemala .
 On March 31, 1963, Ydigoras was ousted by Colonel Enrique Peralta in one of the first of a series of military coups in Latin America that threatened to make a mockery of the political reforms at the base of the Alliance for Progress . Washington recognized the regime in less
 If any efforts were made by Washington to save Ydigoras government were not effective, they were certainly not effective . Washington risked its future to provide bases for the CIA for the Cuban invasion .
 There is, in fact, no available evidence that any such efforts were made. There is no evidence that such efforts have been made.
 A decade after the CIA’s liberation of Guatemala from Communism in 1954, the lot of Guatemalans was about the same . And so, a decade later, Guatemala was still struggling to find a way to survive in the country .
 CIA’s Banana Revolt (183 illiterate, toiled on for wages still ridiculously low) ‘I’m not the only illiterate. I’ll be the only one to get a job.’
 The Invisible Government had moved in, accomplished its task, and moved on . As is so often the case, the Invisible Government has moved in and out .
 The yoke of Communism had been thrown off but in its place there remained poverty and an indifferent oligarchy . The yokes of Communism was thrown off, but the yoke was not thrown off . In its place was poverty and indifferent oligarchism .
 The abysmal conditions that led to Arbenz in the first place were as apparent as ever . In the second half of the first half of this year, the conditions that lead to the death penalty were as obvious as ever.
 The CIA emerged from the coup in Guatemala with a reputation in the Invisible Government as a clever and efficient operator in Latin American affairs . The Kennedy Shake-Up was the CIA's first major shake-up in Latin America .
 The agency's reputation was essentially untarnished when President Kennedy took office in January of 1961 . Despite the agency’s subsequent difficulties in other areas of the world, that reputation remained intact when JFK took office .
 A few days after the Bay of Pigs, President Kennedy called in Clark M Clifford, a Washington lawyer and close confidant . Clifford later became the chairman of the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board . Clifford was a close friend of President Kennedy .
 Kennedy complained that he had been given bad information and bad advice by intelligence and military advisers . Kennedy complained he was given bad advice and bad information .
 The President then set out to gain control of the intelligence establishment and to make it genuinely submissive to his ideas and purposes . The President set out in order to gain .
 President Barack Obama has ordered an investigation into the Cuban debacle . The White House says the probe will be conducted by the next president .
 Kennedy inherited the Bay of Pigs idea from President Eisenhower, officials say . Kennedy inherited idea from Eisenhower, but administration officials say he inherited idea .
 Interior Secretary Stewart L Udall made the mistake of giving public voice to the administration line . Republicans, predictably, pounced upon him. Udall: "Stewart L U.S. made a mistake"
 Kennedy stepped in quickly the mext day to prevent all-out political war . Kennedy stepped up quickly the day after the election . Kennedy: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 "He has stated on all occasions, and he restates it now, so it will be understood by all," he said .
 Kennedy’s full public acceptance of the blame seemed to be the Republicans’ price for laying off the Cuban issue, at least temporarily . The Invisible GOVERNMENT is the GOP's most secretive government .
 Eisenhower set the Republican line on emerging from an eighty-five-minute conversation with Kennedy at Camp David on April 22 . Eisenhower was speaking with Kennedy on the night of that meeting .
 Kennedy used the momentary truce to set in motion a sweeping reorganization of the Invisible Government . Kennedy used it as a way to set up a new government .
 He had indicated to several high-ranking officials that he would put Richard Bissell in charge of the agency when Dulles stepped down . Bissell is a former CIA director .
 Bissell would have to go and that the shake-up would be deferred for a decent interval . Now, in the shadow of the Cuban fiasco, it was clear that Bissell was to go .
 Army Major General Marshall Sylvester Carter, fifty-two, replaced by Major General General Marshall Marshal Syllvester Carter . Carter was replaced by Army Major General General General Marshall Carter, fifty, in 2009 .
 Bissell resigned as the deputy director for plans for plans on February 17, 1962 . Bissell was a member of the National Planning Council of the United States .
 Robert Amory, the deputy director for intelligence, was shifted to the Budget Bureau to become the director of its International Division . Amory will be the new director of the budget bureau's international division .
 The top-level shake-up at the CIA was not completed until a full year had passed . The shake-ups were not complete until a year after the change was made .
 Kennedy ordered General Maxwell Taylor to head an investigation into the invasion . General Taylor made recommendations for the reform of the intelligence community . Kennedy ordered Taylor to investigate the invasion and make recommendations .
 World War II paratroop commander John Taylor quit Army Chief of Staff in 1959 . He was unhappy with Eisenhower's refusal to adopt his views on conventional warfare . Taylor quit in protest against the Eisenhower Administration .
 After the Bay of Pigs investigation, he became Kennedy’s The Kennedy Shake-Up ((187 personal military adviser) and, finally, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 Robert Kennedy, Allen Dulles and Arleigh Burke were among those involved in the investigation . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968, along with his wife and daughter .
 The Attorney General was to become the untitled overseer of the intelligence apparatus in the Kennedy Administration . It was clear that the Attorney General would become the .
 The appointment of Dulles and Burke, holdovers from the Eisenhower Administration, was designed to gather broad political support for the shake-up . They were designed to forestall suggestions that a whitewash operation was afoot .
 Kennedy moved to take even tighter grip on the Invisible Government on May 4 . The President’s Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities under a new title, the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board . Kennedy is the president of the President of the United States' Council of Representatives .
 The original group had been set up by President Eisenhower on January 13, 1956, on a recommendation by the Hoover Commission . President Eisenhower set up the original group in 1956 . Hoover Commission recommended the group .
 It was headed by James R Killian, Jr., the president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Killian led the group .
 Joseph P Kennedy, the President’s father, served on the first six months of the Kennedy administration . Kennedy served on it for six months .
 The board had disbanded on January 7, 1961, when the entire membership resigned in anticipation of the new administration . The board was disbanded in January 1961 .
 Kennedy called it back into existence, again under the chairmanship of Killian . Killian is the chairman of the board .
 The original board had met just twice a year and had only been only marginally informed about intelligence activities . It met just once a year, and had met only a few times a year .
 Kennedy ordered the new board to meet six to eight times a year and carry out assignments for him at home and abroad . Kennedy also ordered the board to carry out specific assignments for the president . The new board will meet with Kennedy at least once a year .
 The Killian and Taylor groups had scarcely begun their secret . The new members were Frank Pace, Jr., former Secretary of the Army; Dr. Dr. John Taylor, Dr. Frank Pace and Dr. Michael Killian .
 William O Baker was vice-president for research of Bell Telephone Laboratories . Lieutenant General James H Doolittle was retired, retired, board chairman of Space Technology Laboratories, Inc. Lt. James H . Baker was chairman of the Space Technology Laboratory .
 The 'Invisible Government' made inquiries before the tenuous political truce on the Bay of Pigs began to be breached . The Invisibility Government made inquiries into the situation .
 Miller said his accusation was based on comments by Eisenhower to a group of Republican leaders . But the former President corrected him the very next day .
 Eisenhower denied that American air power had been approved during his time in office . Eisenhower denied the idea during his presidency .
 He had merely stated that an amphibious operation could not succeed without air support . The general explained that he was merely stating that such a mission could not be carried out without aircraft support .
 This was the first of many confusing exchanges during the following weeks and months on the issue of air cover . This was a series of confusing exchanges between the two sides .
 Republican and Cuban exile leaders charged repeatedly that the Bay of Pigs invasion failed because President Kennedy withdrew American air cover . The Bay of the Pigs invasion was the result of a failed invasion of Cuba .
 The air-cover controversy had grown out of a massive confusion over what was included in the original air plan for the Bay of Pigs . The air plan was originally intended to cover the Bay .
 Castro's air force was to have been destroyed on the ground by the CIA’s Cuban exile bombers . The CIA's Cuba exile bombers were to have destroyed the Cuban air force . Castro was killed in the Cuban exile bombing raid .
 Cuban invaders would not have required aerial protection against nonexistent planes . In that event, the Cuban invaders logically would not need aerial protection .
 The President canceled the second strike against Castro’s air bases . The strike was canceled by the President of Cuba .
 Castro’s planes were in the air to harass the invaders on the beach and to sink the ships carrying their equipment, ammunition, fuel and communications . The planes were also used to attack the enemy ships carrying ammunition and fuel .
 The real question in the controversy is whether the invasion could have succeeded if Kennedy had not canceled the second strike . The Kennedy Shake-Up (189) could have failed if Kennedy hadn't canceled the first strike .
 The Taylor group grappled with this question but failed to reach agreement . Taylor group: "I'm not sure what I want to do with my life"
 Taylor and Robert Kennedy concluded that the invasion plan had been thoroughly faulty and stood no chance of success in any event . Taylor and Kennedy wrote that the plan was a mistake .
 The invasion might have worked without air support of any kind, the admiral argued . The first air strike had not been scheduled two days in advance of the landing eliminating the element of surprise .
 Dulles felt the CIA and the Joint Chiefs made a mistake in not arranging for alternatives in case the second strike failed or did not come off . Dulles: CIA and Joint Chiefs did not arrange for alternatives if the strike failed .
 He thought there should have been a contingency plan to make sure the invaders got ashore with their equipment . He said there should also be a plan to ensure the invaders didn't get ashore .
 The Taylor committee presented its views, secretly and orally, to President Kennedy in the summer of 1961 . President Kennedy received the Taylor committee's views .
 The group interviewed virtually everyone of significance in the Bay of Pigs invasion, including the CIA man who directed the air operations . Mario Zuniga, the Cuban pilot who told the cover story about defecting from Castro’s air force .
 The committee reached more than thirty conclusions, including findings that communications were very bad and that there was an overcentralization of the operation in Washington . The committee also found that communications are very bad .
 Bundy and Salinger recommended that it be released to the public in January, 1963 . Bundy, Salinger said it should be released in January 1963 at the White House .
 The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT has reached a meeting of minds on another crucial point . The Invisible Government has reached an agreement with the U.S. government .
 After the Bay of Pigs, there was considerable pressure within and without the government to limit the CIA to intelligence-gathering alone . After the CIA was limited to intelligence gathering alone, the agency was under pressure .
 It was argued that the agency was inevitably tempted to warp its intelligence estimates to justify its pet projects . The agency should transfer responsibility for all clandestine operations to some other agency, possibly the Pentagon .
 Separation of intelligence-gathering from operations would result in expensive duplication of personnel and facilities, particularly at overseas posts . They contended that separation of intelligence gathering from operations .
 Foreign agents tend to play off one branch of the spy apparatus against the other, experts say . They also warned that foreign agents would tend to bid up the price of information and confuse the evidence .
 Dulles: "No intelligence agency in the world is split into separate information-gathering and operational units" Dulles pleaded that, contrary to popular belief, no intelligence agency was split into information gathering and operations units .
 When the British set up a Special Operations Executive in World War II, he maintained, they ran into serious difficulties and had to revert to a CIA-type system .
 Taylor committee declined to recommend that all clandestine operations be divorced from CIA’s responsibilities .
 The President agreed and the CIA continued to function essentially in its old ways . President agreed with the President .
 CIA was to be limited to operations requiring military equipment no larger or more complex than side arms . In the future, the CIA would only be able to carry weapons that could be carried by individuals . The CIA would then only carry side arms, not large or complex weapons .
 In other words, the CIA was never again to direct operations involving aircraft, tanks or amphibious ships . The CIA was not allowed to direct military operations involving amphibian ships .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion was not plausibly deniable because it was too large and pervasive to escape the notice of alert officials, newspapermen and private citizens in a free society . The invasion was too widespread and widespread to escape notice in free society, the author says .
 It is clear from all this that the leaders of the government had finally come to the realization that certain types of clandestine operations are incompatible with the democratic system . It's clear from this, the leaders have finally realized that such clandestine operations can't be tolerated .
 The Kennedy Shake-Up is a secret society, where the organs of communication are tightly controlled, secret ventures can be mounted on a large scale with minimum risk of disclosure . In a total, the Kennedy shake-up is a total of 20,000 people .
 Freedom of speech and the press is constitutionally guaranteed in open society . But this is extremely difficult in an open society in which freedom is constitutionally protected .
 President expressed concern about the limitations imposed upon the government by the institutions of free speech and a free press . Immediately after the invasion failed, he revealed his concern .
 He went before the American Newspaper Publishers Association on April 27, 1961, with a plea for voluntary censorship . He pleaded with the association to allow voluntary censorship in newspapers .
 Despite his chagrin, the President had not lost perspective on the dangers of toying with fundamental freedoms, he said .
 JFK appointed John McCone as Director of Central Intelligence . McCone's appointment was the most controversial of President Kennedy’s reorganization of the Invisible Government .
 The strong-willed, sternlooking multimillionaire was not of the stuff to inspire love among the bureaucrats .
 McCone aroused much fear and antagonism in his rise to the top in the world of business and government . McCone had aroused much .
 Influential scientists were outraged by what they believed was an effort by McCone to have ten of their brethren fired from the California Institute of Technology in 1956 .
 The Caltech scientists had come out in support of Adlai Stevenson’s proposal for a nuclear test ban during the presidential campaign that year .
 Some remain unconvinced by the blunt language of McCone’s denunciation . Still more are embittered by his denunciation of the president . But some remain unconvincing .
 Outside the scientific community, many were disturbed by McCone’s big wartime profits in the ship-building business .
 McCone and associates in the California Shipbuilding Company made $44,000,000 on an investment of $100,000 . Ralph E Casey of the General Accounting Office testified in 1946 that McCone's associates in California Ship Building Company made .
 He insisted that the investment of California Shipbuilding— including loans, bank credits and stock, in addition to the cash—amounted to over $7,000,000 .
 McCone told of his former directorship of Panama Pacific Tankers Company, a large oilcarrying fleet, and of the $1,000,000 in stock he held in Standard Oil of California, which operates in the Middle East, Indonesia and Latin America .
 Senator Stuart Symington, a Missouri Democrat, also saw nothing amiss with McCone . McCone offered to dispose of the stock of the senator .
 The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((194 but the committee refused to consider it. The committee of the House of Representatives would have considered it, but it was refused to .
 From the tenor of the questioning it was clear that the great majority of senators was not at all disturbed by McCone’s record . McCone is a former senator from New Hampshire .
 McCone was born into a prosperous San Francisco family on January 4, 1902 .
 That year he joined the Llewellyn Iron Works in California . He served briefly as a riveter, a surveyor, a foreman and a contruction manager .
 McCone assumed a series of executive positions, including vice-president in charge of sales . When Llewellyn merged into the Consolidated Steel Corporation in 1929, McCone became a vice president . McCone was vice president of the company's sales division .
 McCone left the steel business in 1937 to form a new engineering concern, Bechtel-McCone-Parsons Corporation of Los Angeles . McCone joined the Bechtels-McConesons Corporation in 1937 .
 This firm specialized in the design and construction of petroleum refineries, processing plants and power plants for installation in the U.S., South America and the Middle East .
 McCone and his enterprises were also active in the modification of Air Force bombers for combat . During the war McCone was active in modification of the Air Force .
 After the war McCone took over the Joshua Hendy Iron Works at Sunnyvale, California, he broadened his business interests in a dozen major corporations, including Standard Oil of California and Trans World Airlines .
 He entered government service in 1947 as a member of President Truman’s Air Policy Commission . He served in the Air Force in the early 1950s .
 In 1948 he became special deputy to James Forrestal, the Secretary of Defense . In 1948, he was special deputy deputy to Forrestal . He was awarded a posthumous award for his work in Washington .
 McCone was named Under Secretary of the Air Force in 1950 . The Secret Elite was McCone's first female Air Force Secretary . McCone is credited with being a top Air Force officer .
 He was chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission in 1958 . He returned to private life the next year, but was back in government in 1959 .
 McCone gained a reputation as an uncompromising supporter of John Foster Dulles’ doctrine of massive retaliation, the Air Force’s atomic warfare theories, and the hard-line strategy against the Soviet Union . During his government service, McCone became a staunch supporter of Dulles
 A member of the Roman Catholic Church, McCone was designated by Pope Pius XII as a Knight of St. St. Louis . McCone is a former president of the Catholic Church .
 He and Clare Booth Luce served as Eisenhower's official representatives at Pope Pius’ funeral in 1958 . The funeral was Eisenhower's first papal funeral .
 Robert Kennedy had been looking around for a successor to Allen Dulles . McCone’s reputation as a hardnosed executive who could get things done quickly and efficiently .
 There had been some thought that the Attorney General might take the job himself, but this inevitably would have provoked Republican charges that the Kennedys were creating a dynasty . There had also been thought that .
 President did not relish the prospect of tighter Congressional control of the CIA . And it probably would have stirred up new demands for tighter congressional control of CIA .
 Serious consideration was given to the possibility of offering the job to Clark Clifford . Clifford had impressed Kennedy mightily when he directed the change-over in White House staff be~tween administrations .
 The President then turned to Fowler Hamilton, a close friend of Senator Symington . Fowler Hamilton is a Wall Street lawyer and close friend to Senator Symington . Hamilton is also close to the Senator .
 The foreign-aid job had been scheduled to go to George D Woods, the board chairman of the First Boston Company . Woods was scheduled to be the president of the company .
 Woods withdraws his name because of renewed talk about First Boston’s implication in the Dixon-Yates scandal . Woods felt compelled to withdraw his name due to renewed talk of First Boston's implication in scandal .
 Kennedy then tried to fill the AID opening with Thomas J WatTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT . Wat was the president of the International Business Machines Corporation. Wat was his son, Jr.
 Watson said no and the President named Hamilton as the AID director . Hamilton was named as the new director of AID . Watson says no and Hamilton says no .
 Kennedy decided upon McCone as Director of Central Intelligence . It was then that Kennedy decided to appoint him as CIA Director .
 The decision, announced on September 27, 1961, shocked official Washington . The decision was announced in 1961 .
 After the Bay of Pigs, both Kennedy and the CIA were extremely vulnerable to political attack from the right wing of the party . The CIA and Kennedy were vulnerable to attack after the attack on the CIA .
 With a conservative Republican at the head of the Invisible Government, the President, clearly, thought the political fire would be somewhat diverted . President Obama thought the President would be able to keep the fire going on .
 McCone’s wife died unexpectedly of a heart attack a week later . A week later, on December 6, she passed away unexpectedly . McCone: "I'm not going to be able to live with my wife, and I'm not sure what I'm doing."
 Allen Dulles volunteered to take care of the arrangements for flying the body back to the West Coast . Dulles' body will be flown to the U.S.
 McCone followed Dulles’ advice and set out almost immediately on extensive tours of agency installations in Europe and Asia . McCone set out to follow Dulles' advice and toured the continent .
 His nomination came to a vote in the Senate on January 31, 1962, after a brief, bitter debate . He was confirmed seventy-one to twelve by the Senate .
 As head of the Central Intelligence Agency, while you will continue to have overall responsibility for the agency, I shall expect you to delegate to your principal deputy, as you may deem necessary, so much of the direction of the detailed operation of the agency .
 The President noted “with approval” that McCone had designated his deputy, General Carter, to sit on the U.S. Intelligence Board as the CIA’s representative . General Carter is the CIA's representative .
 He gained experience in international affairs as an important military figure at several wartime and postwar conferences, including the World War II summit meeting in Cairo .
 Kennedy had wanted to put a civilian in the deputy’s job . He settled upon Carter only under strong Congressional pressure for another military man . Kennedy wanted a civilian, but was pressured to appoint Carter .
 When some of Carter’s old military friends would arrive at the CIA from the Pentagon for an intelligence bricfing, the general left no doubt as to who was the real boss of the agency . Carter's old military friend would arrive to the CIA for intelligence .
 As Director of Central Intelligence, McCone was responsible not only for the CIA but also for all of the other government agencies involved in intelligence work . McCone is credited with leading the CIA and other intelligence agencies .
 McCone directed the intel on the appointment of the CIA director . He was not consulted about the appointment nor given a chance to question him about his views on foreign policy .
 U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers and Soviet spy Rudolph I Abel exchanged in exchange for U.S. spy . Fulbright was roused from bed by phone call from McCone .
 Fulbright made it clear this was not the type of consultation he had in mind . Fulbright was annoyed at the idea of consulting with the government .
 USIB, a committee of intelligence agency representatives, was called into session each week in a room adjacent to CIA’s top-fioor office in Langley, Virginia . The committee was called in by CIA director of staff .
 On a bureaucratic level, it did battle with the OSS and the ambitious intelligence men of the Army Air Corps . The OSS battled with the Air Corps and OSS on bureaucratic level .
 After the war the G-2 absorbed many of the OSS operatives under a directive by President Truman . President Truman ordered many of them to be absorbed .
 Air Force lost air intelligence when the Air Force was created as a separate service . Air Force intelligence was lost when it became a separate Air Force .
 Office of Naval Intelligence is the smallest of the intelligence branches of the three services .
 All figures on the number of persons involved in intelligence work are highly classified . Its total complement amounted to 2,600 men in 1961,** *
 It makes use of an attaché system, and it deploys intelligence men at all of its installations, ashore and afloat . The U.S. Navy also uses attaché systems to deploy intelligence men .
 The principal mission of the ONI is to collect information on foreign naval forces . The ONI's principal mission is to gather information about foreign forces .
 It keeps a special weather eye on the Soviet submarine fleet . It compiles elaborate dossiers on the world's major beaches, harbors and ports .
 The A-2 is the most mechanically sophisticated of the service intelligence operations . Air Force Intelligence is the Air Force's most technically sophisticated intelligence operation .
 It employs the latest electronic gear to determine the missile, bomber, satellite and radar potential of the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union has a range of missile and satellite capabilities .
 The Air Force controls all reconnaissance satellites orbiting the Soviet Union . Under a Pentagon directive in 1961, the Air Force controlled all Soviet Union satellites .
 Target Division is responsible for sorting out the intelligence intake and maintaining a current list of potential enemy targets . A Target Division has a target list of possible targets .
 Bombing Encyclopedia is a compendium of target information compiled by the U.S. government . It also compiles and publishes the Bombing Encyclopaedia .
 The A-2 conducts a world-wide attaché system through its International Liaison Division . The A.2 conducts the system .
 It also maintains a Military Capabilities Branch and a Wargame Branch in the Threat Assessments Division of its Directorate of Warning and Threat Assessment .
 The AEC is responsible for making estimates of the atomicweapons capabilities of the Soviet Union and other nuclear powers . It is also responsible for estimating the capabilities of other nations .
 Since 1948 the United States has maintained round-theclock monitoring of the atmosphere to detect radioactive particles from atomic tests . The U.S. has maintained the monitoring since 1948 .
 From an analysis of the samples, the AEC can determine not only the fact that atomic explosions have taken place, but also the type and power of the weapons detonated . The AEC has also been able to determine the type, power and type of the weapon detonated .
 The Pentagon censor in testimony released in 1961 by the House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee . The censors were censors in testimony from 1961 to 1961 .
 The 200 AEC also plays an important role in assessing test-ban proposals . The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (200 AEC)
 It carries out intensive experimentation in ways to shield atomic explosions from detection and ways to pierce other nations' shielding devised by other nations .
 The AEC is one of the most independent branches of the Invisible Government . Because of the law which set it up and its close relationship to the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy in the Congress, it is independent .
 As the investigative arm of the Department of Justice, the FBI is responsible, among its other duties, for catching spies . The FBI is known for its ability to catch spies .
 In this phase of its work, the FBI is an intelligence agency, and as such, it is part of the Invisible Government . The FBI is not only a criminal investigation, but also a government intelligence agency .
 The assistant to J Edgar Hoover, the FBI director, sits on USIB . The FBI has a liaison man who reports to work at the CIA headquarters in Langley every day .
 Counter-espionage work is conducted by the FBI’s hushhush division Number 5 . Actual counter espionage work is carried out by the Department of State Department .
 This is the Domestic Intelligence Division, headed by William C Sullivan . It is based in Washington, DC .
 Squad supervisor is assigned to intelligence in each of the FBI’s fifty-five field offices in the U.S. The FBI has a squad supervisor in each field office .
 Agents who normally conduct ordinary criminal investigations are assigned to espionage cases when necessary . Agents normally do not carry out criminal investigations .
 About 20 percent of 650,000 cases investigated by the FBI in 1963 were espionage-internal security cases . The exact figure is classified .
 The Soviets have attempted to obtain every conceivable type of information, including information from the U.S. State Department .
 The targets have been allencompassing and have included aerial photographs, maps and charts of our major cities and vital areas . The Secret Elite ((20r weapons, planes, ships and submarines)
 Of prime interest to the Soviets is information concerning U.S. military bases, including missile sites and radar installations . The Soviets are interested in information concerning United States military bases .
 This is the division of the Soviet secret police that keeps dossiers on Russian émigrés . The secret police keep dossier records of emigrants .
 Vladimir Gridnev was a temporary employee of the Soviet Embassy . He arrived in the United States with papers identifying him as “Vladimir Gridneev,” forty-nine, in April .
 The first move in the game was made at 9:00 P.M. on April 28, when the defector returned from work to his home in an apartment house in a Virginia suburb of the capital . The defector is believed to be in hiding in Virginia .
 A Russian whom Volodya introduced as “Ivan Ivanovich,” his embassy ‘driver,’ entered the room . A Russian named "Ivan Izhimovich" introduced as his embassy "driver" The driver is a Russian who has worked for the
 Gennadiy Sevastyanov was actually a Russian agent working under diplomatic cover as an attaché in the cultural division of the Soviet Embassy . He was a thirty-three-year-old Russian agent . He worked as a cultural attaché for the embassy .
 Two days later Volodya met his brother again at a bus stop in Arlington, Virginia . The two men met again at the bus stop on the same day .
 The entire scene was filmed by the FBI with a sixteen-millimeter movie camera . The FBI used the camera to film the scene of the shooting .
 Volodya tried to persuade his brother to stay at the CIA but to work for the Russians . The three men drove to a restaurant, where Volodyas tried to convince his brother not to stay . The men then drove to the restaurant where they met again .
 Sevastyanov made the same proposal, and promised that later on he could return to his homeland and be well taken care of . The Russian president also promised that he would be well cared for by his homeland .
 Sevastyanov gave the CIA man a password and other instructions for clandestine meetings . Sevastyyanov also gave him instructions for secret meetings with the CIA .
 Volodya THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((202) was allowed to return to the Soviet Union on May 4 . He was regarded by the FBI as a helpless pawn in the Soviet operation .
 Since 1950 a total of thirty-four Soviet and seventeen Communist-bloc diplomats have been expelled from the United States for a variety of reasons . Since 1950, the number of diplomats expelled has risen from the U.S.
 Many of the espionage efforts of Soviet agents operating as diplomats seem bumbling and amateurish . Like Sevastyanov’s activities, many of the spy efforts of the Soviet agents were bumbling .
 By contrast, Soviet “illegals’’—spies operating under deep cqgver-— are skilled experts and therefore much harder for the FBI to detect, the author says . The author says, “By contrast, the Soviet ‘illeg
 They slip into the U.S. with false documents, pass for ordinary Americans, and enjoy no embassy protection . They slip in the country with false papers and pass with ordinary Americans .
 The FBI’s counter-espionage work is concentrated within the continental United States . The FBI is working in the continental U.S. to counter-spionage efforts .
 The bureau operated in the Western Hemisphere and cracked Nazi espionage rings in South America during World War II . Counter-espionage and espionage abroad became the province of the CIA and military intelligence organizations after the war .
 Contrary to popular belief, the FBI does have some agents overseas . The FBI does not have agents in the U.S.
 The FBI had 14,239 employees in 1964, but its budget of $146,900,000 ranked it as one of the smaller units of the Invisible Government . The FBI's counterespionage work is vital to national security .
 Bureau of Intelligence and Research INR is really misnamed, in the view of one of its former directors, Roger Hilsman . InR is the State Department's intelligence agency, he says .
 It is, in a real sense, not really an intelligence agency as you think of the word and it does not collect as such . It is not really a real intelligence agency, it is not a collection agency, says Mr Snowden .
 The Secret Elite (203) has functions relating to the intelligence community . It has functions related to the CIA .
 INR relies upon the information of others—the diplomatic service, the CIA, the military attaches and the published documents and maps of foreign nations . As Hilsman indicated, INR .
 INR analyzes this information for the use of the Secretary of State and the other branches of the intelligence community . The INR analysis is conducted by INR at a cost of $1.5 billion .
 USIB's main function is to make sure that the final intelligence estimates reflect the political, social and economic facts of life, as seen from the State Department's viewpoint .
 The absence of cloak-and-dagger in INR is reflected in the fact that it is the only member of USIB whose intelligence budget is part of the public record . INR has the highest intelligence budget in the USIB .
 It produces over 16,000 pages of social, political, economic and biographic analyses each year . The social, economic, and political analyses are produced by the National Institute of Public Studies .
 By its own estimate, 40 to 60 percent of the raw data for these analyses come from diplomatic reports of U.S. embassies abroad .
 INR makes use of the scholarly output of the universities and commissions a study by the academic community . INR also commissions a review of the work by the academics .
 INR, the FBI, the AEC and the intelligence branches of the military services represent the lesser agencies of the Invisible Government . INR and the FBI are the lesser government agencies .
 The National Security Agency may be the most secretive branch of the Invisible Government . The agency has been accused of spying on Americans .
 Even more than the CIA, the NSA has sought to conceal the nature of its activities . The NSA has also sought to hide its activities from the public eye .
 The CIA’s functions were revealed in general outline by Congress in the National Security Act of 1947 . Congress in 1947 outlined the CIA's functions in a general outline .
 The NSA’s duties were kept secret in the classified presidential directive which established the agency in 1952 .
 NSA is the nation’s codemaking and code-breaking agency . Nevertheless, it is no secret that it is the NSA . The NSA is also known as the nation's code-breaker agency .
 "It is impossible, however, to receive official confirmation of that obvious fact," says CNN.com.com .
 NSA officials have refused to grant interviews under any circumstances . Duiles and other high-ranking CIA men have occasionally talked to the press and on television .
 As a sub-agency of the Defense Department, the NSA is watched over by the deputy director of defense research and engineering . The NSA is under the watch of an official who oversees the NSA .
 The White House has been largely uncommunicative in recent years . But it's not the first time the president has been in charge of the White House . It's a job that's not always easy to ask for answers from the public .
 During the Eisenhower years, the job of overseeing the NSA was held by military men . The NSA was once overseen by the military .
 Kennedy and Johnson Administrations turned to civilians with broader scientific expertise . Kennedy administration turned to civilian scientists to fill gaps in scientific knowledge .
 Fubini was confirmed by the Senate without difficulty despite a challenge from Senator Thurmond, a South Carolina Democrat . The Senate confirmed the nominee without difficulty .
 Thurmond questioned Fubini on his political affiliations in Italy prior to his emigration to the U.S. in 1939 . Thurmond also questioned him about his political affiliation in Italy before emigrating to the United States .
 Fubini admitted that he had been a dues-paying member of the GUF, the Fascist student organization in the universities . But he explained that membership was “almost a compulsory thing” in Mussolini’s Italy, and that he finally left his homeland in
 Fubini made it clear, to Thurmond’s evident relief, that he had never been associated with Communist or Socialist movements . Thurmond said he was proud of his achievements in his career .
 He rose to become the vice-president of the company . He worked on several classified electronic projects and rose to be the vice president .
 By the time he joined the Pentagon in 1961 he was thoroughly impressed with the need for tight security . He was impressed by the need to tight security.
 He became convinced that a mass of vital national secrets was being given to the Russians through careless public disclosure, he says .
 Fubini and his staff maintained a long list of security violations which appeared in the press and elsewhere . The former president of the U.S. State Department of Homeland Security has been accused of numerous violations .
 Defense Secretary McNamara and his deputy, Roswell Gilpatric, made public statements . McNamara was secretary of defense and secretary of state at the time .
 Fubini felt his bosses were sometimes imprudent about national security . In their zeal to defend administration policy, he said McNamara’s television extravaganza after the Cuban missile crisis .
 Fubini’s dedication to security was matched by the agency he inherited . He was the first chief of the Homeland Security Agency to be named .
 The NSA’s U-shaped, three-story steel-and-concrete building at Fort Meade, Maryland, is surrounded by a double barbed-wire fence ten feet high .
 The fences are patrolled night and day, and guards with ready machine guns are posted at the four gatehouses . The gates are guarded night and by day and by night .
 The interior, including the longest unobstructed corridor in the world, is similarly patrolled . The interior of the world is also patrolled by security forces .
 The building is 1,400,000 square feet, smaller than the Pentagon but larger than the CIA’s Langley headquarters . The building was built in the 1980s and 1990s .
 It houses highspeed computers and complicated radio and electronic gear . The site is home to a range of high-tech computers, radio and electronics .
 It is said to have more electric wiring than any other building in the world . It is also said to be the largest building in history to have electric wiring .
 A German-made pneumatic tube system shoots messages at the rate of twenty-five feet a second . Special security conveyor belts carry documents at the . rate of a hundred feet a minute . A German made version of this article has been published by The Guardian .
 The NSA headquarters was built at a cost of $30,000,000 and was opened in 1957 . It was built in the 1950s at a total cost of nearly $30 million .
 The hospital contains a complete hospital, with operating rooms and dental offices . It contains operating rooms, operating rooms .
 It also houses eight snack bars, a cafeteria, an auditorium, a bank and a bank . It is the first time a bank has been opened in a public building .
 They are subject to lie-detector tests on application and intensive security indoctrination on acceptance . They are also subject to lying detector tests and indoctrination .
 The indoctrination briefing is repeated and employees are required to sign statements that they have reread pertinent secrecy regulations . Periodically, the indoctrination briefings are repeated .
 The NSA has had more than its share of trouble with security violations . Even so, the NSA has been accused of numerous security breaches .
 In 1960 two young mathematicians, William H Martin and Bernon F Mitchell, defected to Russia . In 1960 Martin and Mitchell defected from the UK to join Russia .
 Twenty-six other NSA employees were found to be homosexuals . The resignment of the personnel director led to the firing of others for sexual deviation .
 The legislation was introduced by the UnAmerican Activities Committee . Secretary of Defense was authorized to fire NSA employees without explanation and without appeal if he decided they were security risks .
 The bill also required a full field investigation of all persons before they were hired . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives on Tuesday .
 Democracy itself is a dangerous form of government and in its very danger lies its strength . Democracy is a form of state of government that is dangerous, dangerous and dangerous . Democracy's strength is its strength, says David Cameron .
 The protection of individual rights by the requirement of due process of law, which has long endured in this nation of ours, is a radical and dangerous idea in most of the world today today . It's a radical, dangerous idea, says President Obama .
 The National Security Agency plays so highly specialized a role in the defense and security of the U.S. that no outsider can actually describe its activities . The agency's activities are so specialized that it's impossible to describe .
 They are guarded not only from the public but from other government agencies as well . They're guarded by the public and by other agencies, including the public .
 In 1954 Joseph Sydney Petersen was tried and convicted on charges of misusing classified NSA documents . Petersen was convicted of using classified documents in 1954 . Petersen's trial was held in 1954 and he was convicted .
 The Dutch Embassy in Washington admitted it exchanged ‘secret intelligence’ with Petersen on the assumption that he had acted with the knowledge of his superiors . Petersen was found guilty of acting on behalf of the Dutch Embassy . The embassy said Petersen acted on the advice of the embassy .
 In 1959, Khrushchev bragged that he had obtained top-secret American codes and intercepted messages from President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Nehru . During his visit to the U.S. in 1959, he bragged he had intercepted Eisenhower's messages .
 Your agents give us the code books and then we send false information back to you through your code . Your agent gives us a code book and then sends it back to us via your code book . We are sending false information to your agent, and we are sending it back through our code
 Izvestia published a letter from Victor Norris Hamilton, a naturalized American of Arab descent . Hamilton had sought asylum in the Soviet Union . Hamilton was naturalized in 1963 .
 Hamilton said he worked for a division of the NSA which intercepted and decoded secret instructions from Arab countries to their delegations at the U.N. He said he had worked for the NSA to decode secret instructions .
 Hamilton claimed UN Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge had sent a letter to the division thanking them for the information . Hamilton claimed he received a letter from the UN Ambassador to thank them for information .
 Army Sergeant First Class Jack E Dunlap committed suicide when he realized he had been discovered selling top-secret NSA documents to Soviet officials . He committed suicide after he was found out he had sold the documents to the Soviets .
 Dunlap reportedly received $60,000 during a two-year period for disclosing U.S. intelligence on Russian weapons advances, the deployment of their missiles and troops . Dunlap received similar information about NATO countries .
 The playboy sergeant had a wife and five children . He spent the money on several girl friends, two Cadillacs and frequent trips to the race track .
 Most of it was indirectly confirmed by the Pentagon in its contradictory statements on the case . The House UnAmerican Activities Committee issued a public report stressing the seriousness of the defection .
 The Office of Production attempted to break the codes and ciphers* and read the messages of the Soviet Union, Communist China, other Communist countries, U.S. Allies and neutral nations . Ciphers were used to decipher messages from Communist countries .
 The Office of Research and Development carried out research in cryptanalysis, digital computing and radio propagation . The Office's research was carried out in the UK .
 The Office of Communications Security produced U.S. codes and tried to protect them . It has produced United States codes for decades .
 The Office of Security investigated NSA personnel, conducted lie-detector tests and passed on the loyalty and integrity of employees . And the office of security passed on loyalty and loyalty .
 NSA provided code machines to other nations and intercepted their messages . NSA intercepted messages on the basis of its knowledge of the construction and wiring of the machines . NSA also intercepted messages from other nations .
 The NSA gathered its raw information through more than 2,000 intercept stations around the world . The NSA gathers its raw data through intercept stations across the globe .
 NSA sent eavesdropping equipment along on flights by the U-2 and other aircraft over the Soviet Union and over Communist China . In addition, the NSA also sent its eavesdropping . equipment on flights over Soviet Union .
 Separate flights, called ELINT missions, skirted Communist borders . They picked up the location and characteristics of enemy radar .
 The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((210 ” stations) uses letters or numbers for other letters . Ciphers use letters to replace numbers with numbers . The Invisible Government (210) stations .
 U.S. planes would play “foxes and hounds, feinting toward or into Soviet defenses so as to analyze the nature of the response on nearby radar screens and listening gear . The planes would feint their attacks on Soviet defenses to analyze their reaction on nearby U
 The Defense Intelligence Agency THE DIA owes its existence to the post-Sputnik “missile gap” controversy of the late 1950s . The DIA is the most powerful competitor of the CIA .
 The Soviets demonstrated the range and accuracy of their missiles in a series of spectacular space shots . The Air Force demanded that the United States embark on a massive ICBM program of its own .
 Almost weekly in the period between 1957 and 1960 the Air Force went before the U.S. Intelligence Board to argue that the Russians were deploying hundreds of ICBMs and tipping the military balance in their favor .
 The U-2 spy plane started to fly over the Soviet Union in 1956 . Air Force photo-interpreters duced scores of pictures taken by the plane .
 Allen Dulles relied on the independent interpretation of the photos by the CIA’s Research Division . Two thirds of the Air Force estimates were based on the photos, he says .
 USIB’s meetings were dominated by long and bitter arguments over the conflicting missile estimates . USIB's meetings dominated by bitter arguments about the conflicting estimates .
 Each service tends to adopt a self-serving party line and pursue it relentlessly, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 At budget time each year each year, the Air Force would see endless numbers of Soviet missiles and bombers . The Navy would detect the latest enemy submarines just off the East Coast . The Army would mechanize a few dozen more Russian divisions .
 USIB and the civilian leaders of the Pentagon were anxious to find some mechanism for resolving the conflict . Overwhelmed by the constant bickering, the Pentagon was anxious for a solution .
 Joint Study Group was set up in 1959 to conduct a sweeping investigation of the intelligence community . They turned the problem over to a Joint Study of the Intelligence Community . They were set up to conduct an investigation into the CIA's intelligence operations .
 The group was composed of military men, active and retired, and career intelligence officials in the State Department, the Defense Department and the White House . The group is comprised of military and intelligence officials .
 A polio victim who was confined to a wheel chair, Kirkpatrick was often spotted overseas . Kirkpatrick often seen overseas, pursuing his many investigations .
 Joint Study Group submitted a comprehensive list of recommendations late in 1960 . Joint study group submitted a list of proposals late 1960s .
 The DIA was to serve as the arbiter of the conflicting service estimates . It was to present its findings to USIB as the final judgment of the Pentagon . The Pentagon says the findings will be presented to the USIB .
 The idea appealed strongly to Thomas Gates, Jr., the last Secretary of Defense in the Eisenhower Administration . Thomas Gates Jr. was a member of the Eisenhower-era Cabinet .
 When the Kennedy Administration took office in January, 1961, Gates forcefully urged McNamara to put the recommendation into effect without delay . Gates: "When the Kennedy administration took office, there was no delay"
 The Defense Intelligence Agency concluded that there was no foundation in the argument that the U.S. was lagging behind the Soviet Union in the production or deployment of ICBMs .
 The study convinced him of the dangers inherent in the fragmented intelligence operation at the Pentagon, he says .
 He saw great value in subordinating the service intelligence branches to a centralized agency directly under his supervision . The agency is now under the control of a central intelligence agency .
 Despite his many wrangles with the services, Dulles felt it was imperative that they continue to have a voice in the deliberations of the intelligence community . Dulles: "I think it's imperative that [intelligence] community members continue to be part of intelligence community"
 The CIA would be cut off from direct access to the facts and opinions developed by the military men . Then the CIA would rely on whatever information the DIA saw fit to give it .
 "Yes, the services have been guilty at times of analyzing intelligence from a parochial point of view," says Putin . Putin: 'Yes, yes, yes. Yes. Yes, yes'
 Other agencies of government are no less susceptible to self-serving judgments . But other agencies of the government are also susceptible to the self-seeking judgments .
 The function of USIB is to serve as a forum for all viewpoints, even extreme viewpoints, says USIB . USIB's function is to "serve all viewpoints," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: USIB serves as an outlet for "all viewpoints
 The Director of Central Intelligence, and through him the President, can arrive at comprehensive and objective assessments . Only then can the Director of Intelligence arrive at an objective assessment, the President .
 Dissent should be aired at the highest possible level and not suppressed outside the orbit of presidential observation . Dissent must be aired in the country's most powerful state of mind, says President Vladimir Putin .
 If the service intelligence branches were removed from USIB, the DIA would become the sole representative of the government's biggest producer and biggest consumer of intelligence .
 The DIA as an agency subordinate to a political appointee, the Secretary of Defense, would be more vulnerable to political influences than are the services which have a semi-autonomous status by law .
 Dulles was particularly worried about the possibility that the DIA would gain a monopoly over aerial reconnaissance . Dulles worried about possibility of DIA gaining a monopoly on aerial reconnaissance.
 The Defense Department controlled the reconnaissance equipment . Dulles feared that the DIA would be tempted to hoard the photographs produced by the equipment .
 During the U-2 era, the CIA had built up a skilled corps of THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (214 civilian photo-interpreters) The CIA would surely quit if the Pentagon monopolized aerial photographs . The CIA built up an elite corps of photo interpreters
 Without interpreters, the CLA would have no way to verify Defense Department estimates . The CLA has no way of verifying estimates .
 Pentagon control of aerial reconnaissance could result in Pentagon dominance of intelligence community . At a time when electronic espionage was bulking ever larger, it could be a time for electronic espionage .
 Dulles expressed his misgivings to McNamara, who responded with assurances that the DIA would be only a co-ordinating body . McNamara said it would not supplant the intelligence branches of the Army, Navy and Air Force .
 Some of Dulles’ advisers suspected that the Pentagon had covert ambitions for the DIA which were being suppressed temporarily for tactical reasons . Some of the Pentagon’s covert ambitions may have been suppressed temporarily, says Dulles .
 Lieutenant General Joseph F Carroll named as director of the Air Force . Carroll had been the inspector general of the air force . He has been in charge of the US Air Force since 2001 .
 Carroll started his career with the FBI and was a leading assistant of J Edgar Hoover at the time he moved to the Air Force in 1947 to set up its first investigation and counter-intelligence section . Carroll set up the first investigation into the first Air Force investigation in 1947 .
 CIA men delighted in pointing out that all of Carroll’s experience had been as an investigator and that he had no credentials as a foreign or military intelligence analyst .
 Major General William W Quinn, a former West Point football star, was named deputy director . Rear Admiral Samuel B Frankel, a Chineseand Russianspeaking expert on the Communist world, became the DIA’s chief of staff .
 Quinn was the G-2 for the Seventh Army in Europe during World War II . Quinn acted as personal courier for the information Dulles gathered in Switzerland on Nazi troop movements .
 McNamara authorized the DIA to provide “overall guidance for the conduct and management” of all duties retained by the individual services . The original list of functions seemed relatively modest, but an expansion of DIA's responsibilities was clearly implied .
 Parkinson’s Law was added to the DIA's list of Parkinson's Law domains . The DIA added to its domain in response to the inevitability of the law .
 By 1964, when the DIA became fully operational, it had more than 2,500 employees . The DIA was fully operational in 1964 .
 It had acquired 38,000 feet of Pentagon office space . It had submitted a request for a separate $17,000,000 building . The Pentagon had also requested a separate building .
 The Daily Digest was viewed by the CIA as duplicatory and competitive to its own Central Intelligence Bulletin . It had succeeded in eliminating the separate service intelligence publications and supplanting them with two own .
 The DIA had also supplanted the J-2, the intelligence staff of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, both on USIB and in supplying information to the Chiefs .
 It had replaced the services in the production of ‘order of battle” intelligence . Order of battle intelligence—estimates of the size and deployment of enemy forces .
 The DIA did so on request in 1963 when Kennedy wanted quick intelligence on whether the Guatemalan Army would be able to handle expected Communist riots . Kennedy wanted to know if Guatemalan army could handle expected communist riots .
 By 1964 the DIA’s control over military intelligence had expanded to such a degree that the services were reduced to providing technical information on enemy weapons, running the attaché system and collecting raw intelligence .
 Only a veto by President Johnson could prevent the DIA from becoming the sole military voice on the board . The DIA is currently the only military voice in the board of the U.S. Congress .
 John McCone took over as CIA director in November, 1961 . He must have found a glimpse of an occasional passing fawn a pleasant relief from the cares of office .
 As far as the eye can see, the rolling hills of Virginia’s Fairfax County surround the CIA building on all four sides . He could dine, if he chose, in utter isolation and complete quiet, twenty minutes and eight miles from downtown Washington .
 The Pentagon is bigger than the Pentagon, but that colossus is easily visible from almost anywhere in the capital . It's a bigger colossus, but it's easily visible to almost anywhere from anywhere in Washington .
 The CIA’s concrete headquarters is invisible, an architectural diadem set in bucolic splendor in the middle of nowhere . It is modestly veiled by a thick screen of trees .
 The advantages of a rustic retreat were extolled by Allen Dulles when he went before a House Appropriations Subcommittee in June, 1956, to seek funds for CIA headquarters .
 Three years later guests, in response to engraved invitations from Dulles, attended the cornerstone-laying ceremony . Guests were invited to the ceremony .
 Colonel Stanley Grogan, the CIA’s public information man at that time, handed out a press release . Colonel Grogan was a CIA official at the time .
 The fact that the CIA could send out public invitations to lay the cornerstone of its hidden headquarters reflects a basic split personality that plagues the agency and occasionally makes it the butt of jokes .
 Allen Dulles became the CIA director in February, 1953 . The agency was housed in a ragged complex of buildings at 2430 E Street in the Foggy Bottom section of the capital .
 Eisenhower and his brother Milton set out to visit Dulles . Eisenhower and brother Milton visited Dulles at the age of 60 .
 Even guides on sightseeing buses were pointing out the buildings as “the CIA,” he said . He had the printing-office sign taken down and one that said “Central Intelligence Agency” put up .
 When the CIA moved across the Potomac to its Langley home in 1961, the matter of secrecy still proved bothersome . The CIA moved to Langley in 1961 and the CIA was still shrouded in secrecy .
 The George Washington Memorial Parkway had been extended to the new headquarters at a cost of $8,500,000 . Large green and white signs pointed the way to the CIA from the parkway . The new headquarters will be located in New York City .
 Signs were erected to guide workmen to the site during construction . Originally, the signs were erected as a guide to workmen during construction.
 After CIA moved into the building, some of its officials felt there was no need to leave them up . After the CIA moved in, some officials felt it was no longer necessary to leave the photos .
 In their place, there was only a small green and white marker reading “Parkway,” with an arrow pointing along the highway, and “B.P.R.” The arrow pointing to the CIA turn-off was removed .
 No outsiders venture into the CIA anyhow unless they are on official business . No outsiders are allowed to enter the CIA, even if they are in the country .
 A CIA employee cannot tell his wife or mother-in-law to drop in on him . CIA employee can't tell his family or wife not to tell them to see him .
 Another example of the now-you-see-it-now-you don’t atmosphere surrounding the building is the way the CIA answers the telephone . The CIA has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Other government-agency switchboards answer with the name of their department . Other switchboards also answer with their department's name .
 Only a few officials can be reached by name; for most, the caller must ask for the extension he wants . For most of the call, the call goes by the name of the caller, and the number he wants is an extension .
 Despite the atmosphere of secrecy surrounding the building, a KGB agent trying to find the CIA headquarters would have no difficulty . CIA headquarters is located in a stateless state .
 He could drive to the nearest Amoco station and ask for a map of Washington, which clearly identifies the CIA site at Langley, D.C. He could use a map to find out where Langley is located .
 The Russian spy would not have to drive; he could get to the CIA from downtown Washington by taxi for $4.50 . On the other hand, the Russian spy wouldn't have to .
 He could make the trip for forty-four cents on a public-transit bus, as do hundreds of the CIA’s regular employees . Or he could make it for 40 cents on the bus .
 Buses leave at 7:12 A.M., 7:46 A.m. and 8:16 M.M. at CIA . Buses arrive at CIA thirty-four minutes later . Bus leaves at 7.12 a.m., 7.46 a.M,
 If the Soviet spy were a top “illegal,” as the Russians call their agents, he could check the Washington Post for a suitable location . The Washington Post is a good location for a top spy .
 In March, 1963, the paper carried a large advertisement for the Broadfalls Apartments in Falls Church, Virginia . The apartment complex was located in the town of Falls Church .
 Realtor applied to the local zoning board for permission to build apartment houses on his land . The CIA was planning to build apartments on the land .
 The CIA learned that from the fourth or fifth floor, residents would be able, with a spyglass, to look right into McCone’s picture window and read his classified documents . It was with a sense of growing horror that the CIA learned .
 Secretly, the CIA ordered the government’s General Services Administration to buy up the land in the area forthwith . Secretly ordered the GSA to buy the land, and it was bought forthwith by the CIA .
 They kept saying they didn’t know who wanted it or why it was wanted and that the only reason for taking it was that there was an established need for it . The only reason they took it was to take it, they said .
 The agency killed off the apartment-house project by buying up most of the land, but it finally permitted the doctor to keep his home . The agency bought up the land to buy the doctor's home .
 Under the agreement, the CIA can screen and reject anyone to whom he wishes to rent or sell . The agreement allows the CIA to rent, sell, rent or rent anyone he wants .
 In winter, when the leaves are gone, the CIA can be glimpsed through the branches from the Sterrett home . The Sterrett family's home is surrounded by the CIA .
 The CIA headquarters building has been a subject of some difficulty for the CIA from the outset . The headquarters building is located in the CIA's former headquarters building .
 When Bedell Smith was head of the CIA, he requested $30,000,000 for a new building . Smith requested the money for the CIA .
 The request was concealed in the budget the agency sent to Capitol Hill . To preserve security, it was concealed .
 $30,000,000 with no apparent purpose was cut out of the budget . Congressmen cut the money out of their budget .
 Not until after Dulles had become the director did Congress finally vote to begin planning and construction . Congress, in July, 1955, finally voted the funds to begin .
 The CIA's main headquarters was the E Street complex, which had been used by the OSS in World War II . The agency was scattered about in thirty-four buildings all over Washington .
 An elaborate system of couriers and safeguards were needed to shuffle papers back and forth with security . An elaborate security system was needed to keep papers in the hands of the government .
 The CIA estimated it would save $600,000 a year by eliminating time lost shuttling between buildings . The CIA said it would cut time lost to shuttle between buildings in a bid to save money .
 The Budget Bureau slashed this to $50,000,000 and Congress finally authorized $46,00,000 . The budget was originally set to be $100,000.000. The budget has now been slashed to $46 million .
 He foiled anyone who might try to compute precisely how many people worked at Langley . And he foiled any attempt to calculate exactly how many worked at the Langley.
 The CIA building has net floor space of 1,228,100 square feet . The standard amount of office space needed by a D.C. worker can be divided into the space needed to work in Washington .
 A ten-foot-high wire-mesh fence surrounds the entire CIA site in Langley . A visitor to the new headquarters turns off at the “B.P.R.” sign at Langley and comes shortly to the 10-foot high fence .
 Beyond the gate is a guardhouse, but a visitor who appears to know where he is going is waved through without having to stop and show credentials . Beyond the guardhouse is a gatehouse .
 A sharp left, and the building, still halfhidden by the trees, comes into view . The building is still half hidden by trees, but is still visible in the distance .
 Several hundred feet farther along, near the main entrance, the building emerges from the trees for the first time . Finally, several hundred feet further along, the entrance to the building is finally revealed .
 It is massive, grayish-white concrete, several stories high and cold in appearance . The concrete is several stories tall and cold and cold . It is the first concrete structure to be built in New York City .
 The windows are recessed and those on the lower floors are barred with a heavy mesh . The windows on lower floors of the building are barred from the view .
 A separate domed structure housing a §500-seat auditorium gives an almost Martian atmosphere to the grounds . Off to the right of the main entrance a separate dome structure houses a $500,000-seater auditorium .
 Dulles indicated that the space-per-worker figure can be much lower . However, as Dulles said, the space per worker figure is much lower than that .
 Based on these space-utilization figures, some 8,000 to 10,000 people would work at the CIA headquarters at Langley .
 In summertime, only the hum of the building’s air conditioners and the sound of crickets and birds can be heard . In the summer, only crickets, birds and crickets are heard .
 The building might be a hospital or a huge private sanitarium in the woods . The building may have been a hospital . It might also be a private hospital .
 Joseph Leiter, the son of a millionaire Chicago businessman, built a beautiful home half a century ago . He called it the Glass Palace and called it "Glass Palace" on this same site .
 He and his wife entertained lavishly and enjoyed the view of the Potomac . The couple were married in 1996 .
 There is still glass in the CIA’s concrete palace, but it is mainly on the second and seventh floors . The outside walls are formed by continuous windows .
 On the grounds, there are twenty-one acres of parking space for 3,000 cars . There are also 21 acres of space for three,000 vehicles .
 On the roof, there are $50,000 worth of special radio antennas . The antennas are a vital part of the CIA’s own world-wide communication system .
 Central control room is a central control room to which alarm systems are wired . Alarm systems in the CIA headquarters are wired throughout the building . The alarm system is controlled by an alarm room in a central room .
 Three security incinerators gobble up classified wastepaper . Security incinerators were built at a cost of $105,000 . The incinerators are used to burn classified waste .
 Inside the vast headquarters, a visitor can get about as far as the inscription in marble on the left wall . ‘And ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free.’
 A security escort takes him where he is going, waits until he is through and escorts him back to the front door . The escort is a security escort .
 There, just inside the airy lobby, a mammoth official seal with the words “Central Intelligence Agency” is set in the marble floor, with an eagle’s head in the center .
 Most of the doors to offices were closed and unmarked, giving the false impression of a virtually deserted building . As he walked through the corridors, the visitor might have noticed that .
 CIA headquarters is built in compartments like a battleship, the CIA headquarters . The Invisible Government is the CIA's most secretive state of government .
 An employee in one office would not necessarily know what was happening a few feet away on the other side of the wall . The wall is a wall that separates two offices .
 Among the building’s special facilities is a $200,000 scientific laboratory . The lab is where the CIA perfects some of its miniaturized weapons, invisible inks, special explosives and other devices .
 The CIA's electronic “brain’s” stores and retrieves the mountains of information that flow into Langley . Langley's electronic "brain" is one of the really spooky instruments at Langley, the CIA's biggest .
 A desired document is flashed in front of the CIA viewer by means of a photo tape robot called Intellofax . The robot is used to flash a desired document to the viewer .
 The CIA collects 200,000 newspapers, books and other “open” material each month . The agency collects the vast amounts of classified data that come into the CIA .
 When a CIA man wants a particular item, be it a speech or a top-secret report on Khrushchev’s health, he feeds into WALNUT a list of key words about the subject .
 The brain finds the right microfilmed document and photographs it with ultraviolet light . Brain finds right document and photos it using ultraviolet light to find it .
 The CIA has also been experimenting with another brain called Minicard developed by Eastman Kodak for the Air Force . The CIA is also experimenting with a brain developed by Kodak .
 The CIA also has a special spy-fiction library, which it does not advertise . The CIA has a library of spy fiction, but it doesn't advertise .
 This library contains thousands of past and current mystery and spy stories . This library includes thousands of stories from the past and present .
 CIA makes a point of keeping up with the latest tricks of fictional spy heroes . It should please fans of Ian Fleming and Helen MacInnes .
 U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers continued to work for the CIA at Langley . After his release by the Russians, Powers continued working for CIA . Intermarriage is not unusual .
 Downey, the mother of a seven-year-old girl, was said to have resigned from the CIA to become Mrs. Downey . Downey is said to be a mother-of-one .
 In Washington, a highly social city given to much partying and mixing of many diverse circles, few CIA men are casually encountered .
 In bygone years, CIA employees were barred from admitting where they worked . CIA employees are no longer allowed to admit where they work .
 Overt employees are permitted to say where they work, but not to a foreign national . Nowadays, overt employees are allowed to say they work in the U.S. without revealing their location .
 The CIA is constantly facing little problems that no other agency faces, says CIA director . "The CIA constantly faces little problems," he says . "No other agency has a problem like this," he adds .
 For example, suppose an agent in the Clandestine Services breaks his arm in the line of duty . The agent's arm is an example of an agent breaking his arm .
 Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, which built the U-2 and along with NASA served as a front for the CIA, announced Powers had taken “a routine test pilot job” with Lockheed at Burbank, California, in November 1962 .
 After the U-2 was shot down in May, 1960, both NASA and Lockheed announced that Powers was a civilian pilot employed by Lockheed . Powers was the pilot of the U.2 .
 He was flying for the CIA under a $30,000-a-year contract he had signed with the intelligence agency in 1956 .
 The CIA was created after the CIA was established in 1961 . The agency was created in response to the CIA's creation of the CIA . The CIA says the agency's creation was a result of a lack of oversight .
 When agents were hospitalized, Group Hospitalization had to know who they were . Group Hospitalized had to include agents who had been hospitalized .
 Mutual of Omaha waived paperwork on ailing spies . Mutual agreed to waive the paperwork on spies . The spy agency says it was a good business partner .
 CIA employees are not technically under Civil Service . They qualify for the government’s normal retirement provisions . Their pay is equivalent to those in Civil Service and they qualify for retirement benefits .
 In 1963 McCone asked Congress to set up a better retirement system for his top people . The system was similar to that of that of the State Department’s Foreign Service .
 In 1964, Congress passed a law allowing high-ranking agents with twenty years of service to retire at age fifty . Later, in 1964, a law was passed that allowed agents to retire age 50 . The law allows agents with more than twenty years' service to be retired at age 50
 CIAR, as the pension plan was called, will cost an estimated $4,000,000 by 1969, or $900,000 a year . The CIAR pension plan will cost around $4 million by 1969 .
 The Armed Services Committee says many CIA employees serve under conditions more difficult than those of the FBI and other agencies . The measure was approved by the Armed Services committee .
 The agency tries to select students standing near the top of their class . The agency says students must be standing at the top .
 CIA stays quietly in touch with college deans and hires most of its research analysts this way . CIA stays quiet in touch and hires them to research analysts . CIA says it hires most research analysts in secret to keep up with colleges .
 On every large campus there is usually someone who serves secretly as the CIA’s talent scout . The CIA's talent scout is a secret CIA operation .
 At Yale, for example, during the early 1950s, it was Skip Walz, the crew coach . At Yale in the mid-'60s, he coached the crew team .
 John Downey, who was imprisoned by Communist China in 1952, was recruited off the Yale campus in 1951 . Downey was recruited by the Communist Party of China .
 The booklet’s cover, in yellow, red, brown, violet and white, portrays a handsome young man with jaw on hand, pondering his future .
 Of this 20 percent, about 11 percent are screened out because they drink too much, talk too much and have relatives behind the iron curtain . For serious security reasons, 4 percent of this 11 percent is screened out for serious reasons . About 11 percent of those screened out are people who have
 The polygraph is standard equipment at the agency and all new employees take the test . All new employees are required to undergo the test at the federal government .
 I know of people who have said they didn’t for various reasons want to take the lie-detector test, and they have not been dismissed or terminated for that reason . “I know of . people who said they did not want to test,’s not
 "The general rule is that they take the test. But generally when people come on board, they take it very carefully," says the CEO .
 Criticism that the CIA is an ‘Ivy League’ institution is only partially accurate . The CIA is not an Ivy League institution, but it is an important institution, the author says .
 The top twenty executives have always been largely from Ivy League colleges . This is not true of the agency generally . The agency's top 20 executives are largely Ivy League college educated .
 This is not surprising in the agency that devotes a major portion of its efforts to research and analysis . The agency has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 The CIA publishes its own digest-sized magazine, the most exclusive magazine in the world . To satisfy the interests of its scholarly employees, the CIA publishes a digest-size magazine . The magazine is the world's most exclusive .
 The CIA magazine was begun because the CIA has so many former professors who, for the most part, cannot publish on the outside . The magazine was started because of the CIA's reliance on former professors .
 It has studies of current interest in the field, in this case, intelligence .
 There is an attempt to treat on a high academic level such as how to keep a double agent from being tortured and shot by the enemy .
 The article was a study of Captain Stephan Kalman, a Czech Army officer who betrayed secrets to the German High Command . He was caught and hanged in 1936 .
 He can use an intermediary in order to retain some control, especially with respect to his own identity . He can also use the intermediary to keep some control of his identity .
 He can send a messenger, make a phone call, or establish a radio contact . He can also establish contact with a friend or family member via a messenger .
 One conclusion derives from positive and negative aspects of the Czech performance with respect to security . One conclusion is that Czech security has improved in recent years .
 There is no place for laxness, even if it may seem overbureaucratic and ridiculous . Security applies on every echelon of command, says CNN.com.com .
 The application of security measures has to be executed precisely in every detail, says the head of security at the centre of the world's biggest security breach .
 Intelligence Articles’ academic objectivity leaves something to be desired . A discerning CIA reader might come to suspect that .
 The CIA reviewed a book* that presented ideas about foreign policy not at all to the liking of the CIA reviewer . Another excerpt worth quoting in this respect is from the magazine’s review of a book*.
 If the CIA has its cloistered advantages for the scholar at Langley, there are hazards for agents in the field . The CIA has some advantages for agents, but there are also hazards for them .
 Some of the CIA’s clandestine employees crack under the pressure . The CIA's clandestine workers crack under pressure .
 One deputy director drove himself so hard he had to be transferred to a less demanding post overseas . Another deputy director was transferred to an overseas post .
 The agency has a fairly high rate of suicides, which usually get little attention outside of the D.C. newspapers . The agency is known for its high suicide rate .
 In October, 1959, a thirty-two-year-old CIA employee and his wife, just back from a two-year tour of duty in Germany, jumped into the Potomac River rapids in a suicide pact . In October 1959, for example, a 32-year
 The CIA man, James A Woodbury, drowned, but his blond wife was pulled out of the water . The woman was pulled from the water, but her blond wife survived . Woodbury drowned in the accident .
 Under 1947 law they can be fired by the director “in his discretion” with no appeal . Under the 1947 law, the director can fire them in his discretion . They can also be fired in his own "in his own discretion"
 In at least one instance, this led to a series of embarrassing disclosures about the agency’s operations and personnel . This led to an embarrassing disclosure of operations, personnel .
 On January 30, 1961, Dulles fired a veteran CIA intelligence officer and contact specialist named John Torpats, who then went into Federal Court seeking reinstatement . The veteran CIA contact specialist went to Federal Court to be reinstated . He then went back to the CIA .
 Dulles wrote that “George B Carey,” an assistant director of the CIA, had notified “Emmet Echols” the director of personnel, that Torpats was allowed to discuss his case with “Ralph Poole” and �
 The mission reports were considered to be unsatisfactory in our component . The mission report was considered unsatisfactory by the crew .
 My superiors felt that I could handle the problem more effectively and expeditiously and decided to send me to do it . I was sent to handle it more effectively, and I did it .
 The principal figures in this particular mission were Mr Tracy Barnes, Mr Thomas Parrott and Mr Paul Losher . Mr Barnes and Mr Losher were the principal figures .
 At the time of my separation, Mr Barnes and Mr Parrott were employed by the Agency in the Washington, D.C. office .
 I was given no special instructions before I left; I was to be on my own, he says . I was not told what to do, but I was told to be 'on my own'
 The mission had sent a report on the problem which I later proved was incorrect . The mission later proved that the report was incorrect, and it was later proved wrong .
 Had the mission report been followed, it would have done incalculable harm to the U.S. Had it followed, the report would have been harmful to the United States, the author says .
 The ousted CIA man detailed a long history of his case as it dragged on through the agency bureaucracy for several years . He detailed the case in a lengthy letter to the CIA .
 He said he was transferred out of the Clandestine Services and eventually fired . He was transferred from Clandestine services to be fired from the military .
 Dulles angrily filed an answer to Torpats on July 2, citing an old Civil War case to support his contention that employees of secret services cannot air their grievances in court .
 The Torpats, Dulles said, “understood that the nature of his work was secret,” he said . Torpat understood that the disclosure of his duties and the names of fellow employees would not be in the best interest of his government .
 CIA employees can go into court every time they feel they are THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT, says Dulles . It would be no way to run an espionage apparatus, he says .
 Eisenhower voiced a similar sentiment when he spoke at the cornerstone-laying at Langley on November 3, 1959 .
 Richard M Bissell received a secret intelligence medal honoring him for his years as deputy director for plans . Bissell was eased out after the Bay of Pigs, but received a top intelligence medal .
 Bissell was not allowed to talk about his medal, to show it to anyone or to wear it . Bissell received no public announcement of the award, and Bissell is allowed to wear the medal . There was no announcement of his award .
 Church had stumbled on some information which he thought John McCone ought to have immediately . Church was shocked to discover that he had stumbled upon some information he thought he should have .
 Three and a half hours later a bedraggled and distraught page returned to Church’s office . The page was returned to the office three hours later .
 He reported that he had fallen into the hands of CIA security police, who had questioned him at length about what he was up to . He said he had been taken into custody by the CIA security forces .
 The Senate messenger, like most Americans, never got a peek inside CIA headquarters . The agency's operations are not a total mystery .
 It is possible to piece together a fair idea of its internal workings, and organization, as well as the techniques and methods it uses both at home and abroad . It is also possible to pieces together an understanding of its methods .
 The CIA is the biggest, most important and most influential branch of the Invisible Government . The Invisible Government is the most powerful and most powerful branch .
 Intelligence, Plans, Research, Support, Support are each headed by a deputy director .
 The CIA devises the CIA’s special codes, which cannot be read by other branches of the government . The codes are designed by the CIA, which can't be read .
 It provides expert assessments of foreign advances in science, technology and atomic weapons .
 It was responsible for analyzing the U-2 photographs brought back from the Soviet Union between 1956 and 1960 . The U.2 photographs were analyzed by the U.S. Air Force in 1960 .
 It has continued to analyze subsequent U-2 and spy-satellite pictures . The U.S. government has also analyzed U.2 images .
 In this it works with the DIA in running the National Photo Intelligence Center . The DIA is also involved in running a photo intelligence center in Washington .
 Herbert “Pete” Scoville headed the Research Division for eight years . He left in August of 1963 to become an assistant director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency .
 The Plans Division is in charge of the CIA’s cloak-and-dagger activities . The plans division is responsible for the CIA's cloak and dagger operations .
 It controls all foreign special operations, such as Guatemala and the Bay of Pigs . It collects all of the agency’s covert intelligence through spies and informers overseas .
 He was succeeded as DDP by Frank Wisner, who was replaced in 1958 by Bissell, who, in turn, was succeeded in 1962 by Richard Helms . Bissell was succeeded by his deputy in 1962 .
 Helms studied in Switzerland and Germany and was graduated from Williams College in 1935 . Helms was born in St. David's, Pennsylvania .
 When some OSS men were transferred to the CIA, he stayed on and rose through the ranks . When the war ended, some of them were transferred into the CIA . He rose through ranks and became a CIA officer .
 Helms' counterpart as the deputy director for intelligence in the CIA hierarchy after the Bay of Pigs was also an ex-OSS man . Helms’ counterpart as . the deputy . for intelligence after the . Bay of . Pigs . was also the . deputy director .
 The Inner Workings (235 Township, Illinois, and was graduated from Harvard, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa Kappa . He was elected as president of the University of Illinois .
 Cline served for a period as liaison man with British intelligence, the most important of the sixty-odd foreign intelligence organizations with the CIA is linked .
 Cline ran the CIA operation on Formosa under the cover title of Director, United States Naval Auxiliary Communications Center, Taiwan . Before he was named the DDI, Cline was the Director of U.S. Navy Communications Center .
 Information Agency,* the Agriculture, Treasury, and Commerce f Departments, and the Agency for International Development, among others .
 Intelligence Division’s function is to take the mass of information available to it and ‘produce’ intelligence, that is, to draw up reports on the economic, political, social and governmental situation in any country in the world .
 Cline and his subordinates pride themselves on their independence and detachment from operational problems . Cline: "I'm not going to be in the military forever, but I'm going to get my hands on the ground"
 They maintain that they evaluate information flowing in from the CIA Plans Division on an equal basis with intelligence coming in from elsewhere in the government .
 Donald M Wilson, the deputy director of USIA, was asked by the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on February 21, 1963, to explain what type of contact USIA had with the State Department, the CLA and other intelligence agencies . They contend that they do not have any ax to *
 Commerce Department's Office of Technical Services agreed to serve as the channel . The CIA wanted to get translations of Soviet scientific and technical journals into the hands of American scientists .
 The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT has no vested interest or operation to protect and, therefore, that they produce the most objective reports of any branch of the government . The Invisible Government is the government's most secretive government .
 The most important of these reports are prepared, sometimes on a crash basis, by the Office of National Estimates . Sherman Kent, a sixty-year-old former Yale history professor, is long headed by Sherman Kent .
 Kent and his board turn out National Intelligence Estimates and, in times of crisis, quick reports known as Special National Intelligence estimates .
 The Department of State would draft the section on the political, economic or sociological development in a country or an area or situation . The Army would deal with ground forces, the Air Force with the air forces, and the Navy with the naval forces . The Joint Chiefs of Staff would deal
 Sherman Kent’s board generated its own studies and was under the jurisdiction of the deputy director for intelligence . Under Dulles, Sherman Kent's board generated own studies .
 One of the changes made by McCone was to bring the Board of National Estimates directly under his personal command . McCone made the changes to the board of national estimates .
 McCone controlled the frequency and subject matter of NIE reports . McCone then controlled the reporting of the NIE .
 The Inner Workings was a group to McCone and estimates were frequently rewritten at his direction . Estimates were often rewritten at McCone's direction .
 The NIE was then transmitted to the President as the estimate of the Director of Central Intelligence . The President was then informed of the estimate .
 The President is responsible for the intelligence operation, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "The end product goes to the President as the personal responsibility and personal estimate of one man"
 It is in this area that the structure of the Invisible Government is the most complex . The Invisible Government has been described as 'invisible'
 The Director of Central Intelligence is the ultimate arbiter of the vital security information, predictions and evaluations that are placed on the desk of the President . Intelligence is a vital part of America's national security .
 President Obama presides over branches of the intelligence community represented on USIB . But, as has been seen, he also heads the CIA, which is one of these branches .
 He controls not only the intelligence product of CIA but also the product of the entire Invisible Government . The Invisible Government is the result of the CIA's "invisible government"
 He is therefgre both umpire and player, the chairman of the board and a member of it . He is also chairman and member of the Cricket Australia Board .
 CIA also provides the President with a daily top-secret checklist of the major world crises . The President also receives a daily check-up of major crises in the world .
 Copies go to the Director of Central Intelligence and to the Secretaries of State and Defense . Copies of the book will be distributed to all of the world's intelligence agencies .
 Top-ranking men in the CIA’s Intelligence Division get to work at 3:00 A.M. to read the overnight cables and compile the checklist . The checklist is compiled by the CIA's Intelligence Division .
 During the Kennedy Administration, the checklist was presented to the President the first thing each morning by Major General Chester V Clifton, the chief White House military aide . The checklist was given to the president the morning of each day .
 Under President Johnson, McGeorge Bundy assumed the responsibility for the morning intelligence briefing . Bundy initially assumed the role of the intelligence briefings .
 President and three other recipients of the checklist can be reached instantly in an emergency . Special procedures have been established to assure that the President and the three others .
 Indications Center is manned twenty-four hours a day by representatives of the CIA, the Pentagon and the State Department . Indications center is manned by representatives from the CIA and Pentagon .
 Watch Committee meets once a week to survey crisis situations and, if necessary, to recommend an immediate convening of the Board of Estimates . It works under the guidance of a Watch Committee, which meets to discuss crisis situations .
 The power of the CIA deputy director for intelligence has been enlarged in another direction . Although that board no longer operates directly under the CIA, the power of his office has been increased .
 Ray Cline was the first DDI to be informed about the secret operations of the Plans Division . Cline is the first person to learn about the plans division's secret operations .
 The CIA had been rigorously compartmented in the interests of maximum security . The CIA was compartmented for maximum security, the CIA said .
 The agency’s left hand was purposely prevented from knowing what the right hand was doing . The agency's left hand had to be kept out of mind by the agency's hand .
 Intelligence Division would receive all of the covert information collected by CIA agents abroad . The Intelligence Division was kept in ignorance about all clandestine operations . Intelligence Division received all the information collected .
 In the parlance of the trade, all cloak-and-dagger schemes were “vest pocketed” by the Plans Division . Plans Division was ‘vest pocket’ by the plans division .
 Cline’s predecessor as DDI, Robert Amory, was never told in advance about the Bay of Pigs . Amory was never given advance information about the event .
 President Kennedy might have abandoned the operation if all of his intelligence advisers had not been sponsors of the plan . President Kennedy's intelligence advisers were devout advocates of the program, he says .
 He set up a three-man study group composed of Lyman Kirkpatrick, General Cortlandt Van Rensselaer Schuyler and J Patrick Coyne, former FBI agent .
 McCone instructed the Plans Division to keep the Intelligence Division updated on all its activites . The Intelligence Division was also instructed to keep a complete log log of all its activities .
 Intelligence Division received “sanitized’s reports (names of agents removed) on all current operations . Thereafter, the intelligence division received ‘sanitized reports’ on all operations .
 Intelligence analysts were in a position for the first time to contest the special pleading of the men who were running the operations . The intelligence analysts were thus in a place for the . first time .
 On the basis of the large pool of information available to them from all branches of the Invisible Government, they could recommend changes in or complete cancellation of doubtful schemes .
 Plans Division tends to attract activists and risk-takers, but Intelligence Division attracts academic and contemplative types . Intelligence Division also attracts academic types .
 In its political complexion, the CIA splits roughly along the lines of its major functional responsibilities . The CIA split roughly between its major functions and political objectives .
 The Inner Workings ((239 be liberal: they’re at home with people like Schlesinger and Bundy . They’ve been at home to people like Bundy and Schlesingers, Bundy, and Bundy.
 A frequent charge against the CIA, justified in part, is that it tends to support right-wing, military governments that it regards as ‘safe” The CIA has ignored more liberal elements that might, in the long run, provide a more effective hedge against Communism .
 Plans Division officials considered by colleagues to be by instinct and background more conservative than the pure intelligence analysts .
 It is the agents serving in foreign stations under the DDP, after all, who are most directly concerned in the field with the question of where to throw CIA support in a political situation .
 CIA also operates inside the U.S. in many locations and in many guises . The CIA's work is centered at Langley, the CIA's Langley headquarters .
 CIA has offices in twenty cities throughout the U.S. Although few Americans are aware of it, the CIA has an office in 20 cities across the country .
 Since the CIA was created to deal exclusively with foreign intelligence, the question might be raised as to why it has field offices across the U.S.
 The offices are needed to collect foreign intelligence domestically, says CIA officials . The answer is that the offices are located in Washington, D.C.
 The CIA operates under a number of classified directives issued by the National Security Council since 1947 . The CIA has been operating under the directives of the NSC since 1947.
 It is not unusual for the CIA to contact Americans about to go behind the Iron Curtain as tourists . It can also be obtained through Americans, business and professional men and American residents of foreign countries, who are naturally brought in touch with what is going on in those countries .
 Not every tourist is approached, of course, and many decline to get involved in high-risk amateur spying . Not all tourists are approached, however, and some are reluctant to take part .
 The agency also plants its own tourists behind the Iron Curtain, sometimes with disastrous results . In addition to approaching legitimate tourists, the agency also tries to approach legitimate tourists .
 Two Air Force veterans, Mark I Kaminsky and Harvey C Bennett, of Bath, Maine, were arrested while touring the Soviet Union . On August 25, 1960, they were arrested .
 Kaminsky denied any spying, said he had planned to write a book called The Soviet Union Talks Peace While Preparing for War . Kaminsky denies any spying and says he planned on writing a book .
 He was arrested and sentenced to eight years after the Russians charged he took pictures of military installations in Kiev . He was also sentenced to 8 years in prison after he was found guilty of photographing military installations .
 In February, 1962, James Donovan came within of freeing Makinen in the Powers-Abel exchange . Donovan came close to getting Makinen freed in February 1962 .
 Makinen remained in Vladimir Prison until October 12, 1963, when he was returned to the U.S. in a four-way trade . Makinen was sent to Vladimir Prison in 1963 in a trade deal .
 There are many other types of activities operating from the CIA’s twenty regional offices within the U.S.
 At least a few whiskers of this particular cat were peeping out of the bag when McCone testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee during hearings on his nomination .
 Later, Senator Richard B Russell, the Democratic chairman, and Senator Leverett Saltonstall, the Massachusetts Republican, attempted to smooth over the delicate and unpleasant question . The Invisible Government of the U.S. is the most secretive government in history .
 Our enemies are trying to seek to destroy us in every possible way, he says . They are appealing to all ethnic groups in any way they can get their hands on them, he adds .
 For a decade, a $100,000,000 fund was available for this type of activity . Actually, for a decade there was a . decade, there was . a . $100K fund . available for such activity .
 In 1961 Congress repealed the amendment at the request of the Agency for International Development . The amendment was repealed by Congress in 1961 .
 The CIA’s domestic field offices are also useful in obtaining intelligence from business firms that have extensive foreign operations . The CIA is also useful to obtain intelligence from businesses that operate abroad .
 The Inner Workings (243 universities; in turn the universities help recruit personnel) The Inner Worksings is based on the work of the universities .
 Universities provide a pool of expert knowledge about foreign countries upon which the intelligence agency can, and does, draw . Perhaps even more important, the universities provide experts on foreign countries .
 The agency has been able to obtain the services of almost all of the academic institutions and individuals it has approached . The agency was able to get the services from almost every academic institution and individuals .
 Harvard has refused to accept money for classified projects . Some of its faculty members have done research for the CIA by funneling their work through the nearby Massachusetts Institute of Technology .
 MIT Center has adopted many of the practices in effect at the CIA headquarters in Virginia . MIT Center was set up with CIA money in 1950, and is now based in Washington, DC .
 An armed guard watches over the door and the participating academicians must show badges on entering and leaving . The event is being held in honor of students and faculty members .
 The Center was founded by Walt Whitman Rostow, an economics professor who served in the OSS in World War II . Rostow also served as the chief of the State Department’s Policy Planning Staff in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations .
 In 1952 Max F Millikan, another economist, became the director of the Center after a twoyear tour of duty as an assistant director of CIA in Washington . Millikan became the Center director in 1952 after a tour with the CIA .
 Rostow and his colleagues produced a CIA-financed book, The Dynamics of Soviet Society, in 1953 . Rostow's colleagues produced the book, which has subsequently become standard procedure at MIT and elsewhere .
 It was published in two versions, one classified for circulation within the intelligence community, the other ‘sanitized’ for public consumption . The document is published in both classified and sanitized .
 One of Rostow’s subordinates at the Center was Andreas F Lowenfeld, who became a legal adviser in the State Department under Kennedy and Johnson . Rostow was Rostow's boss at the center .
 One of the dangers inherent in the liaison between the universities and the CIA is the opportunity it provides for Communist propagandists to question the intellectual objectivity and detachment of American scholars .
 Princeton's Cyril Black was accused by Communist Bulgaria of having acted as the CIA’s contact man with Ivan-Assen Khristov Georgiev, a Bulgarian diplomat who was shot the next month as an alleged spy for the United States .
 Black’s denial was not questioned by his colleagues . The incident, nonetheless, sent a shiver of discomfort through the academic community .
 There is evidence that the CIA subsidizes some foundations, cultural groups and a publishing house as well . The CIA has links to the academic community, according to the report .
 Most Americans are totally unaware of the CIA’s domestic activities . The Inner Workings (245) is published by The Washington Post .
 St. Louis—MA I 6902 New Orleans—JA 2 8874 Seattle—-JA 2 874 Seattle—MA 4 3288 Denver—388 4757 Minneapolis—FE 5 o811 .
 The CIA has other offices in some U.S. cities in addition to its listed ones . The CIA is based in Washington, D.C. and New York .
 In 1963, the CIA was operating as Zenith Technical Enterprises, Inc. In Miami, in 1963, its listed number was listed in Coral Gables . The CIA was in Miami, Miami, as well as in Miami .
 The CIA, the major tenant in the Boston building, insisted that the landlord insert a nondiscrimination clause into leases with all of his tenants . The CIA was the building's major tenant .
 In true Jan Fleming fashion, the CIA cover office listed no precise address—the university south campus is a big place . The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (246) was the CIA's cover office .
 It can be revealed, however, without imperiling national security, that the CIA has been operating from Building 25 . Building 25 is located in Building 25.
 The CIA is not simply an agency that gathers foreign intelligence for the U.S. in far-off corners of the globe . The point of all this is that the CIA isn't just an intelligence gathering agency, it's also a national security agency .
 Zenith, Double-Chek, Gibraltar Steamship and Vanguard in one city alone . It can and does appear in many guises and under many names .
 The foundation, cultural committee, the Cuban exile organization, the foreign-affairs research center, the distinguished publishing house specializing in books about Russia, the steamship company, the freedom radio soliciting public contributions, the innocent-looking consulting firm .
 Whether this state of affairs was intended by Congress when it passed the National Security Act of 1947, is another matter entirely . Whether Congress is even aware of those facts is another question .
 The CIA’s internal, domestic activities have only rarely surfaced to cause it embarrassment . The CIA's internal activities only rarely surface to cause embarrassment .
 At the time, Lattimore was under attack by Senator Joseph R McCarthy of Wisconsin . McCarthy was a Republican senator who opposed the reform .
 The Finnish-born defendant in the case, Harry A Jarvinen, worked for the Where-to-Go Travel Agency in Seattle .
 Jarvinen’s tip to the CIA reached the State Department on May 26, 1952 . The State Department issued a “stop order” barring Lattimore from leaving the country . Lattim Lassimore was arrested in June 1952 .
 The State Department apologized profusely to Lattimore after Jarvinen was indicted . Jarvinan was indicted in the indictment .
 Wayne Richardson and Miller Holland refused on security grounds to testify in Federal Court at Jarvinen’s trial . Three months later the two CIA agents involved refused to testify . Richardson and Holland, who were involved in the case, were both cleared of wrongdoing .
 Federal Judge William J Lindberg sentenced the two CIA men to fifteen days in prison for contempt of court . The CIA men were sentenced to 15 days in jail . The two men will be sentenced for contempt .
 The government, the judge noted tartly, had initiated a prosecution against a citizen with one hand and thwarted it with the other . The judge noted that the government had initiated the prosecution with the first hand .
 President Truman stepped in and ended the farce by issuing full pardons to Richardson and Holland . The two CIA men were sentenced to a stretch in Federal jail .
 Overseas, the CIA operates principally under embassy cover and commercial cover . Overseas operations are conducted under embassy and commercial covers .
 In several corners of the world the CIA operates what appear to be small business concerns but which are really covers . CIA operates businesses that appear to cover up to cover the CIA .
 No subject is touchier to the CIA than the question of cover, for cover is the ‘cloak’ in cloak and dagger, the professional intelligence man’s sine qua non . Cover is the "cloak in cloak, dagger, which is the professional
 In U.S. embassies across the globe, there is a restricted floor, or a section of the embassy, that houses the CIA mission . The CIA mission is located in a restricted area of the United States' embassies .
 Each mission is headed by a station chief with several intelligence officers reporting to him . The U.S. military says the mission is based on a mission from a local station chief .
 Officers recruit local “agents’s” to collect intelligence information . These officers in turn recruit local agents to collect information . Local agents are recruited by local police officers to gather intelligence .
 The CIA personnel are listed as State Department or Foreign Service officers . CIA personnel listed are State Department and Foreign Service personnel . The CIA is listed as a CIA contractor .
 The British and Soviet secret service mission chiefs are very seldom known . This is in sharp contrast to the British and . Soviet mission chiefs, whose identities are very little known .
 In the case of the CIA, agents below the level of station chief are usually less well known outside of the embassy .
 State Department employees usually come to know in fairly short order who the CIA people are, State Department officials say . State Department staff at the U.S. Embassy in Washington, D.C., say they're not surprised .
 The fact that the CIA operates under embassy cover is not something that the government discusses . Very occasionally, references to it pop up in unexpected places, however, .
 Everybody in town who had any interest in it knew who they were . "Their cover was so shallow that it was very easily seen through," she said .
 He had almost the entire CIA staff at his home for a party one night, and I was about the only non-CIA man there . He knew that they were all CIA and worked with them as such .
 The chief of the CIA section’ in the American Embassy in Havana was pro-Castro, testified before the same committee . “The Number 2 CIA man in the embassy” had encouraged a revolt of Cuban naval officers in Cienfuegos in September, 1957
 The CIA's Number 2 man in the CIA intended to convey that thought, he says . "I do not believe that the Number Two man in CIA intended that thought. I do believe that," he said .
 His story to me was that he had been called over to interview some men believed to be doctors because they were dressed in white coats . They wanted to know what the position of the United States would be, he said .
 Smith testified he repeated all this to Batista, The American ambassador’s efforts to explain to the Cuban dictator that the Number 2 CIA man in the embassy could not tell the difference between a Navy uniform and a medical white coat .
 Henry Pleasants, widely known as the CIA mission chief in Bonn, West Germany, was listed in the 1963 Biographic Register as an “attaché,” with “S-1” rank, meaning the highest category of Foreign Service staff officer . Ple
 Frank Wisner, the former CIA deputy director for plans for plans, ran the Guatemalan operation in 1954 . Wisner was listed as an “attaché” I THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (250) after he was sent to London as station chief on August
 The 1963 Biographic Register lists “govt. ser.-59” for Wisner, to account for the period prior to his London assignment . Wisner was a member of the British House of Representatives .
 Robert Kendall Davis, the Guatemala mission chief who set up the Bay of Pigs training camps, was listed as an “attaché” and later as “first secretary” of the embassy .
 He was carried on the State Department's rolls as a Foreign Service reserve officer . He also served as a reserve officer for the Foreign Service .
 William Egan Colby was listed as a “political officer” in 1959, and later as “first secretary” of the embassy . Colby served as the former CIA station chief in Vietnam .
 By 1963 he had shed his diplomatic cover and was back in Washington as the head of the CIA’s Far East division . He had shed diplomatic cover to head the CIA in 1963 .
 John H “Jocko” Richardson, who became the new CIA station chief in Saigon, was listed as “first secretary” of the embassy when he arrived there . Richardson served in Athens and Manila and Manila .
 The book grumbled bitterly about “spy diplomats” on the staff of the U.S. Embassy in Moscow . The book also grumbled about ‘spy’ diplomats on the United States Embassy staff .
 Russians ousted five Americans from the embassy in the sensational Penkovsky spy case . Two years later five Americans were ousted from the Russian Embassy in Moscow . The case was a sensational spy case involving the Russian spy agency .
 Oleg V Penkovsky was the deputy chief of the Soviet State Committee for the Coordination of Scientific Research, and very likely was also a colonel in Soviet military intelligence . He is believed to have been a colonel .
 At his show trial in May, 1963, he confessed passing 5,000 frames of exposed miniature-camera film, containing classified information about Soviet rockets and other secrets .
 The Inner Workings (251 bassy or Hugh Montgomery, the internal security officer. Hugh Montgomery). Hugh Montgomery was Hugh Montgomery's security officer . Hugh Montgomery is Hugh Montgomery’s personal assistant .
 If he found the charcoal circle it meant there was something ready to be picked up at the Pushkin Street drop . The circle was meant to be ready to pick up at a drop .
 According to the Moscow version, Richard C Jacob, the twenty-six-year-old embassy ‘archivist’ from Egg Harbor, New Jersey, would go to the radiator and retrieve the little package .
 The Russians also sought to link Penkovsky to Rodney W Carlson, the thirty-one-year-old assistant agricultural attaché at the embassy, and to William C Jones III,* .
 Wynne supposedly got the chocolates out of Moscow by giving them to the children of a British diplomat . Wynne supposedly gave them to children of British diplomat in Moscow .
 The Russians convicted Penkovsky and later announced he had been executed . The Russians executed him after he was found guilty .
 No fewer than twelve Americans and British diplomats were linked, one way or another, to a serious charge of espionage . London and Washington were exceedingly quiet about it all .
 The Russians ousted two embassy aides in October, 1962, just before the Penkovsky case surfaced publicly . They also ousted two aides to the Russian Embassy in 1962 .
 Commander Raymond D Smith, of Brooklyn, was assistant military attaché, and Kermit S Midthun, of San Francisco, first secretary .
 Smith was arrested in Leningrad on October 2, carrying a tiny tape recorder, a Minox camera and high-powered binoculars . Smith was also carrying a camera, a tape recorder and a camera .
 The Russians say he was photographing naval installations . The American Embassy says he was taking a walk in the park . The U.S. Embassy says it was just a walk .
 Midthun, forty-one, was accused on October 11 of having tried to get secret data from a Soviet official . The Russians also expelled five British diplomats in the Penkovsky case .
 The Kennedy Administration made some efforts to reduce the number of agents operating under diplomatic cover in U.S. embassies .
 If relations are severed between countries, or war breaks out, the CIA tends to be cut off from its sources of information . The CIA is often cut off by the loss of its sources, especially from countries involved in conflict .
 In January, 1961, when Washington broke off relations with Havana, the CIA lost its embassy base in Cuba . The CIA also lost its Cuban embassy base .
 CIA agents operating abroad under commercial cover pose, as the term implies, as legitimate businessmen, rather than as diplomats . CIA agents operate abroad under cover, as they pose as businessmen .
 CIA man in Washington told all his friends he was quitting the agency to go to Switzerland for Praeger books . Not long ago, a CIA man told friends he would quit the agency for a book publisher .
 Not all of his friends believed him. Very possibly he was telling the truth and was really leaving .
 A CIA officer operating overseas under embassy or commercial cover recruits “agents’s” locally to feed him information . A CIA agent in the U.S. recruits agents in the region to feed information to the CIA .
 Most valuable information often comes from the occasional defector from the opposition camp . The most valuable information comes from a trusted agent, but from a highly placed defector .
 The most useful defector is a Communist official who can be persuaded to stay at his job, at least for a while, and transmit intelligence to the West . A Communist official can also transmit intelligence .
 The most prized defector of all is one who works, or who has worked, in the Soviet intelligence apparatus . The most valuable defector is a former Soviet intelligence officer .
 A delicate aspect of the CIA’s work is the care and protection of its colony of important defectors who have fled the Communist world . The CIA's work is to protect and protect those defectors, writes John Avlon .
 Until Cuba was expelled from the OAS in January, 1962, the number of high-level valuable de-joint members of the U.S. government was estimated to be at the highest level of intelligence .
 Others are given a new identity that, hopefully, will protect them in the U.S. from the long arm of KGB assassins . Some are given new identities to protect themselves in the United States . Others are also given new names to protect them from the KGB assassins.
 A resident of McLean, Virginia, near the CIA headquarters was intrigued when an obviously Russian family moved in across the street . Two huge dogs guarded the premises, and a chauffeur-driven car came to take the children to school every day .
 Not all stories of Soviet defectors under CIA protection come to happy endings, however .
 Reino Hayhanen, a lieutenant in the KGB, entered the United States under the name Eugene Maki, in 1952 . He became an assistant to Rudolf Abel, the Russian master spy who posed as a mousy photographer-artist in Brooklyn under the alias of Emil R Gold
 After Abel’s trial and conviction that October, Hayhanen dropped out of sight . After Abel was convicted, he disappeared from sight .
 The CIA gave him a new identity and kept him in a house in New England, guarded by a dog . The CIA kept him alive and gave him new identity .
 Two “lawyers’s” who lived next door were actually CIA bodyguards . Hayhanen lived in the same apartment as his CIA colleagues . Two "lawyers" who lived there were CIA body guards .
 He continued to imbibe heavily, which made the task of the CIA bodyguards an unenviable one .
 After the Bay of Pigs invasion, Attorney General Robert Kennedy wondered if there might not be some way to improve the CIA’s then sagging public image . Attorney General Kennedy wondered whether the CIA could improve its image .
 National BroadcastTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((254 ing Company) suggested a television program . Attorney General liked idea and ordered Hayhanen temporarily released to appear on show .
 In the interim, word spread around the intelligence community that Reino Hayhanen was dead . The CIA’s prize defector had been killed in a mysterious ‘accident” on the New Jersey or Pennsylvania Turnpike .
 The filmed NBC program was telecast, as scheduled, on November 8 . Nevertheless, the show was taped and aired on November 7 .
 Hayhanen’s face was “kept dark for his own protection,” David Brinkley, the narrator, said . The film is set to be shown in New York City .
 The CIA didn't ask NBC to tell its millions of viewers that they had just watched an interview with a dead man . The CIA definitely did not ask NBC, however, to tell viewers that it had just been an interview .
 Like any intelligence agency, the CIA employs methods and techniques that are not normally the subject of polite chit-chat . Like any other agency, it employs methods not normally subject to polite conversation . The CIA employs techniques and techniques not normally known to be used in public .
 These techniques include sex, money, wiretapping and the use of hidden microphones . The techniques include money, money and wiretapping .
 Profumo and the Soviet naval attaché, Captain Yevgeni Ivanov, shared Miss Keeler’s favors . It had also been disclosed that Profumo .
 At the time, the Powers-Abel swap was secretly in the making; the films may peewee have been shown to reassure the Russians that Abel was alive and well .
 Soviets have been known to use sex as a lure in espionage . Q Whether or not it is involved in the Profumo case, it is known to be involved .
 Russians accused Dulles of using voluptuous women CIA agents to seduce Soviet Olympic team at Melbourne, Australia, in 1956 . Four years earlier, the Russians had accused the CIA of seducing them at the Olympics .
 The paper implied that the Soviet athletes scorned the temptresses and stuck to their hammer-throwing and pole-vaulting .
 Money is used by the CIA, as it is by other intelligence services, to pay agents, and double agents . Money is also used to buy information, where necessary, and to pay double agents and agents .
 Money was no object when Dulles was hunting for Khrushchev’s secret speech in 1956 . Money was not a problem for Dulles when he was looking for the speech .
 CIA is a major purchaser of electronic listening devices and wire-tap equipment . CIA is also a major buyer of wire-tapping equipment . The CIA is believed to be a major source of listening devices .
 The most famous case involving such equipment was the CIA’s “Berlin tunnel,” a secret wire-tap installation in a tunnel that led from a mock U.S. “experimental radar station” across the border into East Germany .
 The Russians discovered the tunnel on April 22, 1956, and decided to try to recover some propaganda value from the CIA’s coup . The tunnel was discovered by the Russians in 1956 .
 The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (256 derground wire tap tap) turned it into a tourist attraction . Three photographs and a diagram of the tunnel appear in Caught in the Act .
 A few years ago, the Tass man was filing 1,000 words a day, attacking Washington’s policies in Latin America . In Montevideo, he was filing more than a million words per day . He says the man is now in the middle of a crisis in Latin
 The CIA persuaded the Montevideo chief of police to put taps on the telephones at the Soviet and Czech Embassies . The CIA also persuaded the police chief to tap on the phone taps at the embassies of both countries .
 Later the police chief quit; his successor was less friendly to the CIA and the game ended . The game ended when the CIA chief quit .
 A key turned in the door of a twenty-third-floor apartment in the Seguro del Medico Building in Havana’s fashionable Vedado Beach section on September 15, 1960 .
 Marjorie Lennox, a lovely twenty-six-year-old divorcée with shoulder-length blond hair, was alone in her apartment . Lennox is a divorcee and a divorced mother-of-two .
 They arrested her; she was accused of being a spy and ordered out of Cuba two days later . She was ordered to leave the country two days after her arrest .
 Lennox was expelled from Cuba . Havana arrested six other Americans and accused them of being members of a spy ring . She was accused of tapping the telephone wires of a Communist Chinese news agency .
 Also arrested were Robert L Neet, who the Cubans said was an employee of the American Embassy . Mr and Mrs. Neet were also arrested .
 On December 17, 1960, a military court in Havana held a oneday trial for the three “engineers” and Mario Nordio . The trial took place in Havana, Cuba .
 They were accused of setting wire taps in the Hsinhua office to learn about a trade treaty between Cuba and Communist China . They were also accused of trying to learn of the establishment of diplomatic relations .
 The prosecutor asked for thirtyyear prison terms for the four Americans . The prosecutor, Lieutenant Fernando Flores, asked for 30year prison sentences .
 The “engineers’ said they had been hired to repair some electronic equipment in Neet’s apartment . The apartment was located in the same building as the Communist Chinese news agency .
 On January 10, 1961, the three ‘engineers’ were sentenced to ten years each in prison . The three "engineers" received ten years in prison each for their involvement .
 U.S. Ambassador Philip W Bonsal had filed an angry formal protest over the arrest of Mrs. Mrs. Bonsal . United States Ambassador Philip . Bonsalsal filed a formal protest .
 He was silent about the three “engineers” and the dancing instructor, however, however .
 Washington was concerned that Carswell, who knew about similar electronic operations in other parts of the world, be turned over to the Russians for questioning . Washington was particularly concerned lest the high-ranking Carswell be turned .
 The release was arranged in April, 1963, by James Donovan, who had successfully "exchanged" the Bay of Pigs prisoners for drugs and food four months earlier . Donovan arranged the release in April 1963 .
 The State Department official who handled the matter, was perfectly well aware of this . The primary reason for Washington’s efforts was to get the three CIA men out, and Robert A Hurwitch, the State Department .
 Magdalena Urdaneto, a nine-year-old Venezuelan girl, was an innocent bystander . Molina killed the girl during the shooting brawl .
 Rockefeller, on the assurance of the Federal Government that he was acting “in the national interest,” released The Hook from the state prison at Stormville . Rockefeller was released from prison on behalf of the federal government . Rockefeller: "I was acting in national interest"
 Donovan brought back the Americans from Cuba in what amounted, in effect, to a straight swap of three saboteurs and a killer for three CIA men . They were flown from Florida to Havana as Donovan brought them back from Cuba .
 Unlike the other returnees, they would not tell the American Red Cross their destination . And for some reason, unlike the others, they wouldn't tell the Red Cross .
 The Search for Control to MAINTAIN the CIA and the other branches of the intelligence establishment, the government spends about $4,000,000 a year on the CIA .
 The exact figure is one of the most tightly held secrets of the government . It appears in none of the Federal budget documents, public or private, it appears in public .
 It is unknown, in fact, even to many of the key officials in the Invisible Government . The Invisible Government is unknown to many, including key officials .
 All of the budgets are pulled together by the director of the International Division of the Budget Bureau . Those in one branch find it difficult to estimate the budgets of the others .
 He is assisted by four experts, each handling about $1,000,000 of the Invisible Government’s money . The Invisible Government's money is made up of about $2.5 million .
 All of the Invisible Government’s hidden money is buried in the Defense Department budget, mainly in the multibillion-dollar weapons contracts, such as those for the Minuteman and Polaris missiles .
 Comptroller of the Pentagon knows where the money is hidden, but so carefully is it camouflaged, even his closest assistants are unable to guess at the amount . Even those at the very center of the Invisible Government vary in estimates of what is being spent .
 In a private briefing for high-ranking military men in the summer of 1963 McCone offered a figure of $2,000,000 . McCone estimated that 100,000 persons were involved in intelligence work .
 McCone appeared to be limiting his estimate to the money spent by the CIA and the other agencies on the more conventional forms of intelligence work . However, McCone appears to be limited to the amount of money spent on conventional intelligence .
 When the two forms of intelligence are included, the total budget reaches $4,000,000 . The personnel figure amounts to about 200,000. The total budget is about $4.2 million .
 It is often assumed that the National Security Council controls this vast intelligence establishment . It is also assumed that it controls the vast intelligence agency .
 In practice much of the activity of the Invisible Government is never examined at NSC meetings . The Invisible Government never discusses the NSC's activities at meetings .
 The Invisible Government is made by the committee known as the Special Group . The committee is responsible for the Invisible Government .
 The composition of the committee has varied slightly . Its membership has generally included the Director of Central Intelligence, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs and the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense .
 In Kennedy and early Johnson Administrations, McGeorge Bundy was the president's representative . Bundy was a key member of the Special Group . Bundy is a key figure in the Kennedy and Johnson Administration . Bundy served as the president of the U.S. in the early 1960s .
 The other members were McCone, McNamara, and Roswell Gilpatric, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and U Alexis Johnson .
 Soviet Secret Police Chief Alexander N Shelepin estimated in 1959 that the CIA spent $1,500,000,000 a year and employed 20,000 persons . On the other hand, Soviet Secret . Police chief Alexander N. Shelepins estimated in . 1959 that CIA spent .
 The Search for Control ((261) The Special Group was created early in the Eisenhower years under the secret Order 54/12 . It was created under the Order of the Secret Army under Eisenhower .
 It was known in the innermost circle of the Eisenhower Administration as the “54/12 Group” and is still so called by a few insiders . The group was known as the 54/12 group .
 Its existence is virtually unknown outside the intelligence community and, even there, only a handful of men are aware of it .
 The more grandiose of the Invisible Government’s operations have been launched in this exclusive arena . The Invisible Government has launched a series of operations .
 The United States is regularly committed to policies which walk the tightrope between peace and war . It is here in this hidden corner of the massive governmental apparatus that the U.S. is committed to .
 CIA men generally have the Special Group in mind when they insist that the agency has never set policy, but has only acted on higher authority . CIA men say they have never acted on the issue, but have acted on authority of higher authorities .
 Some decisions of this type have been made by the Special Group in an informal way without elaborate records and procedures of other high government committees . But, in fact, some decisions were made in a way without the elaborate records .
 President Obama has made decisions without benefit of outside analysis . The president's decision was made without benefit from outside analysis, he says .
 The OCB, the Operations Coordinating Board, was composed of the Under Secretary of State, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, the President's Special Assistant and the directors of CLA, USIA, and the old International Cooperation Administration . Little detached criticism has been brought to bear on the natural
 They were supposed to make sure the President’s decisions were carried out in their departments . They were meant to carry out their own decisions .
 President Kennedy abolished the OCB in his first month in office . The OCB was abolished by President Kennedy in March 1963 .
 Government embark upon ventures which might prove their toughness, demonstrate their vision or expand their power . The Invisible Government will embark on ventures to prove its toughness .
 Two presidential watchdog committees, the Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities of the Eisenhower Administration and the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board of the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, have had great difficulty getting to the bottom of the matter .
 Both committees were composed of part-time consultants who met only occasionally during the year . Both committees met only once or twice a year .
 The original committee had, in fact, been established by Eisenhower in 1956 at least partly to head off closer scrutiny of the Invisible Government .
 Hoover Commission recommended that such a presidential committee be established in 1955 . Hoover Commission had recommended such a committee be set up in 1954 .
 It had also proposed the creation of a Joint Congressional Committee on Foreign Intelligence . But it also had proposed the formation of a joint Congressional committee on foreign intelligence .
 Hoover Commission’s Intelligence Task Force, headed by General Mark W Clark, had submitted a much stronger recommendation . General Clark's recommendation was based on a report by the Hoover Commission's Intelligence Task force .
 It had proposed a single watchdog commission composed of senators, congressmen, and presidential appointees .
 By 1954 pressure had built up in Congress for a closer scrutiny of the intelligence community . By 1954 substantial pressure had been built on Congress to scrutinise intelligence .
 Mike Mansfield, then a freshman senator from Montana, submitted a resolution that would have carried out the Hoover Commission recommendation by creating a Joint Committee on the Central Intelligence Agency .
 In its final form, the resolution called for a twelve-man committee, six from Senate and six from House . The resolution calls for the appropriation of $250,000 for staff expenditures during the first year .
 The resolution was defeated by a vote of fifty-nine to twenty-seven . 14 of the sponsors had reversed themselves, and the proposal was defeated .
 Thirteen of those who had changed their minds were Republicans reflecting White House pressure . Thirteen Republicans who changed their mind changed their positions .
 Many Democrats who voted against the resolution clearly were worried about disturbing Senator Richard B Russell, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee, and other Democratic titans .
 Mansfield’s language was not calculated to please the conservative inner club of the Senate, which enjoyed special relations with the Invisible Government .
 Control of expenditures is exempted from the provisions of the law which prevent financial abuses in other government agencies . Control of its expenditures is exempt from the provision of the . law which prevents financial abuses is prohibited .
 There is a profound difference between an essential degree of secrecy to achieve a specific purpose and secrecy for the mere sake of secrecy . However, there is a fundamental difference between secrecy and secrecy .
 Some of the information gathered by the Central Intelligence Agency and laid before the National Security Council was so confidential and secret that the very portfolios in which it was contained were under lock and key .
 The members of the National Security Council were not even permitted to take those folders and portfolios to their homes . Members of the NSC were not allowed to take their portfolios and portfolios .
 Russell also raised the specter of critical national secrets leaking out of Joint Committee . Russell: National secrets could leak out of the Joint Committee without congressional approval .
 He insisted that the CIA was already subjected to adequate scrutiny by members of the Senate Armed Services and Appropriations Committees .
 The CIA’s view on whether there should be more Congressional scrutiny was stated officially in a letter to Mansfield from General Cabell on September 4, 1953 . The CIA's view was stated in the letter from Cabell, a CIA official .
 Much of the secret CIA hearings during Dulles’ tenure were taken up with mutual congratulations . In fact, he was such a good friend and great admirer of Dulles that much of the hearings during his tenure were held with mutual congratulation .
 CIA officials came armed with thick black volumes, but the other members of the House Subcommittee* never had time to probe deeply into the agency’s activities . The subcommittee never had any time to investigate the CIA's activities .
 Cannon’s absolute control over the committee could do little about it in view of his absolute control . Some of the members displayed annoyance but could do nothing about it . Cannon's absolute control of the committee was evident .
 Cannon sought to have the CIA checked by the General Accounting Office . Cannon once sought the CIA check by the G.A. Office . The CIA has never been found guilty of wrongdoing .
 In the House there was also a CIA subcommittee of the Armed Services Committee . In the Senate, the CIA subcommittee was also part of the Committee of Representatives .
 It was composed of Carl Vinson, Georgia Democrat and chairman of the Armed Services Committee; L Mendel Rivers, South Carolina Democrat; F Edward Hebert, Louisiana Democrat; Melvin Price, Illinois Democrat; Charles E Bennett, Florida Democrat; George Huddleston, Jr., Alabama
 The decision was to go along with Cannon but to steer the GAO into a non-sensitive area . Cannon: "The decision was made to steer it away from a sensitive area"
 The auditors were taken to the facilities of the CIA’s broadcast information service . The CIA monitors the radio programs of foreign countries, particularly the Communist bloc, particularly .
 The GAO spent a year at the foreign broadcast service, but to the satisfaction of the CIA, turned in a harmless set of recommendations . The CIA says the recommendations are harmless .
 Prior to 1954 the GAO kept two of its men on permanent assignment with the CIA as consultants . The GAO says the CIA was responsible for the CIA's success .
 CIA accountants would ask GAO men to judge whether they were acting properly . GAO: When a problem arose in a non-sensitive area, CIA would ask them to judge if they acted properly . CIA accountant: "When a problem arises, the CIA asked the GAO
 GAO men would then refer the problem to the Comptroller General’s office for approval . Taking the facts as presented to them, the GAO would then report the problem . The problem would then be referred to the comptroller's office .
 The procedure amounted to a certification of CIA practices without the authority to investigate them . Joseph Campbell withdrew the GAO men from the CIA when he took over as Comptroller General in 1954 .
 GAO continued to bump into an occasional CIA project while investigating large defense contracts . Still, the GAO continues to look at the CIA .
 The 1949 law removed Congress’ power to audit the CIA . GAO was prohibited from looking further, even if it had suspicions that the contractor might be juggling non-CIA funds .
 Congress’ difficulties with the intelligence community have been matched by those of U.S. ambassadors in foreign countries . Congress' difficulties with intelligence community matched those of ambassadors .
 In 1959 the Senate Foreign Relations Committee compiled a booklet of anonymous quotations from retired Foreign Service officers . The booklet was compiled by the committee .
 Without immunity, the CIA's codes, files and communications would not be secure . The immunity accorded to diplomatic property is immunity for diplomatic property .
 The CIA maintains its own codes and an independent communications system . Unless CIA agents choose to tell an ambassador what they are reporting to Washington, he has no independent means for finding out .
 Eisenhower order seemed, on the surface, to re-establish the ambassador’s supremacy over all U.S. agencies operating overseas . The Eisenhower order seems to have re-established the ambassador's supremacy over U.N. agencies overseas .
 Many were troubled by the possibility of secret “instructions” to the CIA circumventing the ambassador’s authority . But many were concerned by the possible secret ‘instructments’
 When President Kennedy entered office, he took prompt action to reaffirm the powers of the State Department and the ambassadors . President Kennedy's actions were prompt .
 You are in charge of the entire U.S. diplomatic mission, says President Obama . "I shall expect you to supervise all of its operations," he says .
 I shall give you full support and backing in carrying out your assignment. I shall support you, I say . I shall back you to carry out your task .
 In the event of a decision by you in which they do not concur, they may ask to have the decision reviewed by a higher authority in Washington . Needless to say, representatives of other agencies are expected to communicate directly with their offices .
 It is their responsibility to keep you fully informed of their views and activities and abide by your decisions . However, it is your responsibility to abide by their decisions .
 The moving force behind Kennedy’s letter was Chester Bowles, then Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs . Bowles was Bowles' then Under . Secretary of . State for . Political Affairs at the time of the letter .
 In the summer of 1961 Bowles set out on a round-the-world trip to explain the new arrangement . Bowles travelled around the world to explain his new policy .
 A fifteen-man team accompanied Bowles to seven regional meetings with ambassadors and their staffs . The team includes representatives of the State Department, CIA and the AID . Bowles has been in charge of the U.S. since 2009 .
 Bowles told meetings that ambassadors were to be kept fully informed on all CIA operations . Ambassador to Washington to receive copies of all CIA messages to Washington, Bowles said .
 The CIA says ambassadors do not understand the CIA’s special problems . What, they asked, about situations in which ambassadors don’t understand their special problems? What?
 The ambassador should be in a position to cross-check information if he runs across one of the informants at a diplomatic function, Bowles said . Bowles answered, "Yes, yes"
 Staff of experts sent on a world-wide inspection late in 1962 by the Subcommittee on THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((270 National Security Staffing and Operations of the Senate Government Operations Committee)
 Ambassadors were still unable to give orders to the CIA or to stop an agency operation . Ambassadors still couldn't stop an operation .
 The only evident change was that the ambassador now appeared to be in a better position to protest about a CIA program and delay it until a decision came back from Washington .
 These conclusions were watered down in the staff report published by the subcommittee in January, 1963 . The report was published in January 1963 .
 Report: Military services and CIA tend to “take a restricted view of the ambassador’s right to interpose himself” between them and their superiors in Washington . But the report did point out that the military services and the CIA take a less restrictive view of ambassadors .
 The uneasiness felt in other government agencies over the role of the CIA runs deeper than that, however, however . It's not just about the CIA, but it's the CIA's role in Afghanistan .
 "This uneasiness is little known outside of the government, and it is almost never talked about," says the government . "It's almost never discussed in the U.S. and it's not talked about. It's almost impossible to say what it is, but it's
 During the 1960 campaign, John F Kennedy had promised, if elected, to establish a Peace Corps . The Peace Corps was established during the 1960s .
 Shriver's brother-in-law, Sargent Shriver, Jr., heads the agency . He kept his word, created the agency by an executive order in March, 1961 .
 The Peace Corps, with its thousands of young volunteers dispersed over the globe, could well look like an all but irresistible ‘cover” to an inTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT .
 At the same time, Shriver knew that the Peace Corps, because it would offer genuine help to the emerging nations of the world, would be a tempting target for Communist propaganda .
 Shriver privately proclaimed his determination to take every possible step to divorce the Peace Corps from even the faintest smell of intelligence work .
 He was well aware that even one ‘spy’ incident involving a volunteer might destroy the Corps. He was aware of the possibility of a "spy" incident involving volunteer .
 An anecdote that went the rounds of the executive suite of the Peace Corps at the time of its birth is revealing . The Peace Corps is now the largest branch in the United States .
 In the spring of 1961 Shriver made a trip seeking to persuade neutral nations to accept Peace Corpsmen . Shriver was a Peace Corpsman in 1961 .
 He discovered leaders of countries were blunt in asking whether he would let the Corps be used as a cover for intelligence agents . He discovered that the leaders of those countries had asked if he would allow them to use the Corps .
 Shriver said he was doing everything he could within the government to make sure that the CIA stayed out of his agency . Shriver replied just as bluntly that he did not agree .
 He promised to assist individual countries in any security checks they might care to make . He also promised to help individual countries with security checks .
 Shriver went directly to President Kennedy to prevent Peace Corps being tarred as an instrument of Cold War intelligencegathering .
 President Kennedy followed up this verbal assurance to Shriver by issuing orders to Allen Dulles and later to his successor, John McCone . The orders continued to be issued after President Johnson took office . Shriver: "It's a good thing that you can talk to me. I'm
 In addition, Shriver met with Dulles and later with McCone and obtained their guarantee that the CIA would stay away from the Peace Corps . Shriver also secured a guarantee from Dulles that the Peace Corp would not be affiliated with the Peace corps .
 Shriver’s dilemma Purity in the Peace Corps was a peculiar one, bred of the Cold War and inconceivable in the America of even twenty years before . Shriver's dilemma in the 1970s was a unique one .
 Shriver must have decided he could not be sure of the answers to these delicate questions, for he did not rely on presidential assurances alone . Shriver decided not to rely on the president alone .
 It was designed, of course, to catch any Communist or security risk who might try to get into the Peace Corps . The Peace Corps was designed to catch anyone who might be a security risk .
 It was designed to spot any CIA "volunteer" before he could unpack his cloak and dagger . But it was also designed—hopefully—to spot any . CIA “volunteers” before they can unpack their .
 Shriver designated William Delano, the Peace Corps’ young general counsel, to ride herd on the problem . Delano was to make sure no intelligence men slipped through the net . The Peace Corps' general counsel was assigned to protect the public from harm .
 "No one with any intelligence background, even years ago, would be accepted," he said . "Even years ago," he added. "No. No one with a background would have been accepted"
 Openly acknowledged ‘overt’ employees of the CIA are allowed to say so when they seek a new job . CIA employees can say they want to leave the CIA for a job when they are looking for a change .
 But covert employees of the CIA are not permitted to reveal it, even years later on a government job application form . CIA employees are not allowed to reveal the information on a job form .
 They might put down the name of a commercial cover company or perhaps some other branch of the government for which they had ostensibly worked . They might also put the name down a commercial company or a government agency .
 Peace Corps officials realized that a routine Civil Service check would not reveal if applicants had been or were still covert CIA agents . And a routine check would also not reveal whether applicants were or were covert agents .
 Government” to cover a period of a year or THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT. S Government’s two-year period . The Invisible Government. (274 two)
 Would-be volunteers were questioned by Civil Service investigators, who naturally demanded to know more details . But the would-be volunteer volunteers, in these cases, have been questioned by investigators .
 Peace Corps applications have been turned down since the Peace Corps began . Applicants have applied to the U.S. government on their applications . The Peace Corps is based in Washington, D.C.
 Screening out persons with a background in intelligence was only part of the problem . Screening is not the only way to find out who is the right person to be in the right place, it says .
 The Peace Corps also decided that it had to guard against the possibility of the CIA approaching a volunteer after he had been accepted into the Peace Corps .
 He says he doesn't want you to spy, but that he’d like you to get together with him and chat every couple of weeks . Tell him a couple of things you’ve learned, and perhaps tell him a few of them you've learned .
 Most volunteers replied they would have no part of any free-lance spying of this sort . Most of the volunteers said they would not take part in the free-spying program .
 Peace Corps officials felt it was unlikely that their volunteers would be solicited to do any intelligence work . Still, one official admitted, the real problem would be “covert people trying to infiltrate.”
 Shriver’s concern over keeping his agency ‘clean was reinforced in September, 1961, when Secretary of the Army Elvis J Stahr made a speech suggesting that an Army Peace Corps be established .
 General Barksdale Hamlett, Army Deputy Chief of Staff, gave Purity in the Peace Corps plan . Hamlett added details of the plan, which seemed to envision use of the Army in worthy social projects in underdeveloped countries .
 To Shriver, it smacked of precisely the sort of military and intelligence overtones he was trying so hard to avoid . Shriver: "To Shriver it smacks of ... military and intel overtones"
 A high-level meeting was held at the Pentagon, attended by Stahr, Shriver, Hamlett and Hamlett . A platoon of be~ ribboned Army brass was also present .
 The generals insisted that the Army Peace Corps would have no relation to any intelligence work . The Peace Corps will not be involved in intelligence work, they said .
 Lawrence had served with the Agency for International Development in Southeast Asia . Lawrence was familiar with CIA operations in that part of Asia .
 He asked the generals to name the officers who would be in charge of the proposed “Army Peace Corps” in Southeast Asia . He asked them to name their officers as the officers in charge .
 U.S. intelligence obtained, from Eastern Europe, what appeared to be a guide for satellite nations on how to phrase propaganda against the Peace Corps .
 Peace Corps officials believed that it served as a primer for subsequent propaganda emanating from various points in the Communist world . Peace Corps. officials believed it served . up for propaganda .
 Russian and Communist Chinese attacks followed a familiar pattern . The attacks on Russia and China were followed by a pattern of Russian and Chinese attacks .
 Radio Havana broadcast attacks on the Peace Corps that paralleled the Moscow barrage . Radio Havana broadcasts attacks on Peace Corps in Havana .
 Also in Havana, the newspaper Hoy warns Venezuela to ‘watch out’ for the Peace Corps . The Peace Corps is based in Venezuela .
 Polish paper attacked Peace Corps by charging that girl volunteers were Mata Haris . Polish paper published an article attacking the Peace Corps in March 1963 .
 A Peace Corps woman teacher in Somalia tried to teach pupils the “indecent movements” of the twist . Tass picked up the sex theme .
 By the spring of 1963, U.S. analysts concluded that the Soviet Union, having had little success with this loud, public campaign against the Peace Corps, had embarked on a simultaneous behind-the-scenes campaign .
 In Ghana, the Soviet ambassador succeeded in persuading the government of President Kwame Nkrumah to impose some restrictions on the Peace Corps .
 In May, 1963, the Ghanaian Times, regarded as the unofficial spokesman for Nkrumah, openly attacked the Corps as an alleged CIA tool . And in May 1963, Ghanaian newspapers openly attacked it .
 There seemed no likelihood that the public attacks would stop, but their intensity logically dictated that Shriver, more than ever, would want to keep the Peace Corps pristine . Shriver: "There was no doubt that the attacks would continue, but the very intensity of the attacks logically dictates that
 A spy incident involving a volunteer would give the Russians a propaganda field day . It could possibly wreck the Peace Corps, and Shriver’s political career as well .
 The Peace Corps maintains it does not know of a single case in which it could be sure of an attempted infiltration by an intelligence agent seeking to use the Peace Corps as cover . The CIA maintains it doesn't know of any case of attempted infiltration .
 The fact that Shriver felt he had to take the astonishing precautions he did, speaks volumes . But the fact that he felt he needed to take such precautions speaks volumes.
 Actually, the Peace Corps has rather strict rules about sex . It reflects the atmosphere of mistrust that is felt, rightly or wrongly, by overt officials of the Corps . The Peace Corps says it has a strict policy on sex .
 Some unlikely departments of the government have become vehicles for secret operations of various shadings . Government departments are used as vehicles for undercover operations .
 Guards armed with Tommy guns patrolled the garden wall of the decaying villa in Miramar, Havana, on the outskirts of Havana .
 He took out a black wallet, of the type that was large enough for foreign bills, and reached into an apparently empty pouch . He reached into the pouch and reached out a large wallet .
 From a concealed pocket in the wallet he pulled out a typewritten sheet of onionskin paper . He pulled out the typewritten note from his pocket .
 Donovan used a code sheet to convey the progress of his negotiations to ransom the lives of more than 1,000 prisoners . Donovan ordered his “broker’s” to “sell Quaker City” and by using A Gray Operation ((279 other key words)
 He was playing for the freedom of the 1,113 survivors of the Bay of Pigs invasion . "He was playing high stakes," he said. "I'm playing for high stakes"
 Donovan was a silver-haired, forty-six-year-old former OSS man, short but powerfully built . Donovan was an OSS veteran who served in the U.S.
 In February, 1962, on the bridge in Berlin, he had traded the Soviet master spy Rudolf Abel for the U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers and Yale student Frederic L Pryor .
 Donovan’s Cuban adventure began a few months later, early in June, 1962, when Attorney General Robert Kennedy sent to him a delegation of Cubans made up of survivors of the Bay of Pigs brigade and their families .
 Talks between Castro and a Tractors for Freedom Committee collapsed in June, 1961 . Up to that time, sixty prisoners had been ransomed for a pledge of cash, but efforts to free the rest failed .
 The committee had been unable to reach agreement with Castro on the dictator’s continually shifting offers to trade prisoners for tractors or bulldozers . The committee, sponsored by the Kennedy Administration, was unable to agree with Castro .
 Donovan, after listening to the pleas of his visitors, agreed to become the general counsel to the group . Donovan agreed to serve as the group's general counsel . Donovan: "It's a good thing for the world to hear from the group"
 It was called the Cuban Families Committee for Liberation of Prisoners of War, Inc., a charitable corporation . It was granted tax-exempt status by the IRS .
 On August 29, 1962, Donovan went to Cuba for his first talks with Castro . Donovan's first visit to Cuba was in 1962, when Castro was in Cuba .
 He stayed at the crumbling villa in Miramar and conferred with Castro at the Presidential Palace in Havana . He stayed with Castro in Havana, Cuba .
 He made it clear he would offer drugs and baby foods for the men, but no cash or tractors . He said he would not offer cash, but drugs, baby food and baby food .
 Castro agreed to negotiate on this basis, provided the Cuban Families Committee came up with the $2,900,000 it had pledged in return for the sixty prisoners released the previous April . Castro agreed on this condition, provided that the families committee had pledged the money in exchange for the prisoners
 Donovan's friend John T Connor, head of Merck, Sharp & Dohme, is a friend of Donovan's . They called in another friend, Merck Sharp, to discuss the case . Donovan is a close friend to Donovan, who has been married for more than 20 years
 The executives of the two drug companies offered to donate medicines to help Donovan get the men out . Donovan says the drug companies have offered to help him get his men out of prison .
 The CIA approached the drug industry trade association to explore the chances of large-scale donations by manufacturers . The CIA also approached a drug trade association, to look at the chance of large donations .
 Donovan won the Democratic nomination for U.S. Senate in September . Donovan returned from Cuba shortly after his return from Cuba . Donovan is now a Democrat in the United States Senate .
 Donovan returned to Havana, confident he could reach agreement with Castro . On October 2 the drug-company pledges in his pocket, Donovan returned . Donovan: "On October 2, the drug company pledges in . pocket"
 Pfizer quietly began moving $2,000,000 worth of drugs in refrigerator cars to Idlewild International Airport . Pfizer Company quietly moved the drugs in refrigerated cars to the airport .
 Castro agreed to trade the men for baby foods and medicines . Castro made the deal on a second trip to buy baby food and medicine . Castro agreed the men were traded for baby food .
 Donovan had a painful attack of bursitis in his right shoulder that forced him to fly to Miami briefly for treatment . Donovan was going well except for the painful attack . Donovan: "I'm not going to be able to play for the rest of the season"
 Donovan was accused of trying to make political capital out of his role as Cuban negotiator . Donovan returned to Havana to continue his talks with Castro . He returned to the United States to continue talks .
 Some members of Congress said that the U.S. ought not to be dickering with Castro at a time when it was asking other countries to cut off trade . And some members of the United States should not be ducking with Castro .
 The White House refused to say whether any government funds would be used to ransom the men . White House refuses to say if government funds will be used for ransom .
 It insisted Donovan was acting as a private attorney but said he was keeping President Kennedy advised of his activities . Donovan was kept in touch with President Kennedy, it said .
 Three days later a U-2 plane flying secretly over western Cuba took a photograph of a Soviet mobile medium-range missile site . The U.2 plane flew over Cuba and photographed the site in Cuba .
 The world moved close to A Gray Operation ((28r nuclear war during the latter half of October . The world was on the verge of a nuclear war .
 Donovan’s chances of reaching an agreement to free the men had been shattered . Against this background of tension it looked as though Donovan's chances of finding a deal to release the men were shattered .
 He suffered a personal, although not unexpected, blow when he lost the election on November 6 to Senator Javits . Javits won the election in 2010 .
 The drug industry was unwilling to donate medicines to Castro unless the Kennedy Administration made it publicly clear that the deal was in the national interest . Now in the wake of the missile crisis, the drug industry is unwilling to take the risk of donating medicines .
 The drug firms are already hit hard by the Senate investigation of their high prices . They had no desire to bring a new wave of public disapproval down upon themselves .
 Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and Assistant Attorney General Louis F Oberdorfer represented the Justice Department .
 The high-level meeting concluded that Castro’s demand of $53,000,000 in drugs would cost only $17,00,000 at wholesale U.S. prices . The meeting ended with a decision to reject Castro's request for $53 million in drugs .
 It was also decided to study the tax angle involved in possible contributions of drugs by the companies .
 It was agreed that a memorandum would be prepared over the weekend to be ready for Robert Kennedy on Monday December 3 . Robert Kennedy will be at the center of a memorial service in Washington, DC .
 Some drug companies might gain a tax “windfall” by making charitable contributions to the prisoner exchange deal . It was the kind of reas*The memorandum noted that some drug companies may gain a . tax "windfall" from the deal .
 K THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT. (282 sur sur surance the drug companies had been looking for. K The Invisible Goverment. K . The government is the most secretive government in the world. K.
 Donovan's phone began to ring in Brooklyn with additional pledges of drugs from the industry . Donovan: "It's like a drug dealer's dream, but it's not a dream. It's a dream," Donovan says .
 Robert Kennedy called on the President at the White House, and at noon the Attorney General phoned Oberdorfer to give him the green light to go ahead with the operation . The operation was the first time the operation had been carried out .
 The American Red Cross agreed to accept the drugs as contributions to charity and deliver them to Havana . The Red Cross then agreed to deliver the drugs to the island nation .
 Donovan slipped into Washington to confer with Robert Kennedy the next day . Donovan's next day was in Washington, DC, to discuss with Kennedy . Donovan: "The next day Donovan slipped in to confer" with Kennedy.
 The Attorney General met with officials of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association on December 7 . On December 7 he met with representatives of the pharmaceutical industry .
 He told the drug manufacturers that the Bay of Pigs invasion had been launched by the United States . The plan had been started by the Eisenhower Administration and continued by the Kennedy Administration . Both the nation and the government had a moral obligation to get the men out .
 Robert Kennedy talked about the courage of forty members of the brigade who had escaped and crossed the Caribbean in an open boat . Robert Kennedy spoke about the bravery of the men and women who crossed in open boats .
 The U.S. could not directly conduct negotiations with Cuba because it would be “misunderstood” by the world, he said . The deal would be a diplomatic disaster if the deal failed, he added .
 All departments had received a list of the drugs Castro wanted and that none were considered strategic . He said that all departments had been informed of the list .
 The Attorney General assured the companies that the sight of the returning prisoners would still any criticism of the drug companies for contributing to Castro . Finally, the Attorney General said the companies would still be criticized .
 On December 9, Robert Kennedy gave the same talk to a group of baby-food manufacturers . Kennedy also gave a talk to the same group of manufacturers .
 A group of private attorneys, including John E Nolan, Jr., Jr., and E Barrett Prettyman, Jr. were brought in to help .
 The Justice Department attorneys did not identify themselves as government employees . They said they were calling as representatives of the Cuban Families Committee .
 The Justice Department team obtained clearances from the Civil Aeronautics Board and the Interstate Commerce Commission . They obtained charitable contribution of air and surface transportation to haul the drugs to Miami .
 The CIA, the Air Force, the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Department of Health, Education and Welfare began making arrangements to receive and process prisoners in Florida .
 Commerce Department granted export licenses for food and drugs . Food and drugs export licenses were granted by the Commerce Department . The Commerce Department also granted licenses for drugs and food .
 Castro demanded a guarantee of full payment of the ransom; otherwise he would hold back the brigade officers until the last payment was made . Donovan told the Justice Department that Castro was demanding a guarantee that full payment would be made . Castro is believed to be behind the kidnapping of the brigade .
 Katzenbach flew to Montreal on December 14, but the Royal Bank of Canada balked at issuing a letter of credit without some formal guarantees by American banks . The Canadian bank says it can't issue the letter without guarantees by U.S. banks .
 The Continental Insurance Company wrote out a $53,000,000 performance bond without charge . The bond guarantees that the Red Cross would meet its obligations to deliver the drugs to Cuba .
 The CIA provided a pharmacist, Stephen Aldrich, who helped log the drugs as they arrived in Florida . Aldrich was the pharmacist who logged the drugs into Florida .
 He stopped off in Washington to confer with officials and then went on to Miami, where he disappeared . He was last seen in Miami, Florida, in 1994 .
 Donovan stayed in a CIA house in Miami on December 16 and 17, telephoning to Havana . Donovan stayed at the CIA house and telephoned to Havana, Cuba .
 Donovan called Washington to say that he had arranged to go to Havana in the morning . December 17, Donovan called D.C. to say he was going to Havana . Donovan was in Havana for the first time on December 17 .
 He also reported that one of Castro’s negotiators had a sick child who needed a certain medicine immediately . He also said a certain child was sick and had a need for medicine .
 Katzenbach called Walter Reed Hospital and got ten vials of the medicine . The Invisible Government of the U.S. called the hospital .
 Shortly after midnight Oberdorfer, his assistant Frank Michelman, John Nolan and a CIA attorney flew to Miami from Washington, taking the medicine along . The medicine was sent along along with the CIA .
 They did not arrive at the CIA "safe house" until 5:00 A.M. on December 18 . They arrived at a CIA safe house at 5:30 a.m. on Christmas Day .
 Shortly after midnight three Cuban Red Cross officials in olive drab flew secretly into Miami . They were accompanied by Cuban officials . The Red Cross has been working with the Cuban government for years .
 Scheele and Barrett Prettyman were shown the supplies at Opa-locka and then taken to Port Everglades to inspect the drugs being loaded on the African Pilot . The African Pilot was donated by the Committee of the American Steamship Lines . Scheele, Prettyman and
 The Cubans adjourned to a Howard Johnson’s motel and said to Prettyman they wanted to remain for the day . Cubans then adjourned for a day .
 Nolan and Prettyman were alarmed at what would happen if the press learned that Castro emissaries were holed up in a Florida motel . Nolan was alarmed at the press's reaction to the discovery of the emissary in the motel .
 One of the Cuban Red Cross men smoked big cigars and, in his olive uniform, did not project the image of a man of mercy . In his uniform, he wore an olive uniform with a big cigar .
 The African Pilot sailed for Havana with the first shipload of drugs . That same day the African Pilot was sent to Havana .
 Nolan and Prettyman joined Donovan in Havana on Sunday, December 23 . Donovan's team is currently in Havana, Cuba .
 At 5:00 P.M. the first plane left the San Antonio de los Banos airport for Homestead Air Force Base south of Miami .
 Cuban Families Committee had pledged $2,900,000 as ransom for sixty wounded prisoners released in April . Castro threatened to halt airlift unless ransom was paid for 60 wounded prisoners . Donovan entered the picture after Castro's refusal to pay the ransom .
 Nolan made it clear that unless the money was raised by three o’clock that afternoon, the deal would collapse . Nolan made the decision to raise the money by the end of the day .
 The Attorney General called Richard Cardinal Cushing, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Boston, who pledged $1,000,000 . The attorney general's office received a $2,500,000 donation .
 Robert Kennedy also called General Lucius Clay, who was a sponsor of the Cuban Families Committee . General Clay was also a sponsor for the Cuban families Committee .
 Clay borrowed the remaining $1,900,000 on his own signature, then solicited contributions from American business firms to cover that amount . Clay borrowed $1.9 million from American businesses to cover the remaining amount .
 Texaco, Standard Oil of New Jersey and Ford Motor Company Fund each contributed $100,000 . Ford Motor Co. Fund also contributed $10,000 to the cause . Texaco contributed $50,000.
 In Cuba, that Monday, two more planeloads of prisoners were permitted to take off . The prisoners were allowed to leave Cuba that day .
 First he staged a military air show at San Antonio de los Banos airport to tie up the airport . Then he staged an air show in a bid to get the airport back on track .
 Castro halted all flights until he received word about the money . Then, about 1:00 P.M., halted flights until the money was found . Castro: "I'm not going to let them go. I'm going to do it"
 Castro was assured the Royal Bank of Canada had deposited it in Montreal . Late in the afternoon Castro had been assured the bank had deposited the money .
 Donovan and Castro met at the Canadian consul’s office to accept financial guarantees . Donovan then met with Castro to accept the financial guarantees from Castro . Donovan: Castro and Castro accepted financial guarantees at the consulate .
 At 9:35 P.M. the last of the planes carrying the returning prisoners touched down at Homestead Air Force Base . The last plane carrying the prisoners landed in Homestead, Florida .
 The students had clean clothes, a meal and then a bus trip to Dinner Key Auditoium . Their families and friends were waiting to meet them .
 Brigade 2056 THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (286) marched between double lines of fellow members of the brigade . The band played the march from The Bridge Over the River Kwai. There, they marched alongside double lines .
 Some people were not content to accept the prisoner exchange as a humanitarian act arranged by a private citizen .
 All 13 Republican members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee called for a Congressional inquiry into Donovan’s role . Months later, in June, 1963, all 13 Republicans called for an inquiry . Donovan's role in the war was investigated .
 In January, 1963, the Agriculture Department gave 5,000,000 pounds of dried milk to the Red Cross . The Agriculture Department pledged more as needed as needed .
 The Agriculture Department contributed 35,000,000 pounds of surplus food to the prisoner exchange . The exchange included dried milk, dried milk and shortening .
 The administration was fearful that it would come under political attack for helping Castro . But the administration feared it would be attacked for helping the Castro family .
 The government was saying that it would be paid back in cash for surplus food . In other words, the government would be paying back the surplus food in cash .
 The dried milk cost the government $2,505,000 when it was bought from producers as part of the farm price-support program . It was bought by producers in a bid to boost the price of milk .
 The government gave away commodities for which it had paid $5,655,000 . Consequently, the government gave them away commodities .
 In calculating the value of the milk and shortening given to the Red Cross, the government figured its contribution as worth just under $2,000,000 . The lower price the milk might have brought had it been sold by the government on the world market .
 Normally the government uses the higher price that it paid to producers when it figures the value of a contribution of surplus food to charity . Normally, the government used the higher prices paid to produce .
 In this instance, it obviously sought to minimize the size of the donation because of the domestic political implications of giving anything away to Castro .
 The government was not paid back any amount in cash for its donation of milk and shortening . Nor was the government paid back .
 The government accepted as “reimbursement” 4,000,000 pounds of an insecticide called Sevin . Sevin is a type of insecticide that can kill an insect .
 The Union Carbide Company contributed $2,000,000 worth of the bug-killer to the Red Cross for the prisoner exchange . The Red Cross had donated the bug killer to the United States .
 The Commerce Department ruled that the insecticides would be of strategic economic value to Castro by helping his sugar-cane crops . Castro says the insecticide is of strategic value to him . Commerce Department: Insecticides would help his sugar crop .
 The Red Cross accepted the insecticides, then turned them over to the Agency for International Development . The agency dispatched them to India, Pakistan and Algeria . The insecticides are now being dispatched to India and Pakistan .
 A conservative estimate of what it cost the government to extricate itself after the Bay of Pigs would be $29,793,000 . The government is estimated to have extricated itself from the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 This consists of a $20,000,000 tax loss* to the government as a result of the drug companies’ charitable deductions . $5,655,000 in skim milk and shortening; $4,000k in secret CIA payments to families of Bay of Pigs prisoners
 The estimate of tax loss was made by Mitchell Rogovin, counsel to the Internal Revenue Service, on December 28, 1962 . Because of the political risks at home of dealing with Castro, the government felt it necessary .
 It decided that the realities of the situation were such that even an act of humanity had to be approached with the utmost political caution .
 Donovan persuaded Castro not to let the Red Cross ships sail away empty . Donovan convinced Castro to let them go empty as part of deal .
 Castro began releasing thousands of refugees previously unable to leave Cuba . Castro released over 5,000 members of the families of the prisoners . Castro also freed thousands of families of prisoners .
 Donovan won the release of more than thirty Americans held in Cuban jails in March and April of 1963 . Donovan freed three CIA men from Cuban jails, including three CIA operatives . Donovan won more than 30 Americans, including 3 CIA men .
 The last of the medical supplies reached Cuba on July 3, when the American Red Cross announced that a total of 9,703 persons had been brought out of the country .
 The staggering figure of nearly 10,000 persons rescued by one man is not widely known, because the total figure received less public attention than did the dramatic return of the invasion prisoners .
 Donovan had the assistance of the U.S. government . Donovan worked hand-in-hand with the United States government .
 In each case, as a private citizen, he was breaking new ground in a form of intelligence diplomacy that is a unique outgrowth of the Cold War . "Each case was a private . citizen," he says .
 The writer of the letters claimed to be the wife of the Soviet spy imprisoned in the U.S. The letters were written by the writer of a Soviet spy in the United States .
 Donovan turned each of the documents over to Lawrence Houston, the CIA general counsel . Donovan turned them over to Houston, who is now the CIA's general counsel. Donovan says the documents will be used in the future .
 Donovan was a private American citizen with no diplomatic immunity or protection . Donovan went to East Berlin to negotiate the final details directly with the Russians and East Germans . He was technically on his own, but he was technically a private citizen .
 The government was unwilling to tell the full story of its role in the Cuban prisoner exchange, as it has been related here, because to have done so during Donovan’s negotiations might have handicapped his ability to deal with Castro . The government has been unwilling to reveal the extent of
 It might have engendered too many delicate political questions . And, afterward, it might engendend too many sensitive questions .
 The seeds of one covert operation, the Bay of Pigs, had given rise to another, the return of the invasion brigade . In a very real sense, the seeds of a covert operation had been planted in the U.S.
 Those who sought a clear, simple explanation of whether an operation was private or governmental were disappointed in the case of James Donovan . James Donovan is a former FBI agent who worked for the Bureau of Investigation .
 His rescue of the Bay of Pigs prisoners was not precisely a “black,” i.e., secret operation . The rescue was not exactly a secret operation, but it was a rescue operation, the author says .
 It might be most accurately described as a mixture of both—truly a gray operation . "It's a very gray operation. It's really a very difficult thing to do," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Donovan was negotiating with Castro to rescue victims of one of the Invisible Government’s operations in Cuba . Another operation was being conducted in the airspace over the island in the fall of 1962 . Donovan and Castro were negotiating to rescue the victims .
 In utmost secrecy, the U-2 spy plane was photographing every foot of Cuban territory in search of Soviet missiles . The plane was photographed in utmost secrecy .
 The U-2 had been flying over Cuba from the earliest days of the Castro regime . It was the first time the U.2 had flown over Cuba since the Castro era .
 In 1959 a U-2 was sent over Zapata swamps near the Bay of Pigs to check an erroneous report that missiles were being set up in the area . In 1959 the U.2 sent over the Zapata swamp to check reports that missiles had been set up there .
 SA-2 anti-aircraft missiles were unloaded at Cuban docks in August . That August photos were taken of the missiles being unloaded from Cuban docks .
 Seven U-2s were sent over the island in five weeks between August 29 and October 7 . The overflight program was stepped up and seven were sent .
 Short-range SA-2 defensive missiles were launched in the 1960s . Each mission re-invited missile was fired from a range range of SA2 missiles . The missiles were fired at a range of Soviet Union-built missiles .
 President Kennedy insisted there was no evidence that the Russians were moving in long-range offensive missiles that could threaten the United States . Kennedy: No evidence that Russia was moving in offensive missiles . President Kennedy: "There is no evidence"
 Kennedy gave assurances despite the fact that John McCone had a suspicion that the Soviets were deploying ballistic missiles in Cuba . McCone never passed along to the White House with the assurances .
 McCone said he reported this view within the CIA on August 10, 1963 . In testimony before the Senate Preparedness Subcommittee on March 12, 1963, he said he had reported the view .
 As Director of Central Intelligence he could have ordered that his view be made the official view and reported to Kennedy, he did not do so . He did not report his views to Kennedy .
 McCone left Washington on August 23 to marry Theiline McGee Pigott, the widow of a rich Seattle industrialist and an old family friend . McCone is married to McGee Pigot, a widow of an old friend and a wealthy industrialist . He leaves Washington to marry McGee
 During his honeymoon cruise to Europe and three-week stay on Cap Ferrat on the French Riviera, he received daily briefing telegrams .
 On September 7, 10, 13 and 20, he responded with telegrams expressing his mounting concern . They deepened his apprehension, and he responded to them with a growing concern . He responded with a series of messages expressing concern .
 He did not direct that the ‘honeymoon telegrams” be passed along to the President . But, again, he didn’t direct that he did . The President is expected to be in office on Friday .
 During McCone’s absence, the Board of National Estimates was asked to assess the possibility that the Soviets would station offensive missiles in Cuba . McCone was in the U.S. during his absence .
 The Russians might be tempted to introduce the missiles for psychological reasons, particularly to impress the Latin Americans, the Kremlin says .
 The Soviets might wish to strengthen their position in Cuba as a prelude to a move against Berlin . It also alluded to the possibility that the Soviets might want to strengthen .
 Estimate stated that it was highly unlikely that offensive missiles would be sent in, because the Soviets would be deterred by their awareness of the violent reaction which such a move would provoke on the part of the United States. Nevertheless, the Estimate said that it would be highly unlikely .
 The chief Kremlinologists in the State Department concurred with the Estimate . Charles E Bohlen and Llewellyn E Thompson, Jr., both former ambassadors to Moscow, concurred .
 A CIA sub-agent had spotted a missile part on a highway on September 12, but had experienced delay in getting his information out of Cuba . The CIA sub agent had spotted the missile part .
 Missile experts had rejected hundreds of prior reports by Cuban refugees . They concluded that the sub-agent’s description checked out against known features of Russian offensive missiles .
 The missile part had arrived in a shipment of Soviet cargo on September 8 . The CIA decided the missile part was in the shipment . The missile was part of a Soviet cargo shipment .
 McCone returned from his honeymoon on September 26, and on October 4 an urgent meeting of the U.S. Intelligence Board was called . McCone's honeymoon was September 26 .
 Members of the U-2 crew take a look at the "mosaic" of Cuba from the latest pictures . The mosaic is a photographic panorama of the entire island of Cuba pieced together from U.2 pictures .
 There have been no pictures of the western sector of the island since September 5 . McCone noted that there had been no images of the west sector since then .
 He ordered that overflights be further stepped up and concentrated on that section of Cuba . The Cuban government ordered overflights to be stepped up .
 The risks would be greatly increased by the expanded schedule of missions and by the presence of the anti-aircraft missiles . Now, however, the risks are greatly increased, says CNN's John Sutter .
 CIA concluded that an SA-2 had downed Francis Gary Powers over the Soviet Union in 1960, and another had accounted for a Nationalist Chinese U-2 over Communist China on October 9, 1962 .
 McCone agreed to McNamara’s recommendation that the overflight operation be transferred to Strategic Air Command . Rather than risk another U-2 incident involving the CIA, McCone decided to transfer the operation to the Air Force .
 McCone refused to fire him, despite repeated reminders from the White House that the Estimate was wrong . The Estimate is wrong, but McCone says he will not fire him .
 Carroll took two civilian photo-interpreters to dinner at the home of General Maxwell Taylor . Then Carroll took them to dinner with General Taylor .
 Carter, Roswell Gilpatric and U Alexis Johnson join the Special Group . Carter, GilPatric and Alexis Johnson are members of the Special Team .
 McGeorge Bundy was notified at his home when officials had convinced that Soviet missiles were in place in Cuba . Bundy had been notified by his home at the time of the discovery .
 He arranged for photo-interpreters to report to him at the White House the following morning . He arranged to meet with the photo interpreters the next day .
 Bundy took the pictures to President Kennedy, who was in his bedroom in his pajamas and robe, reading the newspapers . Bundy took pictures of the president in his bed in his room .
 Kennedy quickly indicated those officials who were to be called to the White House . Kennedy was in the midst of a crisis in Washington, D.C. State Department .
 At 11:45 the group, later to be named the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, gathered in the Cabinet Room for the first of a running series of meetings .
 Present were Kennedy, his brother Robert, Lyndon Johnson, Rusk, McNamara and McNamara, Gilpatric, Bundy, Bundy and Taylor .
 Dean Acheson, Robert Lovett and Dean Lovett are former secretaries of state and defense secretaries . They are joined by former Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense . Lovett is also a former Defense Secretary .
 In coming to this decision the Excomm was strongly influenced by Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy influenced the decision . The decision was made in light of the Kennedy assassination .
 He opposed an air strike against the small island of Cuba . Recalling Pearl Harbor, he opposed an attack on Cuba .
 He argued that the nation might never recover from the moral outrage of the world and the shock to its own conscience . He said the nation may never recover .
 At first, the discussion centered on the immediate problem of getting the missiles dismantled or removed . The missiles would have to be removed from the site .
 There were detailed technical analyses of what kind of surveillance and inspection would be necessary to make sure the missiles were rendered inoperable . There were also detailed technical analysis of what would need to be done to render the missiles unusable .
 Stevenson was troubled that the discussion would bog down in details and that the larger problem of eliminating the Soviets from Cuba would be obscured . Stevenson was concerned that the discussions would bogble down on details .
 He reminded the Excomm that a long period of negotiation would probably follow the removal of missiles .
 He recommended some thought be given to possible U.S. proposals during that period . And he recommended that some of those proposals be considered during that time .
 Stevenson was aware that the administration had decided to remove the missiles from Turkey the previous year . The missiles were Jupiter IRBMs, obsolescent, clumsy liquid-fuel rockets .
 The plan was to replace them with missile-bearing Polaris submarines stationed in the Mediterranean . They would be replaced by missile-carrying submarines .
 As the Excomm deliberated, the President went through with two scheduled campaign trips, lest their cancellation betray the secret maneuvering . The President's two scheduled trips were canceled .
 On October 17 he kept speaking engagements in Stratford and New Haven, Connecticut, and New York . On October 19 he campaigned in Cleveland, Springfield, Illinois, and Chicago .
 Pierre Salinger announced that the President would return to Washington immediately because he had a cold and was running a slight temperature . The President was in St. Louis and Seattle that weekend, Missile Crisis was over .
 Kennedy approved the Excomm’s recommendation that a blockade be imposed around Cuba . Kennedy approved a blockade around Cuba in 1961 .
 The decision was ratified the next day by the National Security Council . It was ratified by the decision the following day .
 For the next four days the world balanced on the brink of war, watching fearfully to see if the Soviets would continue work on the missiles, or otherwise defy the President’s ultimatum . The world watched fearfully for four days as it waited to see whether the Soviets
 Late in the night of October 26, a message from Khrushchev was received from the Soviet Union . The message was a message of support for the United States . The U.S. government was forced to pull out of the country .
 The Pentagon spokesman who issued the denials “was not lying. He went on to explain that the Pentagon spokesman was not lying,’s spokesman said .
 The U.S. has pledged not to invade Cuba . Cuba has been subject to a blockade of the blockade and a pledge by the United States not to invasion Cuba .
 Khrushchev message was quickly shattered by a second message, which was made public in Moscow . It was quickly made public, and the optimism was quickly dashed .
 It offered to swap Soviet missiles in Cuba for U.S. missiles in Turkey . The deal was made with the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 The members of the Excomm knew that President Kennedy would not accept such a deal . President Kennedy was not willing to take part in a deal with the Excommission .
 Kennedy felt it imperative to reject the missile swap in order to preserve the Western alliance . As Kennedy was later to explain privately, he explained privately that he felt it was imperative .
 They looked upon the missiles as symbols of U.S. determination to defend them against Russian attack . The missiles were seen as symbol symbols of United States .
 Kennedy issued a public statement, in effect rejecting the missile swap . Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I want to do"
 He ignored the Turkey proposal and agreed to the terms of Khrushchev’s first message . Then he sent off a private message to the Soviet leader, ignoring the proposal .
 SA-2 opened fire in Cuba for the first time, downing a SAC U-2 . U2 wandered over Siberia while on an “air sampling” mission near the Arctic Circle .
 The United States says it might have been forced to violate Soviet airspace . The U.S. says the plane violated Soviet airspace by "unintentionally" The plane was flying over the Soviet Union airspace in violation of airspace .
 Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy promised there would be no more U-2 overflights of the Soviet Union . After the Powers incident, the U.S. was allowed to fly U.2 missiles over to the USSR .
 Their pledge did not rule out flights over Cuba, other Communist countries or along the borders of the Soviet Union .
 The Excomm also realized the second incident might have suggested to Khrushchev that Kennedy was planning some type of direct military action against Russia . The second incident may have suggested that Kennedy might have been planning to take action .
 Moscow released the text of another message from Khrushchev to Kennedy on October 28 . Then, shortly after ten o’clock on Sunday morning, October 28, Moscow released another text of the message .
 The Soviet leader said he had ordered a stop to work on the Cuban bases and had directed that the missiles be crated and returned to the Soviet Union . The missiles were returned to Russia .
 Kennedy hailed Khrushchev’s decision and responded with an expression of “regret” for the Siberian U-2 incident . Kennedy hailed the decision, which the Russian had complained about in his letter .
 In November Congressional elections the triumph was reflected in a major Democratic victory . And in the November congressional elections, the triumphs were reflected in major Democratic victories .
 The crisis had cost the Republicans as many as twenty House seats, said Representative Bob Wilson of California, the chairman of the Republican Congressional Committee . Representative Wilson: The crisis has cost the Republican Party 20 House seats .
 Administration knew in late September that Russian missiles were in Cuba but delayed announcing the fact in order to go into the election in a time of crisis, he said . He insisted that the administration had known in September that Russia had missiles in Cuba .
 The administration's credibility was called into question when Arthur Sylvester, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, made a series of statements which suggested that the administration might have been manipulating the facts in its official announcements .
 Sylvester directed that a representative of his office monitor each interview between a reporter and a Pentagon official . A representative of the reporter's office monitors each interview .
 Official could report substance of interview to Sylvester at end of the day . Alternately, the official could report the substance of the interview to the end of day .
 The State Department instituted a similar practice, but withdrew it a few weeks later under pressure . State Department also withdrew it under pressure from the public .
 Critics accuse the administration of “managing the news,” using information as a “weapon,’ even lying to protect itself . Critics say the administration is using information to manage the news .
 Kennedy’s October triumph was further compromised when Castro refused to allow on-site inspection of the missile sites by the U.N. The United Nations was unable to inspect the sites . Kennedy's victory in October was also compromised by Castro refusing to allow inspection .
 The Republicans seized upon this to suggest that the Russian military build-up was continuing and that all of the offensive weapons had not been removed from the Russian arsenal .
 Senator Keating made the announcement on October 10, twelve days before Kennedy’s TV address, that there were offensive missiles in Cuba . Keating had gained something of a reputation as an intelligence expert by virtue of his announcement .
 The administration had difficulty gaining public acceptance of its denials of the claims .
 Its failure to quiet the storm over Cuba was undermining efforts to turn the October triumph into a Cold War breakthrough .
 Kennedy decided he would have to overwhelm critics with photographic proof . Kennedy decided to overwhelm his critics with photo proof .
 The original idea was to invite the small group of reporters covering Keating to view the special briefing which had been put together for several Congressional committees . Keating was in office at the time of the crisis .
 At the last minute, however, the President decided that if classified material was to be released, he might as well go the whole way . The President decided to release classified material .
 He ordered McNamara to go on nation-wide television that evening, February 6, to display aerial reconnaissance photos brought back from Cuba . McNamara ordered the photos to be displayed on national television .
 The decision was reached so quickly that there was no time to check with McCone . McCone: "The decision was made very quickly and there were no time" for McCone's decision .
 For close to two hours the American people were exposed to some of the “blackest” secrets of the Invisible Government . The Invisible Government was exposed to the "blackest secrets" of the government .
 Most of the briefing was conducted by General Carroll’s thirty-four-year-old assistant, John Hughes . The briefing is conducted by John Hughes, the General's assistant .
 He displayed dozens of blowups of reconnaissance photos showing the Cuban missile sites first under construction and then in the process of dismantling . Finally, he showed the missile equipment being put aboard ships and carried away from the island .
 It was a breath-taking demonstration of the high degree of sophistication which had been achieved in electronic intelligence . It was the high level of sophistication achieved in the intelligence field .
 The presentation prompted two questions which were to prove embarrassing to the administration .
 No pictures were shown for the period between September 5 and October 14, raising the question of whether the intelligence community had neglected to conduct aerial reconnaissance during this period or whether the administration was suppressing photos .
 There had been no photographic count of the number of missiles shipped to Cuba, a tacit admission . There could be no certainty that the number spotted going out represented the total arsenal, a spokesman said .
 McNamara sidestepped these problems in answering questions THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (({300 after the briefing. McNamara: "The Invisible Government of America"
 McNamara finally explained in February that the U-2 missions during that period “didn’t relate” to the areas where the Russian missiles were found . As to the so-called “photo gap” between September 5 and October 14, McNamara explained in
 McNamara was saying that the CIA failed to photograph the western half of Cuba during the six weeks preceding the flight which discovered the offensive missiles . In plain English, McNamara said that .
 Kennedy argued that it really didn’t matter very much because the Soviets set up their missiles so quickly, there would have been nothing to see until a few days before October 14 . Kennedy said that it didn't matter because of the timing .
 Many important members of the administration were not so satisfied with the Invisible Government . The Invisible Government was created by President Barack Obama .
 They suspected that someone in the Pentagon or high in the CIA had been funneling incriminating evidence to the Republicans, possibly raw intelligence which had not yet been analyzed or brought to the President's attention .
 On March 25, when McCone came for one of his periodic meetings with the President, a third person, McGeorge Bundy, was included . Bundy was included for the first time in the meeting .
 The Invisible Government had taken great pride in its perMissile Crisis formance during the missile crisis, only to find its achievement compromised by suspicions that it was playing politics .
 There was no denying that the intelligence community had succeeded in raising the art of aerial photography to unimagined heights .
 The missile crisis had revealed unmistakably that automation was revolutionizing the spy business as rapidly as it was transforming American industry . The spy industry has been transformed by automation and automation .
 John Kennedy: “That function can now be assumed by satellites. That function is now being assumed by satellite satellites . “Satellite satellites are now capable of carrying out that function,” he said .
 The President of the United States and the Premier of the Soviet Union were referring to one of the strangest secrets of the Cold War, a secret which was scarcely a secret at all . NIKITA S KHRUSHCHEV to Paul-Henri Spaak, July,
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were alluding to a revolutionary tool of espionage, the camera-bearing ‘spy in the sky” satellite . The camera-carrying satellite was the first satellite to carry a camera inside the sky .
 Neither side had been fooled by elaborate security precautions of the other . And it was clear that neither was fooled by the elaborate security measures .
 The United States had been orbiting SAMOS spy satellites over the Soviet Union since 1961 . The Russians were known to have the capacity to track them .
 The Soviets started in 1962 to send up their COSMOS satellites under the vigilant eye of the U.S. tracking system . With similar technique and purpose the Soviets started sending up their satellites in 1962 .
 By 1963 aerial reconnaissance had become the most secretive operation of the Pentagon . Aerial reconnaissance was the Pentagon's most secretive program .
 SAMOS was first tested in 1960, when its virtues were graphically described in official pronouncements . Yet, ironically, the virtues of SAMOS were described as its virtues in 1960s .
 The electronic and optical laws upon which it was founded had long been the property of the scientific community, Russian and American alike. Indeed, the electronic and . optical laws on which it is founded had . long been . the property . of the Russian scientific community .
 Eisenhower Administration was emphasizing its determination to keep the Soviet Union under surveillance despite the incident . The U-2 incident occurred during a summit meeting in Paris being held that month .
 Pentagon releases classified classified classified information . The Pentagon says the Pentagon has been briefed on the intelligence behind the counter-intelligence operation .
 SAMOS, the name of a Greek island, was a contraction for Satellite and Missile Observation System . SAMOS is a satellite and missile system that was named after the SAMOS .
 The project was in an advanced state of development and the White House had given it a “DX” rating . It was one of the handful of Pentagon programs with the highest national priority . The White House gave it a "DX" rating .
 Still, it was to be pushed even faster on a budget of just under $200,000,000 a year . Still, the government budget was set to be increased on a $2,000-a-year budget .
 SAMOS was designed to be operational by 1962 and to take photographs with detail equal to what the human eye could see from a hundred feet . SAMOS is designed to take photos with detail equivalent to that of a human eye can see from 100 feet away .
 The satellite was launched* by an AtlasAgena rocket, standing ninety-five feet high, or a Thor-AgenA rocket, with a height of seventy-eight feet .
 The Agena was made by Lockheed Aircraft Corporation, designers and producers of the U-2 . It was the second stage of the Lockheed Aircraft Company's U.2 .
 SAMOS I failed to achieve orbit on October 11, 1960 . The satellite weighed 4,100 pounds and was twenty-two feet tall and five feet in diam diam diametrically .
 SAMOS was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, into a polar orbit from which it could photograph every nation in the world as the globe rotated under it . SAMOS launched from the base in California into polar orbit .
 The camera could be shut off when the satellite was off target, thereby conserving power . It could also be used to turn off the satellite when it is not on target .
 It could pick out radar and communication centers, and pinpoint missile sites by their radio guidance signals . It could also pinpoint missiles by picking out radar, communication centers and pinpoint missiles .
 SAMOS photographs could locate enemy military tar* In July, 1963, the Outstanding Unit Award was presented to the 6593 Test Squadron at Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii .
 The Air Force said the squadron had achieved 70 percent success in its capsule recoveries . The squadron said it has achieved 70 per cent success .
 Electronic Spies (305) get and provide instantaneous indications of troop or supply build-ups . They can also provide instantaneously indications of troops or supplies .
 The reconnaissance satellite would be subject to some of the limitations of the U-2 . The U.2 is a U.S. satellite capable of sending a satellite to the U.N. satellite .
 Clouds cover 60 percent of the earth at all times . It could be frustrated by clouds which cover 60 per cent of the globe .
 The U-2 could provide pictures of northern stretches of the Soviet Union that were beyond the reach of the U.2 . But it could provide images of the northern stretches .
 If it were hit by a rocket, it would burn up on re-entry into the earth’s atmosphere and the evidence would be destroyed . The evidence would then be destroyed if it was hit by the rocket .
 It would be a considerably more difficult target than a U-2 flying ten times lower . And it would be more difficult to hit than a plane ten times higher .
 SAMOS could carry a rocket motor which, on command from the earth, would enable it to move evasively . SAMOS would be able to move with the help of the rocket motor . The rocket motor could also be used to launch an unmanned spacecraft .
 It was to be a maneuverable satellite which would rendezvous with an enemy vehicle in orbit and inspect it by electronic means such as television . It was intended to be able to rendezvous and inspect the enemy vehicle by television .
 It was to have the capacity to neutralize or destroy an enemy satellite . Ultimately, it was to be able to destroy or neutralize an enemy satellites .
 MIDAS was designed to detect missile launchings with infrared sensors . MIDAS detects missile launches using infrared sensors to detect launchings . Midas was the first missile detection system to detect missiles .
 It was fired into orbit by the same rocket and it was also produced by Lockheed . The rocket was also made by Lockheed and launched into orbit .
 MIDAS was to provide a thirty-minute warning of enemy attack . It was designed to detect the intense heat given off by rocket exhaust during take-off .
 BMEWS radar in Thule, Greenland, would pick up incoming ICBM halfway between launch and impact . This would double the fifteen-minute alert of BMEWs . This is the first ICBM to be detected by the radar in Greenland .
 SAMOS was launched in 1962 but operational date was extended to 1967 at the earliest . During one test launching the heat-activated device, the heat system was launched by a team of engineers . SAMOS is the first of its kind to be launched by the Soviet Union in 1966 .
 306 sors sent out signals set off by a coffee pot on the firing pad . The Invisible Government of the U.S. has never been seen .
 Its cameras were to televise cloud cover and storm conditions in order to promote better weather prediction . The cameras were intended to help predict better weather predictions .
 Such surveillance could be of great value in timing SAMOS launches for moments of minimum cloud cover over the Soviet Union . SAMOS could be used to time the launch times for the launch of SAMOS in the 1980s .
 He asserted that it was perfectly lawful for satellites to be flown over foreign territory just as ships freely sail the high seas . He said it is perfectly lawful to fly satellites over foreign territories . The government says it is not illegal to fly over foreign soil .
 The head of NASA was betraying the fears of the administration that U.S. satellites operating over Russia would be shot down by Soviet propaganda . The president of the United States had been worried about the threat .
 They argued that there was a presumption of guilt in surptitious activities . The Soviet Union could play upon this as justification for shooting down a SAMOS or securing a UN resolution condemning the practice .
 If the operation were placed under the UN, the Soviets would be hard-pressed to destroy SAMOS either with rockets or words, they say . On the other hand, they contended, if the operation was placed under UN, it would be difficult to destroy .
 TIROS had been so used to plan U-2 flights over Cuba during the missile crisis in October, 1962 .
 The Kennedy Administration quickly decided that secrecy was a safer course . Electronic Spies were used in the Kennedy Administration .
 SAMOS II was successfully launched on January 31, 1961, 11 days after Kennedy took office . The Pentagon prohibited the release of any details about it . SAMOS I was launched in 1961 .
 This prohibition soon developed into an absolute ban on any discussion of the satellite, even in areas of prior official revelation . This ban has since been extended to a complete ban on all discussion .
 SAMOS existed, but it was impossible to obtain official confirmation that it was SAMOS . SAMOS was first known to exist, but SAMOS has since been confirmed to exist in the past .
 It's clear that the administration had international political purposes in mind in its new crackdown . Security, if any, had long since been breached by the original SAMOS disclosures, it was clear .
 Khrushchev had known for years that the U-2 was flying over Russia, but he said nothing until his hand was forced by the Powers incident . Khrushchev said he knew about the incident for years but kept quiet .
 Their complaint was formally carried to the United Nations in March, 1962 . The complaint was summed up on December 3 of that year by Platon D Morozov, the Soviet delegate to the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space .
 The standard reply of the U.S. was that a nation’s sovereignty extends only to the air space above it . Air space above the United States was the standard reply .
 Officials noted that in the first three years of the space age neither the United States nor the Soviet Union had claimed its territorial sovereignty was infringed by satellite overflights .
 A common law had been established, giving any nation the right to orbit satellites over another . In the absence of protest or international agreement to the contrary, these officials main .
 The resolution stipulated that international law and the United Nations Charter were to apply to outer space . International law and U.N. Charter was to apply . celestial bodies were not to be subject to national appropriation .
 The United States interpreted this as a contradiction of the Soviet argument that SAMOS violated national sovereignty . The U.S. interpreted the U.K. interpretation of SAMOS as a contradictory .
 The U.S. pledged to list all of its satellites to the UN Space Registry in February of 1962 . To demonstrate its sincerity in subscribing to UN supervision of space, the United States pledged .
 The Russians alleged that the U.S. was concealing some of its launches . Playing upon the deep secrecy surrounding the SAMOS program, the Russians alleged some of the launches .
 If it were to dispose effectively of suggestions that it was cheating, it would have to open up the SAMOS firings to much greater publicity .
 This would run counter to the basic policy decision not to provoke the Russians . But this would be a good thing for the U.S. to avoid provoking Russia .
 The United States could produce evidence that the unlisted objects in space were of Soviet origin . Or the U.S. could publicly produce evidence .
 The United States possessed a vast electronic network which kept a precise watch on all Soviet space operations . But this would expose the fact that the U.S. possessed a . vast electronic system which kept an electronic . watch on Soviet space . operations .
 The CIA and the Pentagon were opposed to providing the slightest help to the Russians in compromising the network . And the CIA and Pentagon were also opposed to giving the Russians help .
 If it were officially admitted that the U.S. was eavesdropping along the Iron Curtain, nations providing the clandestine facilities might be subjected to severe Russian pressure, as they were after U-2 .
 "We know that lots of things that two years ago we assumed our adversaries had, they did not have," says President Obama . "We're going to find out what our adversaries have, they don't have," he says .
 "What we are trying to do in this field is to make it as difficult as possible for them," he says . "We're trying to make this difficult for them. What we want to do is make it harder for them to do this," he adds .
 Defense Secretary McNamara was particularly jealous of the secrecy policy . McNamara: "We are trying to make them spend as much time and effort as we have to"
 He apparently did not comprehend that he himself had exposed SAMOS’ effectiveness when he announced that the U.S. was in a position to locate and destroy Soviet missile sites .
 The State Department wanted to destroy the myth that the Soviets could do no wrong in space . The U.S. State Department saw great propaganda value in destroying the myth .
 The government claimed that in the two previous years the Russians had failed in five attempts to reach the planets -- two to Mars and three to Venus . This viewpoint prevailed in September, 1962, when the government .
 In trying to substantiate the claim, the CIA and the Pentagon were realized, the fears of the CIA were realized . The CIA and Pentagon were trying to prove the claim .
 Out of it came revelations of a world that was unknown to the vast majority of Americans, if not to the Soviet leaders . The book was published by the CIA, the CIA and other intelligence agencies .
 It was a complicated network of electronic fences, stretching across the United States . It was also a network of sensitive radios and radars hidden along the perimeter of the Soviet Union .
 The network was so effective that no Soviet rocket could get off the ground without its being known within a few minutes . No Soviet rocket was able to get off ground without being known by the network .
 The first point of detection was a radar and communications system in the Middle East .
 It was centered in Turkey at small Black Sea towns such as Zonguldak, Sinop and Samsun .
 Radars monitored the countdowns and rocket launchings at the main Soviet missile sites near the Aral Sea . The radars, which went into operation in 1955, could reach at least 3,000 miles .
 Modern electronic counter-measures are an important deterrent and intelligence tool for the military services . Modern electronic countersmeats are important deterrents and intelligence tools for military services.
 Another indication of the potential of the eavesdropping equipment got out the following month . The equipment was released by the government .
 Senator Barry Goldwater said an ‘electronic ear” operating in planes off Cuba was so sensitive that it could pick up the sound of various machines to the point of detecting a small generator in operation .
 The Pentagon was perfecting super-range “over the horizon” radar . The Air Force had installed highly sensitive atmospheric pressure gear which could provide instantaneous indications of a Soviet missile launching .
 After a rocket had been detected by the Middle East system, it would next be picked up by the BMEWS radar in Greenland, which kept watch over the Arctic, or by the large saucer-like radar at Shemya in the Aleutians .
 NAVSPASUR is an electronic fence stretching from Georgia to Southern California . NAVSPasUR was the third point of detection and the most precise . NAVspASUR was a fence that was set up in Southern California and Georgia .
 It was also possible to calculate the exact time and place of Jaunch and predict the future path of the satellite .
 Many officials felt that too much was being revealed about these secret electronic systems . Many officials believed too much had been revealed about .
 NASA continued until April, 1963, to list Soviet launchings in the Satellite Situation Reports it issued twice a month . NASA continued to do so until April 1963 .
 There was an abrupt and unexplained return to the previous practice of secrecy . Then there was an unexplained return of secrecy, the government said .
 The House Information Subcommittee sought an explanation, but NASA spokesmen said all they knew was that the tracking system was controlled by the Pentagon, which refused to release the information .
 Despite the fact that the policy of secrecy was perpetuating a false image of United States inferiority in space, the administration held to its practice of suppressing the truth about Soviet failures .
 Despite the fact that nuclear test-ban negotiations were threatened by public ignorance of the elaborate array of United States detection devices, the administration refused to embark upon even a modest program of education .
 The United States was seeking to hold its tongue about secrets that were no longer secret to the Russians . The U.S. sought to keep its tongue on secrets that are now secret to Russia .
 In November, 1962, the Soviets dropped their long-standing demand for a ban on spy-in-the-sky satellites . The Soviets, indicating their complete awareness, dropped their demand for such a ban .
 This opened the way to a United States— Soviet agreement on the peaceful uses of outer space . The United States and the Soviet Union agreed to a U.S. agreement on outer space use .
 Electronic experts suggested the Russians were developing a spy satellite of their own . They did not wish to be inhibited by international prohibitions on such devices .
 Khrushchev’s son-in-law, Alexei Adzhubei, the editor of Izvestia, seemed to substantiate this theory in a speech in Helsinki, Finland, in September 1963 .
 This is the war of words, conducted on the airwaves by combatants who are thousands of miles apart . This is a war conducted by people who will never meet in the U.S.
 Daily, East and West beam hundreds of hours of propaganda broadcasts at each other in an unrelenting babble of competition for the minds of listeners .
 Millions of people in the Middie East, Latin America and Asia who cannot read, can nevertheless be reached by the propaganda of both sides . Millions of those who can't read can nevertheless reach the propaganda .
 To intelligence officers, the term “black radio” can have a specialized meaning, to describe a radio that is captured and then operated as if all were normal in order to deceive the opposition . The Invisible Government is heavily engaged in “Black radio’s” The
 The Germans successfully underL THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (314 operations of every conceivable type) The Germans were successful under the Nazis . The Nazis successfully underwrote the entire German government .
 U.S. radio activities have ranged from overt, openly acknowledged and advertised programs of Voice of America to highly secret CIA transmitters in the Middle East and other areas of the world .
 In between is a whole spectrum of black, gray, secret and semi-secret radio operations . In between, there are also black and gray operations .
 The CIA’s Radio Swan, because it became operationally involved at the Bay of Pigs, never enjoyed more than the thinnest of covers . The CIA's Radio Swan was never more than a cover of cover .
 Other radio operations, financed and controlled in whole or part by the Invisible Government, are more skillfully concealed and much bigger .
 In some cases, it is possible, indeed probable, that lower-level employees of such an organization are unaware of the true point of control of the particular activity .
 A secret CIA transmitter in Lebanon, to take a random example, would be run directly by CIA officers . CIA officers would be in charge of the transmitter . A secret transmitter would be located directly in Lebanon .
 In a larger, hybrid operation, knowledge of financing and control by Washington might be limited to a handful of top executives . But in a larger operation, Washington might not be able to keep control of the operation .
 The American public has been beguiled by some of this allegedly “private” broadcasting work . For purposes of this book, it is sufficient to note that an inevitable by-product—as in clandestine operations generally— is that the American public .
 Black-radio operations fall into two categories: transmitting and receiving . Transmitting and receiving is one of the two categories .
 Both sides carefully monitor each other’s broadcasts to learn what the opposition is saying . The British Operation Northpole during World War I used this technique to mine the British . The U.S. mined the British operation Northpole .
 Parachutists dropped by British Intelligence were lured into traps by Dutch underground radios that had captured by the Nazis . In this chapter, the term is used in its broader sense, to describe radio operations in general where they are controlled directly or indirectly by an intelligence apparatus .
 The intelligence agency’s listening posts all over the globe capture every major broadcast of a foreign nation on tape . The agency's listening posts are located around the world .
 Daily, this extremely valuable foreign broadcast information is edited, correlated, mimeographed and distributed to a wide list of consumers from a CIA office in downtown Washington . The CIA is distributing the information daily .
 The broadcast monitoring service is more or less openly acknowledged by the CIA . It is about the most “overt” operation the agency conducts, the CIA says . The CIA says it does not comment on the program .
 CIA's task was to monitor Communist bloc broadcasts alone, says Free Europe Committee president John Richardson, Jr. Speaking on January 30, 1963, he spoke of the CIA's role .
 Radio stations of thirteen Communist countries, he said, “transmit more than four thousand hours of radio programming abroad every week in sixty-three languages.”
 The Soviet Union leads this radio propaganda parade with some thirteen hundred weekly hours of radio propaganda directed abroad . Soviet Union has 13,000 weekly hours a week dedicated to foreign propaganda .
 For the background to this unusual passage in the President’s speech, one must look to 1956 and Suez . The background to the passage in 1956 and the Suez crisis is to be remembered .
 Less well known are the CIA’s mimeographed summaries of the foreign press . In the aftermath of the *
 Nasser increased his efforts to bring the entire Arab world under his domination . The Invisible Government of Egypt was the result of the failed Anglo-French-Israeli invasion .
 Near East Broadcasting Station at Zyghi, on the south coast of Cyprus, was the most powerful propaganda voice in the Middle East .
 NEBS was a British black-radio operation, ostensibly under private ownership . It was a BBC black radio operation under the name of NEBS .
 Cairo spread the most violent sort of propaganda against its Arab neighbors and the U.S. The United States. It spread a violent propaganda against the Arab neighbors, the United States .
 Its “Voice of the Arabs” was on the air from 6:30 A.M. to 1:15 A.m. the next morning . It was broadcasting throughout the Middle East and as far south as the Belgian Congo from two seventy-kilowatt transmitters
 By 1958 Radio Cairo was openly urging bloody revolution in Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon . By 1958, Radio Cairo had openly urged bloody revolution by Arab Spring .
 In February of that year, Nasser had seized power in Syria and proclaimed the United Arab Republic . In February, he had seized control of Syria .
 Iraq’s King Feisal II joined with his Hashemite cousin King Hussein of Jordan to form the Arab Union . The Arab Union was formed by the Arab Spring in 1991 .
 CIA felt this kind of talk from Radio Cairo could not go unanswered . Since Iraq was the world’s sixth largest oil producer and the only Arab member of the pro-Western Baghdad pact, the CIA felt .
 By 1958 the CIA had set up a series of clandestine radio stations in the Middle East and along its fringes to counteract the influence of Radio Cairo . As a result of the CIA's efforts to counter Radio Cairo, Radio Cairo was banned .
 A crisis is brewing in Lebanon over the selection of a successor to President Camille Chamoun, whose term was expiring . Meanwhile, a crisis was brewing in the country's political crisis .
 Twenty-three-year-old King Feisal and his uncle, the crown prince, were murdered in the coup . The coup was a coup against the government .
 Premier Nuri as-Said, captured while trying to escape dressed as a woman, was also killed . Premier was also captured . He was captured in a separate raid on the country's capital .
 The next day Eisenhower sent the Marines into Lebanon to shore up the Chamoun government . Eisenhower, in Operation Blue Bat, sent the next day . The Marines were sent into Lebanon .
 Radio Cairo exultsed in the bloodshed in Baghdad and urged the people of Jordan to rise up and butcher King Hussein . Radio Cairo also urged Jordan to kill Hussein .
 CIA transmitters got busy, new voices heard on the airwaves . New voices were heard on airwaves as the CIA got busy with transmitters .
 Second mysterious Arab radio station goes on the air yesterday calling itself the “Voice of Justice” and claiming to be broadcasting from Syria . Radio station claims to be broadcast in Syria .
 Its program heard here consisted of bitter criticism against Soviet Russia and Soviet Premier Khrushchev . Its program was aimed at Soviet Russia .
 Earlier the "Voice of Iraq" went on the air with attacks against the Iraqi revolutionary government . Earlier the “Voice of Iraqi’s” attacks on the government were aired .
 Cairo said two stations were transmitting from the French Riviera . Cairo said others were in British Aden, Jordan, Lebanon, Cyprus, Cyprus and Kenya .
 Before the revolt in Iraq, there had been another in Baghdad, the statement said . The revolt in Baghdad was preceded by a revolt in 2003, the government said .
 One of the most nagging problems for such radio stations is to explain the source of funds . These operations are indeed expensive, and one of the biggest problems for radio stations in the world .
 WRUL is a U.S. short-wave radio station with offices in Manhattan as the World Wide Broadcasting System, Inc. WRUL was founded in 1945 . WRUL has offices in New York, New York and Washington, DC .
 H Montgomery Hyde maintains that WRUL was penetrated by British Intelligence in the U.S. during World War II . WRUL maintains that British Intelligence penetrated by WRUL in the war .
 WRUL received a letter of commendation from the Castillo-Armas government of Guatemala, thanking the station for its services during the revolt against Arbenz .
 The letter was from Jose Toron, who operated a clandestine "Free Guatemala" radio station before the Communist government overthrown . Toron operated the radio station for decades before the overthrow .
 WRUL has been linked with at least two CIA operations — the Bay of Pigs and the Guatemala coup in 1954 . WRUL was linked to at least 2 CIA operations, including the 1954 Guatemala coup .
 Cairo complained about clandestine transmitters in the Middle East . Soviet official: U.S. had set up a series of secret radios aimed at making trouble for the Soviet Union .
 It broadcasts exclusively to the Soviet Union, twenty-four hours a day, from seventeen transmitters in three locations . Three locations: Lampertheim, West Germany; Pals, near BarceJona; and Taipeh, Formosa; .
 Its programing center is a rebuilt former airport building near Munich at Oberwiesenfeld, which was once Hitler’s airfield . The airfield was once once used by the Nazis .
 It says it is supported by foundations but does not list them anywhere . It does not say which foundations are supported by it .
 In 1961 it broadcast the fact that the Russians had resumed nuclear tests . In 1961, it broadcast that Russia had resumed its nuclear tests.
 Neither event, of course, had been disclosed to the Russian people by the Soviet government . Neither event had been revealed to the Russians .
 Two Radio Liberty employees died under mysterious circumstances in Munich in 1954 . In 1954 two Radio Liberty workers died in mysterious circumstances .
 Leonid Karas, a writer on the radio’s Byelorussia desk, was found drowned in September . In September, Leonid was found dead in a bathtub in Moscow .
 Abo Fatalibey, head of the Azerbaijan desk, was murdered and stuffed under the sofa in the apartment of a Russian named Mikhail Ismailov in November .
 The coffin was too short for six-foot Ismailov . At the last moment the coffin was opened . The coffin had to be opened at the last minute .
 The body was definitely identified as that of Fatalibey, the Radio Liberty official . The body of the official was found in a shallow grave at the hospital .
 Anatoli Skachkov, a Russian émigré, joined Radio Liberty on January 1, 1957 . Anatoli joined the radio network in 1957 .
 Izvestia carried an article which accused Radio Liberty of being staffed by CIA men . The article was published on November 5, 1962 .
 Two Americans, Valerio and Sanker, bearing flowers and a bottle of cognac, visited Skachkov . The next day two Americans arrived with flowers and cognac in the city .
 The tale of poisoned cognac is colorful, but Radio Liberty tells a different story . Radio Liberty says the story is not true . The story is true .
 According to the radio station, Skachkov was an alcoholic who developed a persecution complex . The radio station says he developed a "persecution complex" after being persecuted .
 As a result, he was committed to the State Institute for the Mentally Disturbed . He is now being held in a psychiatric hospital .
 Radio Liberty is "supported by a group of private American citizens," says Radio Liberty . The station is reaching the Russian people in sufficient numbers to be irritating to the Soviet leadership, it says . But the continuing attacks on Radio Liberty and its present and former employees provide some indication .
 One distinction between RFE and Radio Liberty is that RFE broadcasts exclusively to the five satellite nations, while Radio Liberty broadcasts only to the Soviet Union . RFE broadcast exclusively to five satellite countries, while Liberty broadcasts to Russia .
 Radio Free Europe was born in 1949 . It was formed with the formation of the National Committee for a Free Europe . It is the current incarnation of the radio network .
 Berle, Jr., Jr. participated in the Bay of Pigs operation a decade later . Berle Jr. was the leader of the operation in the 1960s and '90s .
 Two locations are in West Germany, at Biblis, near Frankfurt, and at Holzkirchen, near Munich . Two locations were in West German, and two locations in East Germany .
 RFE, Communist Bloc Operations, Exile Political Organizations, Free World Operations and West European Operations. RFE is based in Russia, Ukraine and Russia .
 In 1953 it set up something called the Free Europe Press, which began wafting rubber and plastic balloons filled with propaganda materials to Eastern Europe .
 In 1956, the Czech Government charged that a balloon released by RFE had caused the crash of a Czech airliner on January 18 of that year in the Tatra Mountains of Slovakia . In February, 1956, a balloon was released by the Czech government that caused the plane crash .
 Moscow also protested the balloons, and Hungary chimed in that American balloons had caused three Hungarian air crashes . Moscow and Hungary also protested .
 RFE figured in another cloak-and-dagger episode in December, 1959, when it charged that “a Communist diplomat” put lethal amounts of atropine in the salt shakers of the radio station’s cafeteria in Munich .
 If taken in sufficient quantity, atropine can cause delirium, convulsions, coma or death . Atropine has been used in the past for more than a decade .
 The case was quietly dropped the next month, when the Munich public prosecutor said the amount of poison in the salt cellars had not been sufficient to cause serious harm . The case has since been quietly dropped .
 At times, RFE has come under critical attack for the content of its broadcasts to Eastern Europe . RFE's broadcasts have been criticized for their content of their broadcasts .
 On July 9, 1959, the United States Ambassador to Poland, Jacob D Beam, had protested RFE’s broadcasts because he felt they contained misinformation and too blatant a propaganda line .
 It was RFE’s role in the Hungarian revolt of 1956 that brought the most criticism and controversy upon it . RFE was criticized for its role in Hungary's revolt .
 At the heart of the issue was the extremely touchy question of whether U.S. foreign policy should be aimed at the “liberation” of Eastern Europe . The U.N. should not be aiming at the "liberation" of eastern Europe .
 RFE fund-appeal booklet, Your Money's Worth, illustrates that the radio station still speaks with a militant voice . Nevertheless, a recent RFE Fund-Appeal booklet shows that RFE still speaks .
 The Soviet role in Hungary was a sickening spectacle to civilized men everywhere . The former Soviet Union's role in the country was a 'sickening spectacle' to civilized people .
 Moscow seemed willing to grant Hungary a measure of freedom in the first phase of its anti-gay laws . Hungary has been hit hard by the Kremlin in recent years .
 Then Russian tanks rolled into Budapest and brutally crushed the Hungarian patriots . Then Russian troops rolled into Hungary and crushed the country .
 In the aftermath of the blood bath, questions were widely faised about RFE’s role . Questions were widely asked about the role of RFE in the aftermath .
 Various tribunals examined the question, but little has been said publicly about some more subtle and basic underlying questions . Various Tribunals examine this question, and little was said publicly .
 The U.S. Information Agency broadcasts around the globe in thirty-six languages . It is an organ of the United States Information Agency, and it broadcasts .
 In 1963 work was completed on a gigantic transmitter complex at Greenville, North Carolina, giving the Voice the most powerful long-range broadcasting station in the world . In 1963, the Voice was the world's most powerful radio station .
 News and propaganda broadcasts across national boundaries to other nations, particularly behind the Iron Curtain, are among the mechanisms of United States foreign policy .
 To do so would have opened up the entire sensitive question of whether and/or to what extent RFE received policy guidance, funds and direction from the CIA and the State Department .
 A spokesman said broadcasts promising Western military aid to Hungary were the work of a “Communist radio located in East Germany’s East Germany . A spokesman for the Hungarian government said the broadcasts were made by a ‘Communist’ radio .
 RFE turned over to it three miles of tape containing all its broadcasts to Hungary before, during and after the revolt . RFE also handed over to the Hungarian government three miles tape .
 On January 25, 1957, Chancellor Konrad Adenauer reported the results of the inquiry at a press conference . The inquiry was conducted by the German government in 1957 .
 Charges that RFE had promised the Hungarians armed assistance by the West “do not correspond with the facts,” he says . Charges against RFE do not correspond to the facts .
 Radio Free Europe said there had been a shake-up at the BBC . But it said there was also a 'shake-up' at the organisation .
 A second inquiry was conducted by the Council of Europe, an organization of Western governments formed in 1949 to deal mainly with social problems .
 Radio Free Europe helped to create an impression that support might be forthcoming for the Hungarians . It would appear that certain broadcasts by the broadcaster created the impression .
 RFE’s broadcasts “helped to create an impression,” as the UN put it, that assistance might be on the way . The three cautiously phrased reports, in other words, found in varying degree that RFE's broadcasts helped .
 Lodge said the Hungarian resistance had given the UN “a brief moment in which to mobilize the conscience of the world on your behalf’s behalf”
 Another RFE broadcast during the revolt gave instructions on how to blow up attacking Soviet tanks . Another gave instructions to blow-up tanks .
 RFE broadcasts from inside Hungary in the dying hours of the revolt . The effect of RFE’s words is nowhere more heartbreakingly recorded than in the broadcasts from Hungary .
 Radio Free Rakoczi broadcast this message from inside Hungary at 13:48 hours:7 “Attention, Radio Free Europe, hello attention. On the afternoon of November 5, November 5.
 State Department brochure discouragingly told Americans who inquired about retiring to an island paradise in the Caribbean . “THERE ARE THREE coconut palm trees on Great Swan Island at the present time,” it said .
 The Swan Islands are a speck in the western Caribbean near Honduras . The vision of thirty-six-inch lizards slithering underfoot would likely deter any potential visitor .
 The department’s brochure, prepared for just such inquiries, had even more hideously disenchanting news . The brochure was prepared for inquiries, but the department's brochure has even more disenchant news .
 The water, the brochure added, “is exceptionally clear and blue and abounding in different types of fish.” CIA’s Guano Paradise is located in the area .
 Great Swan Island, as late as 1964, was the site of a covert CIA radio station broadcasting to Cuba, Mexico, Central America and the northern tier of South America .
 Not that any prospective tourist would have been likely to stumble on the island . The island is home to a population of 1,500 people .
 There is, naturally, no commercial airline service to the CIA’s airstrip .
 The only boat takes five days to ply between Tampa and the island and carries a pungent cargo of bananas and fertilizer . Only boat can ferry bananas from the island to the island .
 The story of the CIA's efforts to conceal the CIA’s hand on Swan Island provides an episode of comic relief . Despite these precautions, the story of this episode of "Swan Island" provides some relief .
 The Swan Islands are really two islands, Great Swan (usually known simply as Swan Island) and Little Swan . Great Swan is a mile and a half long and half a mile wide . Little Swan is one of the largest islands in the world .
 The islands are due south of the western tip of Cuba, Cuba, and ninety-seven miles north of Punte Patuca, Honduras .
 They are said to have been named for a seventeenth-century pirate who used them as a base .
 The CIA's Caribbean isle is made entirely of guano, the accumulated droppings of sea fowl . Like the lair of Ian Fleming’s nefarious Doctor No, the isle in the Caribbean isles is made from guano .
 The United States has claimed the islands since 1863, but then, so has Honduras . The U.S. has claimed them since 1863 . Honduras has also claimed them .
 When the CIA received approval to mount the operation against Cuba that grew into the Bay of Pigs, it was decided first to soften up Castro’s island psychologically by means of radio broadcasts . When the operation was mounted, the CIA used radio broadcasts as a way of softening up Castro
 Initially, its mission was confined to propaganda broadcasts designed to undermine the Castro regime . Initially, it was used to broadcast anti-Castro propaganda .
 The radio station was assigned a more militant role in the Bay of Pigs invasion planning . Gradually, as the invasion planning progressed, the radio station became more militant .
 The boat service is operated by Hamilton Bros., Inc., a Honduran company, the State Department brochure says . During the invasion, as has been seen, Radio Swan broadcast .
 330 coded messages, appeals for uprisings among the Cuban populace and armed forces, and instructions in the art of sabotage .
 The mysterious new fifty-kilowatt station suddenly began to broadcast from Swan Island in May of 1960 . There had to be some public explanation for the new station .
 The president of Gibraltar was Thomas Dudley Cabot, of Weston, Massachussetts, a banker and the former president of the United Fruit Company . Cabot was the director, in 1951, of the State Department Office of International Security Affairs .
 Godfrey Cabot was also president and director of Godfrey L Cabot, Inc., the world's largest producer of carbon black . Cabot is now the president of the world’s largest carbon black company .
 Another stockholder was publicly identified at the time as Sumner Smith, a Boston businessman who claimed his family owned Swan Island .
 Gibraltar Steamship Corporation was leasing land for radio station from Sumner Smith, who was chairman of the board of Abington Textile Machinery Works .
 Peculiarly, the Federal Communications Commission did not license Radio Swan or the Gibraltar Steamship Corporation .
 It firmly listed* Swan Island as a “possession,” and had consistently rejected Honduran claims . The Honduran government has consistently rejected Honduras' claims .
 It did not take long for Havana, stung by the propaganda broadcasts, to bark back . Havana was stung back by the broadcasts, but it was soon back in Havana .
 The Hondurans insisted it was their mound of guano, but CIA says it was actually their guano . The CIA says the situation was going to be handled by the Honduran government .
 The trouble had its roots in the fact that a 1960 U.S. census had been taken on Swan Island .
 In March of that year, a two-star admiral had been piped ashore to count noses on Great Swan . "Great Swan" was one of the most successful warships in the world .
 Rear Admiral H Arnold Karo, the director of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey, stopped off to take the census during a voyage of the survey ship Explorer .
 Swan Island population has dropped four since 1950 . In April, with much fanfare, it was announced in Washington that the population of Swan Island was twenty-eight .
 Honduras students plan to plant their country’s flag on Swan Island . Honduran students protest claim of sovereignty implied by taking of the 1960 census .
 State Department claimed United States sovereignty over the Swan Islands . This did not mean private individuals could not own property on the island, as the Smith family claimed it did .
 The 'Invisible Government' of Honduras arrived off Swan Island . The Honduran government has never been seen since .
 The invaders were repulsed single-handedly by John Hamilton, a Cayman Islander who was the Weather Bureau’s native cook . John Hamilton was the original cook .
 Hondurans shouted that they were coming ashore to place a marker on the beach claiming Swan Island as their own . From their boat, the Honduranans shouted they were on their way to claim Swan Island .
 They came ashore, unarmed, sang the Honduran national anthem, took their own census and planted their flag . They sang their own national anthem and took a census .
 The State Department is awaiting a report from its embassy in Tegucigalpa on the illegal landing by the Hondurans . The U.S. State Department says the government is awaiting the report .
 Honduras says U.S. occupied Swan Island “against the right and will” of his government . Francisco Milla Bermudez, permanent Honduran representative to the UN, told the General Assembly .
 The U.S. claim to the islands was based on guano, specifically the Guano Act of 1856 . The Act was passed by Congress in 1856, and the act was a result of the act of guano .
 Under it, the President could issue a certificate when an American citizen discovered guano on an unclaimed island . The President could also issue it if he found guano in unclaimed territory .
 This gave the discoverer the right to collect and sell the guano, a valuable fertilizer rich in phosphates . This gave him the right of collecting and selling the valuable fertilizer .
 The President, at his discretion, could then designate the island as United States territory .
 Shortly after the turn of the century, the company abandoned the islands . The islands are now uninhabited .
 They were claimed in 1904 by Captain Alonzo Adams, an old salt who sailed from Mobile, Alabama .
 Honduras made several passes at the islands in the 1920s . Washington warned Tegucigalpa to keep off and sent along a copy of Seward’s Guano Certificate to back up its territorial claim .
 For a time the United Fruit Company harvested coconuts on the CIA’s Guano Paradise, but the 1955 hurricane swept away all but the three trees alluded to in the State Department travel brochure .
 The Weather Bureau maintained a station, staffed by eight men, to take wind direction, wind speed, temperature and humidity pressure . The station was staffed by 8 men .
 FAA maintained a high-powered radio beacon as a navigational aid to pilots . FAA maintained the beacon as an aid to navigational aids to pilots.
 The Weather Bureau people were rotated every three to six months . They were not allowed to bring their wives and children to Swan Island .
 A favorite pastime of gourmets among the government men was clonking lobsters over the head with stones in the shallow water . The lobsters were clonked in shallow water with stones .
 The CIA set up shop in lizard-proof Quonset huts half a mile from the Weather Bureau compound . The CIA was located in the huts of Quonsets, a Quonet hut in the area .
 They installed their radio equipment in big trailers slung with awnings to protect the delicate electronic gear from the broiling Caribbean sun . The radio equipment is placed in the trailers to protect them from the sun .
 Cayman Islanders, imported as a labor force, lived nearby with their families in a compound called Gliddenville . The Cayman Islanders lived in the compound with their family .
 WRUL would co-operate with Radio Swan in broadcasts to Cuba in 1960s . Radio Swan was the first station to broadcast to Cuba .
 World Wide, besides its Manhattan office, had a short-wave station at Scituate, Massachusetts . World Wide had a New York office at the time .
 Representative Roman C, Pucinski, Chicago Democrat and sponsor of Radio Free Cuba, announced that his group would also co-operate with World Wide and Radio Swan .
 Pucinski described Radio Free Cuba as a privately owned group that had six radio stations in Florida, including the Florida Keys, and Louisiana . The group also had six stations in Louisiana and Florida .
 Some prominent Cuban exiles taped programs for the CIA station . Luis Conte Aguero, a former Havana radio and television commentator, taped programs .
 During the invasion, the CIA station was on the air twenty-four hours a day, transmitting romantic-sounding messages in code in code . During the war, the station was in constant use of code .
 Radio Swan broadcast mysterious orders to nonexistent battalions . Even after the invasion had collapsed, Radio Swan continued to broadcast mysterious instructions .
 Radio Swan ordered detachments not to surrender during the April 22 invasion . Three days after the end of the invasion, help was on the way, Radio Swan said .
 Survivor survivors bitter at what they felt was false encouragement by Radio Swan . Some of the weary brigade survivors heard the broadcasts as they tried to evade capture by the militia .
 By this time, Radio Swan’s cover as a private station owned by the Gibraltar Steamship Corporation had worn perilously thin . Radio Swan's cover as private station had worn thin .
 A private station that had broadcast messages in code and instructions to troops during a clandestine invasion—well, it seemed to be time to get out of town . The station was a private radio station that broadcast messages to troops .
 The company kept an office in Manhattan, but moved the entire operation to Miami in September, 1961 .
 Horton Heath will be moving to Miami to take over the office of the Gibraltar line .
 Several pieces of luggage being moved into the suite were marked with the name “George Wass,” who was identified as an official of Radio Swan .
 Gibraltar took this listing in the Miami telephone book:* Gibraltar SS Corp. Gibraltar took the listing .
 Vanguard Service Corporation did not bother to move out of Gibraltar’s quarters or to change its telephone number .
 Radio Americas, now managed by Roger Butts, continued to broadcast from Swan Island . With a whole new dramatis personae, Radio Americas continues to broadcast .
 Mr Crowell’s father had been a chemist for a guano company . The adventurous couple occupied their leisure time with visits far and wide to the scene of bygone guano operations .
 The Crowells were, apparently, innocently unaware of what they had stumbled into . They were apparently unaware that they were going to be killed .
 Once a week, a CIA plane would leave Miami for Swan Island, and it was the only air link with the United States . The island was the last link between the U.S. and the United Kingdom .
 Island found out that no preparation in the line of ramp or ladder had been made to get two passengers from the high door of the plane .
 After much scurrying around and various suggestions, a solution has been found . After much THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT scurried around, the solution was found .
 They drove a tractor with a scoop up to the door, raised the scoop, led us onto it, backed away a bit and lowered us . They lowered us onto the scoop and then lowered us down .
 What happened next was like a scene straight out of a Margaret Rutherford—Alistair Sim film comedy, as the charming couple was turned loose on the CIA’s guano island .
 Palm warblers . . were around our house all the time . I had an excellent view of a vittelina warbler, Nelson’s named for Mr George Nelson and found only on Swan .
 On the runway we enjoyed daily a flock of twenty little blue herons in all stages of color, a few white ibis and one cattle egret . On the runways, we saw a herd of herons and a few cattle egrets . We also saw a few ibis
 It seemed like home to hear and see one catbird, also one tree swallow . It was home to one bird, one bird and one swallow .
 There was no question that the CIA had gone above and beyond the call of duty to be hospitable to the delightful Massachusetts couple . The CIA has been criticized for its actions .
 Crowell concluded, “the pilot flew low over and around the islands as a farewell treat.” Crowell said the pilot flew . Crowell: “The pilot flew. low over . around the . islands as an . farewell treat .
 It called on Cubans to burn cane fields, and carry matches to be ready for sabotage at all times .
 It instructed people to go into offices and telephone booths and take the receivers off the hooks to tie up communications . It instructed them to take the hooks from the hooks in telephone booths .
 The CIA's reported plan was to curtail the island’s beer supply by creating a bottle shortage . The plan was reportedly to create a bottle bottle shortage by creating bottle shortages .
 In Boston, Sumner Smith maintained he was not sure whether or not he was still a director of the Gibraltar Steamship Corpora~CIA’s Guano Paradise .
 Smith foreclosed a mortgage on the island that had been acquired years ago by his father, the late Charles Sumner Smith . Smith said he foreclosed the mortgage on that mortgage .
 Smith said he transferred ownership of the island to his four children . He said they had leased the land to Gibraltar for operation of the radio station .
 A telephone call was placed to the Vanguard Service Corporation, consultants, in Miami late in 1963 . A call was made to Vanguard Service Corp. in Miami .
 FCC does license stations broadcasting from the United States or its possessions . Gillingham said yes, the FCC does .
 Millions of persons watched the four televised debates between Richard M Nixon and John F Kennedy . Voters went to the polls without knowing the secret reasons for the public positions the candidates took on Cuba .
 Behind scenes, on both sides, there was deep concern over the pending CIA invasion . Behind the scenes, both sides were worried about the imminent invasion .
 The Nixon and Kennedy camps in 1960 over the planned invasion of Vietnam began in 1944 . To understand the secret drama, one must go back to a tradition that began with 1944 .
 Thomas E Dewey, the Republican presidential candidate, was made available to Dewey by The 1960 Campaign—and Now . In that year, wartime intelligence reports were made available by Dewey .
 In 1952 President Truman made CIA data available to General Eisenhower and to Adlai Stevenson . In 1952, President Truman gave CIA data to the Eisenhower administration . The CIA data was available to the Stevenson family .
 In 1956, Eisenhower arranged CIA briefings for Stevenson . Eisenhower arranged the CIA briefings . Stevenson was assassinated in 1968 .
 Allen Dulles, then Director of Central Intelligence, flew to Hyannis with two aides, James Brooke and Gates Lloyd . On July 23, Dulles and two aides were at Hyannis, Hyannis .
 CIA men arrive in an Aero Commander that had the markings of a private plane . CIA men arrived in the plane in the Aero Commander . The plane had markings of private plane, the CIA says .
 Kennedy indicated particular emphasis had been placed on Cuba and Africa . Kennedy said these had been discussed ‘in detail’ and indicated emphasis was on Cuba .
 On July 27 Dulles flew to the LBJ Ranch in Texas and remained overnight to brief Johnson . Dulles stayed overnight at the ranch to brief the president .
 Nixon and aides did not know exactly how much, if anything, Kennedy knew about the invasion plan . Nixon and his aides were not sure how much of the plan was known .
 They certainly did not want the Democratic candidate to be able to claim credit for an invasion that might be launched by a Republican President . They certainly didn't want to .
 President Eisenhower ordered the CIA to arm and train the exiles in May of 1960 . Eisenhower had ordered that the CIA armament and training exiles to arm them . Eisenhower ordered that exiles be trained and trained .
 Nixon and his advisers wanted the CIA invasion to take place before the voters went to the polls on November 8 . Nixon wanted the invasion to be done before the November 8 election .
 Nixon was hoping for an invasion before the election because “it would have been a cinch to win” the presidency if the Eisenhower Administration had destroyed Castro in the closing days of the campaign . Nixon was the Number 2 man at the time .
 The best documentation of this is an article by Herbert G Klein, press secretary to Vice-President Nixon during the 1960 campaign .
 On March 25, 1962, Klein revealed what had been going on behind the scenes in the Nixon camp in 1960 . Klein was editor of the San Diego Union, which he was the editor of .
 We had stern instructions not to talk about this, and, despite many tempts, we protected security by remaining silent . We protected security from talking about it, despite tempts of temptation .
 Nixon people were hoping the invasion would take place any day, that was exactly what they hoped would not happen . Kennedy strategists hoped that the Kennedy administration would not be ready for the invasion .
 They were receiving persistent, and disturbing, reports that some kind of Cuban exile operation was in the works . Some of the Cuban government officials say they are concerned about the situation .
 The reports of invasion training were picked up from several sources, including alert members of the press . The reports were reported by several sources .
 George and Hank Walker went to Florida to shoot pictures for Life magazine of Cuban exiles training to invade their homeland . Life magazine's Life magazine featured the photos of exiles preparing for invasion .
 St. George received several telephone calls from William Attwood, a member of Kennedy’s speech-writing staff . Attwood was a speech-writer for Kennedy, who was on Kennedy's staff .
 George, Attwood expressed concern that the Republicans would try to launch an invasion of Cuba before election day . Attwood said he was concerned about a possible invasion of the island nation .
 George said the question, apparently, in the mind of the Kennedy aide was not whether there was to be an invasion, but when . George: The question is not whether the invasion was planned but when. George said, "The question is when"
 In April, 1959, after a long meeting with Castro in his office in the Capitol, Nixon drafted a confidential memo . George told Attwood that there seemed little possibility of an immediate invasion, judging by the state of readiness of the *
 The one thing we can be sure of is that he has those indefinable qualities which make him a leader of men . Whatever we may think of him, he is going to be a great factor in the development of Cuba and very possibly in Latin American affairs generally .
 This word was passed on to Robert Kennedy, who was managing his brother’s campaign . Robert Kennedy was managing the Kennedy campaign .
 At one point, there had been discussion among Kennedy strategists of the candidate’s giving a speech anticipating the invasion that seemed to be brewing, and thereby neutralizing its political effect .
 The idea of a formal speech was dropped, however, when investigation showed there was little possibility that an invasion could be launched before election day .
 Kennedy alerted newsmen for important statement by Kennedy . Kennedy was a Democratic presidential candidate in the 1960s . Kennedy won the White House in 1964 .
 Nixon felt Kennedy was trying to pre-empt a policy which the Vice-President claimed as his own . Now, Nixon felt, Kennedy was . trying to .pre-empted a policy . Nixon felt . Kennedy was not the President of the United States .
 Nixon wrote that he ordered Fred Seaton, Interior Secretary and Nixon campaign adviser, “to call the White House at once on the security line and find out whether or not Dulles had briefed Kennedy on the fact that for months the CIA had not only been supporting and assisting’
 I must not even suggest by implication that the U.S. was rendering aid to rebel forces in and out of Cuba . The United States was not providing aid to rebels in Cuba, the author says .
 He said it would violate ‘five treaties’ between the U.S. and Latin America as well as the Charter of the United Nations . The move would violate treaties with Latin America and the United States, he said .
 Nixon staff let it be known that they felt Kennedy had finally made a serious error . All the next day, as the Republican candidate barnstormed through eastern Pennsylvania, members of the Nixon staff said they felt .
 We would violate five treaties with the American States, including the Treaty of Bogota of 1948, says President Obama . "We would violate right off off the bat five treaties," he says .
 By the time he reached Wisconsin the next day, he was feeling the heat of the Nixon attack . By the day he reached the state, he felt the heat .
 In North Carolina, Adlai Stevenson, campaigning for Kennedy, was alarmed at Kennedy’s stand on Cuba . Stevenson was alarmed by Kennedy's stance on the island .
 Stevenson warned that the statement urging aid to the exiles could develop into a political trap for Kennedy if he were elected . Stevenson: 'When he got through, THE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT (344) declared itself a government of sorts'
 Kennedy seemed embarrassed about the statement and implied it had been issued without adequate clearance . Kennedy implied that the statement was issued without proper clearance .
 Stevenson told Stevenson he would pull back from it, and regain a safer position . Stevenson said he would withdraw from the position .
 On November 2 Kennedy had his last CIA briefing, this time from General Cabell, rather than from Dulles . Kennedy had the last briefing from Cabell on November 2, 1963 .
 Kennedy requested this briefing in order to be brought up to date with any last-minute international developments . Kennedy requested the briefing to be kept up with the latest developments in the world .
 The CIA deputy director flew to Los Angeles and talked with the candidate aboard the Caroline, Kennedy’s Convair, during a flight from Los Angeles .
 In March of 1962, Nixon charged in his book that Kennedy had been briefed about the Cuban invasion and had deliberately endangered its security . The White House issued an immediate denial, backed up by Allen Dulles .
 Kennedy was first informed of the Cuban operation when Dulles and Bissell came to see him in Palm Beach on November 18, 1960, ten days after the election . He said Kennedy was told of the operation by Dulles, Bissell .
 Eisenhower authorized Dulles to fly to Palm Beach, Florida, to meet with Bissell . Eisenhower authorized the CIA chief to do so . Bissell and Dulles met on November 18 for the first time .
 My briefings were intelligence briefings on the world situation,” he said . “I was briefed by intelligence briefings,’ he said. “My briefings are intelligence briefings," he added .
 There is no indication that Goodpaster or Nixon or Seaton ever checked with Dulles directly . Nixon and Seaton never checked directly with the CIA director, according to the report .
 The meeting was top-secret and unrecorded . Exactly what transpired during Dulles’ briefings of Kennedy will never be known for certain . The nuances, the inflections, the exact words when the question of Cuba arose .
 The same applies to General Cabell’s briefing aboard the Caroline November 2 . Cabell's briefing on the Caroline is scheduled for November 2.
 Kennedy did not want to be told about operational matters, such as the Cuban invasion, because of the fact that this might limit his freedom of action . But there is some evidence that there was some evidence .
 In any event, Nixon’s dispute with Kennedy and Dulles over who told what to whom missed the point . In any case, Nixon's dispute over who said what to the whom is missing the point.
 The Kennedy camp learned informally from other sources that an exile invasion was hatching . Regardless of the content of the . CIA briefings, the Kennedy camp had learned from others that .
 The candidates for President of the United States were allowing their campaign strategy and public positions to be influenced by a secret operation of the Invisible Government . The Invisible Government is a secret government operation .
 Eisenhower should have "apologized" to Khrushchev after the U-2 flight of Francis Gary Powers in order to save the Paris summit meeting, says historian John Sutter .
 In the case of the Cuban invasion, both candidates were concerned about a secret plan of which the electorate knew nothing . Both candidates were worried about the secret plan, which they knew nothing.
 In choosing the man to fill the most powerful elective office in the world, the voters were basing their decision, in part, on misleading statements .
 One candidate, Vice-President Nixon, confessed later that he took a false public position during the campaign, exactly the opposite of his true feeling, to protect the CIA invasion plan .
 Millions who watched Nixon and Kennedy argue the Cuban issue on television had no way of knowing that the facts were being distorted or suppressed . But millions who watched them argue on television didn't know the facts .
 This is not to suggest that the invasion plan should have been announced on nation-wide television . The invasion plan was announced on national television .
 It does seem reasonable to ask how the voter can make an informed choice when a candidate is not telling the truth, for whatever laudable patriotic motivation . But the voter should ask: How do you make a decision?
 Those who argue against tighter controls over the secret branches of the government are fond of making the case that the American system already has enough built-in safeguards .
 During his term in the White House, he is free to run the government, including its secret machinery, as he sees fit . President Barack Obama is in charge of the government .
 If voters dislike how he is running the country, they can turn him out of office in four years . But if they dislike how they are running, they could turn him down .
 There is a full public accounting and the people can look, listen and make their intelligent choice . For during every presidential election campaign, the great issues are debated, there is a public accounting .
 That is what happened in 1960, and there is no reason to think it could not happen again . That's what happened to 1960, but it could happen again, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Something has happened to the American system, and something for ill . When the public positions of candidates for President are shaped by secret operations which the voters are not aware of, something has happened .
 Invisible Government participated in the presidential campaign of 1960 . The Invisible Government was the Invisible Government .
 By the midtwentieth century, under the pressures of the Cold War, the primary concern of the nation’s leaders had become the survival of the governed . The U.S. was in the midst of the Great Depression in the 1930s .
 The Invisible Government emerged in the aftermath of World War II as one of the instruments designed to insure national survival . It emerged as an instrument designed to ensure national survival.
 It operated outside of the normal Constitutional checks and balances, it posed a potential threat to the system it was designed to protect . But because it was hidden, because it operated outside the normal checks on the Constitution, it could pose a threat to that system .
 He has asserted that he conceived of the CIA primarily as a co-ordinating and intelligence-gathering aid to a modern President who needed concise, centralized information on which to base national policy . A Conclusion: A Conclusion.
 Truman said the intelligence apparatus had taken on dimensions he never anticipated . Truman said he had never anticipated the agency's size . But by 1963, it had grown so much, Truman said .
 Plans Division, which conducts CIA’s special operations, was established in 1951 under President Truman . Plans Division was established under Truman in 1951 .
 Allen Dulles came to Washington to be the first director of that division . Dulles was under Truman . He came to D.C. as a director .
 Truman could not have been unaware of these events, the real question is whether the CIA has grown to a size and shape that Truman had not intended when he signed the 1947 Act .
 In the years since 1951, secret operations have grown greatly in size and number .
 CIA officials have insisted that the majority of these operations have been successful . Nevertheless, CIA officials insist that the most of the operations are successful .
 As in the case of the Bay of Pigs, some of these operations have become so big that they cannot be practicably concealed or plausibly denied . The Invisible Government has become so large that some operations cannot be concealed or denied .
 In other instances, clandestine activity has turned loose forces which have proved uncontrollable . In some cases, clandestine activities have turned loose .
 Around the world, the CIA has trained and supported elite corps designed to maintain internal security in pro-Western countries . The CIA has been involved in training and supporting elite corps in the past .
 CIA-financed special forces have sometimes become a source of embarrassment to the United States, notably in Vietnam, where CIA-funded special forces raided the Buddhist pagodas .
 Despite the importance of the power and the vast sums at the disposal of the CIA and the other agencies of the Invisible Government, there has not been enough intelligent public discussion of the role of this secret machinery .
 In general, critics of the CIA have been hobbled by a lack of sure knowledge about its activities . The CIA has been criticized by some of the world's most prominent politicians .
 There is a sophisticated notion that the problems raised by a hidden bureaucracy operating within a free society can be resolved by limiting the CIA to intelligence-gathering and setting up a separate organization to conduct special operations . There is the idea that the CIA should be limited to intelligence gathering .
 Intelligence-gatherers inevitably become special pleaders for the operations in which they are engaged . The argument is that when the two functions are joined, they become more important to the nation's security .
 There is little question that this has happened in the past and that it poses a continuing, basic problem, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 An agent who is running a secret operation often is in the best position to gather secret information . But the difficulty is that an agent often is the best place to gather information .
 A CIA man involved in intrigues with the political opposition in a given country will very likely know much more about that opposition than an analyst at Langley or even the ambassador on the scene . The CIA man will know more about the opposition than a CIA analyst or ambassador .
 If the CIA were to be prohibited from carrying out secret operational activity, it might be necessary to create another set of secret operatives in addition to the large number of CIA men already at work overseas . Such a situation would probably reduce efficiency, raise A Conclusion ((351 costs)
 Taylor committee gtappled with the problem after the Bay of Pigs and came to the conclusion that the present arrangement is the lesser of two evils . The Taylor committee concluded that the current arrangement is not the best solution .
 The question is whether the CIA sets its own policy, outside of presidential control . This problem is secondary to the larger question of whether it's OK with the CIA . The CIA should be able to set its own policies outside of the White House .
 There are procedures which call for approval of any major special operation at a high level in the executive branch of the government .
 Eisenhower on Guatemala and Kennedy on the Bay of Pigs demonstrated that they not only approved these operations, but took part in the planning for them . Eisenhower's comments on Guatemala show that he approved of the operations, and planned them .
 Many important decisions appear to have been delegated to the Special Group, a small and shadowy directorate nowhere specifically provided for by law . However, many important decisions are apparently made by the small directorate .
 The Special Group is composed of men with heavy responsibilities in other areas . It obviously can give no more than general approval and guidance to a course of action .
 CIA and the other agencies of the Invisible Government are free to shape events in the field . The Invisible Government is free to form its own opinion .
 They can influence policy and chart their own course within the flexible framework laid down by Washington . The U.S. government has a flexible framework to deal with foreign policy .
 CIA planted fake Communist document in Costa Rica . CIA officers did not see fit to inform the State Department when they planted the document .
 In Cairo, "Mr X" slipped in to see Nasser ahead of the State Department’s special emissary . “Mr X” slipped into Cairo, Egypt, to meet Nasser .
 In the Bay of Pigs planning, the CIA men selected the political leadership of the Cuban exiles . The CIA men picked the political leaders of the Cuba exiles to be selected for the Bay .
 Intelligence men have been able to claim that they have never acted outside of policy set at the highest level of the government . Yet because of the existence of the Special Group and a generalized mechanism for approving operations, intelligence men are able to say that they never acted .
 Even when a clear policy has been established, a President may find it difficult to enforce . In short, even when a . clear policy was established, . a President might find it hard to enforce.
 Presidential power, despite the popular conception of it, is diffuse and limited . Presidential power is diffuse, limited, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Presidential power is very limited"
 The various departments and agencies under his authority have entrenched sources of strength . The agencies under him include the departments, agencies and agencies that he oversees .
 In his relations with the Invisible Government, the President’s problems are compounded . President Obama's problems have been compounded .
 The INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT ((352 tools at his disposal. He cannot bring to bear against it the normal political . The Invisible Government has no real tools to fight back .
 He cannot go over the heads of the leaders of the intelligence community and appeal to the people, he says . He says. He cannot . go over . heads of leaders of intelligence community . He said .
 A President operates under a constant awareness of the capacity of disgruntled members of the Invisible Government to undercut his purposes by leaking information to Congress and the press .
 Kennedy realized the political dangers of canceling a plan to overthrow Castro . The Bay of Pigs plan had been brought to an advanced stage by a Republican administration .
 During the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, White House officials suspected that someone high in the CIA was attempting to undermine the President by providing the Republicans with information . Similarly, in 1962 the White House suspected that a high-ranking CIA official was trying to undermine President by giving Republicans information .
 The Invisible Government has achieved a quasi-independent status and a power of its own . This suspicion reflected the fact that the Invisible Government is quasi-Independent .
 Some form of Invisible Government is essential to national security in a time of Cold War . But, on the other hand, it seems inescapable that some form of invisible government is essential .
 The Invisible Government must be reconcilable as possible with the democratic system . No more than a tenuous compromise can be achieved, he says .
 Most important, the public, the President and the Congress must support steps to control the intelligence establishment, to place checks on its power . Most important is to make it truly accountable, especially in special operations .
 The danger of special operations does not lie in tables of organization or questions of technique, but in embarking upon them too readily and without effective presidential control, says President Obama .
 Special operations pose dangers not only to the nations against which they are directed, but also to ourselves . Special operations are dangerous to our own nation, the U.S. military says .
 They raise the question of how far a free society can emulate a closed society without becoming indistinguishable from it . A free society, in attempting to preserve itself, can emulate itself, but not become indistinguishable from closed society, they say .
 The implication was that the CIA could justifiably respond in kind to the unscrupulous practices of the Soviet espionage machine . The CIA A Conclusion: The conclusion was that it would respond to the Soviets' unscrupulous espionage .
 It is a multi-purpose, clandestine arm of power that can in the last analysis carry out almost any act that the Soviet leadership assigns to it . The Soviet leadership can use it to carry out any act it wishes to do so, says the author .
 "It is more than a secret police organization, more than an intelligence and counter-intelligence organization," says President Obama . "It's more than secret police," he says of the U.S. government .
 It is an instrument for subversion, manipulation and violence, for secret intervention in the affairs of other countries, he says . It is a tool of subversion and violence for subverting, manipulation, he adds .
 A free society has difficulty in adopting such practices because of its moral tradition that the end does not justify the means . A moral tradition in the U.S. is not to allow such practices in a free society, it says .
 It must proceed with caution, alert to the danger of succumbing to the enemy’s morality by too eagerly embracing his methods . The U.S. government must proceed cautiously, alerting to the dangers of its morality .
 Special operations should be launched only after the most sober deliberation by the President, acting upon the broadest possible advice, says the President . Special operations are launched after the President's most sober deliberations .
 This counsel should come not only from those within the intelligence community, but from responsible officials with a wider viewpoint . It should come from those in charge of the CIA, the CIA and other intelligence agencies .
 Operations involved the potential overthrow of a foreign government . Operations such as those at the Bay of Pigs and in Indonesia involved potential overth overth overthrowing foreign governments .
 They should be launched only when the alternative of inaction carries with it the gravest risk to national security, says the author of the book .
 If, nonetheless, it becomes necessary to undertake a secret operation, it is imperative that the long-range repercussions be weighed fully in advance . The long-term repercussions should be weighed in advance, the author says .
 Equal consideration must be given to the problems that would result from the success of a special operation . Equal consideration is needed to consider the risks involved in such a successful operation . The operation is scheduled to take place in the United States .
 It is a delusion to think that the problems of U.S. foreign policy in a complex world can be resolved by the quick surgery of a palace coup . The U.N. should not have to rely on a coup to solve its problems .
 Intelligence and espionage technicians should never be allowed to dominate deliberations leading to secret operations, says Peter Bergen . The intelligence and espionage technician has a natural affinity for such activist solutions .
 Government should not be permitted exclusive control of the conduct of operations in the field. Nor should they be allowed to control of operations, it has been claimed .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy directed that the ambassador be in charge of all U.S. activities in a foreign country . The ambassador is responsible for most of the United States' activities abroad .
 An ambassador should never be put in the position of a William Sebald in Burma, says the Foreign Office .
 If he is to maintain the respect of the government leaders with whom he is dealing, he must be kept informed about U.S. clandestine activity .
 If circumstances dictate a covert policy that conflicts with the avowed policy of Washington toward a given country, the ambassador must know about it . The ambassador to the U.S. must also know about the policy .
 Congress is supposed to act as a check upon the activities of the executive branch . Under the Constitution, Congress should be a check on executive branch activities . President Obama has been criticized for his actions in the past .
 Traditionally, the Senate has given its “advice and consent” to major commitments in the sphere of foreign affairs . Traditionally the Senate gives its ‘advice . consent’ to major . commitments in major . affairs .
 In its relations with the Invisible Government, Congress has all but voted away its rights . The Invisible Government's rights are threatened by Congress, but they are not .
 It knows relatively little about what goes on in the $4,000,000-a-year intelligence complex for which it appropriates money .
 CIA subcommittees in the House and Senate are controlled by the most conservative elements in Congress . Subcommittees are close personally and philosophically to those who run the Invisible Government .
 Subcommittees are now heavily weighted with legislators whose field of competence is military affairs . Subcommittee members are now more likely to be military affairs experts .
 They should be reorganized to encompass men with a wider view and expert knowledge of foreign affairs, says President Obama . The U.S. should re-organize the Foreign Office .
 Men such as Senator Fulbright should not be purposely excluded from Congressional surveillance of the intelligence apparatus . Men such a senator should be included in Congressional surveillance, says Sen. Fulbright .
 The shadowy subcommittees should be replaced by a joint committee, including men from both the House and Senate . There is no reason why secrets should leak in any greater degree from one formal committee than from one .
 There has not been any leak of classified data from Joint Committee on Atomic Energy . Joint Committee has not leaked classified data .
 Although the need for greater Congressional control is apparent, both President Eisenhower and President Kennedy resisted it as an infringement upon their executive power .
 They established a veneer of outside control by creating advisory boards by creating boards of private citizens . The board was created by private citizens to create an independent body of power .
 Selected private citizens are privy to secrets of the Invisible Government . But the elected representatives of the people are denied any meaningful knowledge of the intelligence machinery .
 Congress is not only ignorant of operations overseas, but it has been denied information about the increasing involvement of the Invisible Government in domestic activities . The Invisible Government is now involved in domestic operations, writes CNN.com's John Avlon .
 The mandate to gather and analyze intelligence has been broadened into a justification for clandestine activities in the U.S. The mandate was broadened to include clandestine activity in the United States .
 There should be a thorough reappraisal by private organizations and by the universities of the wisdom of their ties to the Invisible Government . Private organizations and universities should be reappraised by the government .
 There is a real danger that the academic community may find itself so closely allied with the Invisible Government that it will have lost its ability to function as an independent critic of our government and society . The academic community needs to be independent critics of our society and government .
 These unseen domestic activities of the CIA have become disturbingly complex and widespread . The CIA's domestic activities are disturbingly disturbing and widespread, says author .
 To the extent that they can be perceived, they appear to be outside the spirit and perhaps the letter of the National Security Act . They appear to violate the spirit of the law, perhaps even the letter .
 No outsider is in a position to determine whether or not, in time, these activities might become an internal danger to a free society .
 Both Congress and the Executive ought to give urgent attention to this issue, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 In a free society attention should be given as well to the increasTHE INVISIBLE GOVERNMENT. The Invisible Government. (356) ing tendency of the American Government to mislead the American people .
 U-2:; “There was absolutely no—N-O—no deliberate attempt to violate Soviet airspace.” U.2: “There were absolutely no deliberate attempts to violate . airspace. No deliberate attempt was made by the U.S. to violate
 Misleading statements related to covert operations have even distorted the electoral process, as was demonstrated in the presidential campaign of 1960 . The CIA has been involved in covert operations for decades .
 It seems reasonable to suggest that there be fewer righteous declarations and less public misinformation by the government . Perhaps, perhaps, more discreet silence in difficult circumstances .
 The secret intelligence machinery of the government can never be totally reconciled with the traditions of a free republic, says the author of the book . The book is published in the U.S.
 The solution lies not in dismantling this machinery but in bringing it under greater control . The solution to the Cold War lies in greater control of the U.S. government, writes Andrew Hammond .
 "The resultant danger of exposure is far less than the danger of secret power," says author . "Secret power is far more likely to be exposed than secret power"
 Interview with Robert F Kennedy, in U.S. News & World Report, January 28, 1963 . Interview with Kennedy in 1963 . Kennedy: "I am not afraid to be afraid to die"
 Harry S Truman, President of the United States, was assassinated in 1963 . Truman's assassination was the first assassination of a major war hero .
 Interview with Allen Dulles, “Meet the Press,” National Broadcasting Company, December 31, 1961 . Interview with Dulles was broadcast on December 31 of 1961 . Dulles: “I'm not afraid to be afraid of the press. I'm scared to be scared
 The Hot and Cold Wars of Allen Dulles,” Columbia Broadcasting System, aired April 26, 1962, 11.11.11 .
 Hearings, The President's Proposal on the Middle East, 446; joint meeting of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations and Senate . Committee on Armed Services, 85th Congress .
 Hearings, Events Incident to the Summit Conference, 124; Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, 86th Congress, 2nd Session, testimony by Secretary of Defense Thomas S Gates, June 2, 1960 . Hearings were held at the summit conference in June 1960 .
 Television interview with Allen Dulles by David Schoenbrun, Columbia Broadcasting System, August 18, 1963 . Interview with Dulles aired on August 18 1963 .
 Hearing, Francis G Powers, U-2 Pilot, Senate Committee on Armed Services, 87th Congress, 2nd Session, March 6, 1962 . Powers was a pilot for the U.2; Powers was the first pilot to fly a U. 2 .
 Statement Concerning Francis Gary Powers, Central Intelligence Agency, March 6, 1962 . Statement . Said Powers was a member of the Intelligence Agency .
 This document was made public by Representative Carl Vinson, D., Ga., chairman of the House Committee on Armed Services, in advance of Powers’ public testimony the same day .
 The former President later related the incident in the first volume of his presidential memoirs .
 Interview with Robert F Kennedy by David Kraslow, in Miami Herald, January 21, 1963 . Interview with Kennedy was published in the Miami Herald in 1963 .
 Senate Committee on Armed Services, Hearings on the nomination of John A. McCone, January 18, 1962 . McCone was nominated for the post in 1962 .
 J Edgar Hoover testified before a House subcommittee on Appropriations in 1962 . Hoover testified in testimony before the House of Representatives on January 24, 1962. Hoover was the FBI director of the Department of Investigation in the late 1960s .
 Intelligence Activities, A Report to the Congress by the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government, June 29, 1955 . The report was published in 1955 . Intelligence Activities was a report to Congress .
 National Security Organization, A Report to the Congress by the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government, January, 1949 . The report was published in 1949 . It was presented to Congress by a Commission of the Congress .
 Report to President Eisenhower by a special study group, October 19, 1954 . Report was made to the president of the United States in 1954 .
 Compilation of Studies on U.S. Foreign Policy, 86th Congress, 2nd Session, prepared under the direction of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate . The study was compiled in the 86th . Congress .
 Associated Press dispatch filed by Relman Morin in Cairo, in the Washington Post, August 15, 1958 .
 Broadcast by Miklos Ajtay, by Radio Free Europe to Hungary, November 3, 1956 .
 Crowell’s account, from which this and the following quotations are taken, appeared in the Falmouth Enterprise, July 6, 1962 . Crowell's account, which appears in this edition of this article, was taken from the same page as this .