 Documents given are a map showing the location of Cuba and the range of the Cuban missiles . Also given are an extract of Robert Kennedy’s book, 13 Days, describing events on Thursday 18th October .
 Fidel Castro, Ernesto “Che” Guevara and their “freedom fighters“sweep away the corrupted dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista and take over the capital Havana’s capital Havana .
 After they tried to conclude an agreement with the USA in vain, they turn to the USSR and China . They turn to Russia and China to find a solution .
 Cuban-American relationship becomes aggravated, Castro regime officially becomes communist one . Castro regime becomes a communist one in Cuba . Cuba's relationship with the U.S. has been strained for years .
 U.S. nuclear missiles and bombers stationed in Europe through NATO and SEATO in Asia . This is under the direct threat of American nuclear missiles, bombers stationed there .
 All those documents show that the USA stays the world leaders in spite of the danger of a 3rd World War weighing above them .
 In the first part we are going to study the causes of the Cuban missile crisis . In the second part we will go to describe the crisis . The first part of this week's series will focus on the causes and events leading up to the missile crisis.
 The arms race developed into propaganda and intelligence war as well as a forum for technological rivalry . I] The causes of the arms race include the arms war, propaganda, intelligence war and technological rivalry. I]
 Cuba had an important place in the nuclear part of the war . Due to its localization, Cuba had a key role in nuclear warfare .
 The ensuing crisis ranks with the Berlin Blockade as one of the major confrontations of the Cold War . It is generally regarded as the moment in which Cold War came closest to turning into a nuclear conflict .
 This marked the turning of the American National Security State apparatus against its own leadership . United States troops leave the island, 28 January 1909, but the Americansretain control of Guantanamo .
 The apparatus of empire came home to roost after it was threatened by the civilian leadership in America . After overthrown, assassinated leaders, and orchestrated coups around the world, the moment its growing power was threatened was the moment the U.S. was threatened .
 Industries resumed production on a much larger scale than ever . The affluent society Industries resumed its production .
 The relations between these two countries began a long time ago where they were not independent yet . The relationship between the U.S. and South Korea began in the 1960s .
 America was first a British colony and Cuba was under Spanish domination . Cuba was then under British rule .
 America gradually gained a certain influence all over Cuba’s economy and politics . Nevertheless, America has gradually gained influence over Cuba's politics and the economy .