 This season of anniversary and reflection provides us all with a remarkable opportunity to give thanks and to learn from the past . This year marks the 50th anniversary of the Second World War .
 We give thanks for the fact that, because of the wisdom and judgment of our leaders, we're all here today, living in a relatively peaceful and prosperous world .
 Sergei Khrushchev has done so much to increase understanding between the U.S. and his native country . On a personal level, this was brought home to me when I had the chance to meet him .
 "It was quite emotional to realize that when our fathers transformed the hours of danger into the beginning of peace they did it for us and for all children threatened by world at war" "We are very proud of our fathers' efforts to end war," she said .
 Today, it is our collective obligation to carry on that legacy and learn from the past, and to believe in the possibility of peace .
 "There is no single simple key to this peace, no grand or magic formula to be adopted by one or two powers," says President Obama . There is no one simple key, says Obama .
 Signing that document was not a victory of one party over another, or one country over another . It was a triumph of peace over war, of negotiation over faith, of faith over fear .
 The spoils of that victory are shared by all people wherever they live, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The outcome of the Missile Crisis almost seems preordained, but the lesson for us and our children is that it did not have to work out that way . In retrospect, the outcome of this year's crisis seems pre-ordained but not pre-planned .
 This afternoon's discussion will reveal how close the world came to experiencing a nuclear disaster . In fact, our discussion this afternoon will probably reveal that the world was not at risk of a nuclear meltdown .
 President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev agreed to install a hotline to improve communications between their two countries . In the months that followed, recognizing the dangers that they had so narrowly avoided, the hotline was installed .
 "They stood up to the hard-liners in their own governments in order to begin to dismantle the nuclear Sword of Damocles that threatened the entire world," says Obama .
 Let us also direct attention to our common interest and the means by which those differences can be resolved, says President Obama . Let us direct attention also to the ways by which we can resolve differences .
 If we cannot end our differences, at least we can help make the world safe for diversity . And if we can't end differences, we can also help make it safer for diversity, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In the final analysis, our most common link is that we all inhabit this small planet . We all inhabit the small planet, and we all share a common link, says author .
 The future that Khrushchev and the other world leaders of their time cherished is the present that each of us enjoys today . The future was the future that my father, Chairman Khrushvic, and the others of their . time cherished, he said .
 We gather this afternoon to understand how, at the moment when we stood on the brink of a nuclear war, catastrophe was avoided . We gather in London to understand why we avoided nuclear war .
 Consider what lessons we can learn and apply to the perils that confront us today . And consider what lessons you can learn from the world's perils today .
 Panel of experts brings perspectives from all sides of the crisis to CNN.com . Panel includes experts from the U.S. State Department and the International Security Council .
 Sergei Khrushchev accompanied his father on a number of major foreign trips, and meetings with key leaders in the Soviet defense establishment . He was an accomplished engineer in his own right, and an accomplished businessman .
 Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., a renowned historian, public intellectual and political activist, was a tremendous friend of this institution and all of our family . He was a "tremendous friend" of the institution and family .
 Theodore Sorensen served as special counsel and advisor to President Kennedy . He served as JFK's special counsel, advisor and advisor .
 He has been practicing foreign affairs in international law for over 34 years as a senior partner, senior counsel in the law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Morton, and Garrison .
 He is now a Fellow at the John F Kennedy Institute of Politics at Harvard . He is a Fellow of the Kennedy Institute, Harvard .
 Josefina Vidal is the First Secretary of the Cuban Interests Section in Washington, D.C., the official voice of Cuban government in our nation’s capital . Vidal: The Cuban government is the only nation in the world to have a democracy .
 She was appointed this year by the Cuban Foreign Ministry to represent the Interests Section at the conference last week on the Missile Crisis convened by Fidel Castro in Havana .
 Former Director of this Library Chuck Daly and Ambassador Kenneth Galbraith. Chuck Daly . Kenneth Galbrigher was Ambassador to the U.S. Ambassador to America .
 I want to thank all of you for coming and express my gratitude to our panelists for engaging in this historic discussion . I want all of us to come and express our gratitude to the panelists .
 "We’re going to proceed in a relatively orderly fashion, I hope, in a way that makes some historical sense," Obama says .
 Khrushchev's son explains what may have been in his father's mind when the idea arose to suggest the deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 "Josefina will say some things about why this particular overture was made in the first place," says Josefina .
 CNN's John Sorensen takes a look at the President's approach to this problem . Ted Sorennsen talks about the President’s approach to solving the problem .
 "What the mood was like when people were actually sitting around debating what amounts to the fate of the world. And also something that I think fascinates all of us who know this only after the fact and from far away, of what the mood-what the feeling was like," says
 Arthur Schlesinger, our anchor man-and-I’d like Arthur to say some things if he would about this rather unusual President. And then Arthur will say things about this unusual President, he says .
 Almost everything we've learned about the Missile Crisis since 1962 suggests that it was much more dangerous than anyone could have imagined at the time . I was mentioning to my wife on the way into the Library this afternoon that almost everything we have learned about it suggests that the missile crisis was more dangerous
 We know a lot more now about President Kennedy and the way he managed his own administration and this Crisis. And that is that we know a much more now than before . President Kennedy managed his administration and the Crisis.
 The more you know about the way he did that, the more improved you have to be. And the more you learn about the ways he did it, the better you are. And you can't wait to learn more about it, he says .
 Sergei Khrushchev's office is just down the hall from mine in our new building in Providence, Rhode Island . The former Soviet Union leader was in his office at the time of his assassination .
 Rhode Island is the second most famous inhabitant of the state of Rhode Island after the controversial Mayor of Providence . Who is the most famous person in Rhode Island?
 Fidel Castro announced that now he is on the Soviet side, he will be a part of the Socialist family . When we talk about why my father decided to send missiles to Cuba, you have to remember that, at the time .
 It put obligation on the leader of the family, the same as the United States, to defend all their allies, all their friends, and all their clients . The U.S. has an obligation to defend allies, friends and clients, President Obama says .
 We were told that, if we would try to do this diplomatically, no one would listen to us in the U.N. We are told that if we tried to do it diplomatically they would not listen to them in the United Nations, they would be ignored .
 If we tried to bring the conversion arms as many as, as much as, we can, still communication was so poor that Americans, would they want to invade, they would take over this. Still communication was poor that communication was .
 "This way, it was not only our relations to the new revolutionary government and our positive feeling for the things, but it was the understanding, the selfunderstanding of the great nation and the leader," she said .
 We could not defend them, you will send the message to the opposite, or the rest of the world that you are weak. We could . Not defending them, they would send the . opposite message to . the opposite of the opposite or the world .
 "You're just ready to give up this piece and then another piece of your family," she says of her family . "It's just like a new piece of family. You just want to give it up," she said .
 The problem was that he has his Soviet or Russian experience, very different than Americans, he says . The problem is that Americans are very different from Russians, he adds .
 "So we didn’t too much care how many weapons were there until this government not making the decision to attack us," he said . "We didn't really care how much weapons there were there," he added .
 Americans was very-you and I-now I am also American-we are now very different because this country was secured by two oceans. And Americans was once very- you and I . Now I am now American- we are very different, President Obama says .
 Americans went crazy when they found that enemies at the gate, just 90 miles from the shore, they went crazy to what they-just American psychological crisis. So when Americans found that . They went crazy, the government went crazy .
 Nobody could imagine that the Soviet Union would start the war with Americans . The Soviet Union started a war with the U.S. in the 1950s .
 "You have this misperception and misunderstanding when we are making decisions. And it is very important, because you're living in different cultures," she says . "It's very important to understand and understand each other," she adds .
 "Sometimes bringing us very close to the real war without any intentions," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There is a great deal of speculation around the Khrushchev decision to deliver these missiles secret . There is also speculation about the decision to keep the missiles secret.
 "I think what maybe happened, my father never could do that because he was a pragmatic. He was pragmatic. I think that maybe happened," he says . "What maybe happened?" he asks .
 If he signed this agreement in June and published this, I think that it was imposed in July before the first ship even left the Soviet port . The agreement was published in June, and it could have been imposed before the ship left port .
 "That showed that they, at that time, trusted each other more than any in the previous ten years," she said . That showed that . That . showed that that they trust each other, she said, "more than any of the previous 10 years"
 The Soviet Union signed the Peace Treaty with Germany without any crisis . They signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, established the hotline, established a hotline . The nuclear test ban treaty was signed without crisis .
 "President Kennedy defended his ideology. And they were ready to go forward because of that, my father told that, ""President Kennedy defends his ideology," says his son .
 It was some possibility that if they had stayed in power, maybe Cold War would have ended in the late ‘60’s. And it was some . possibility that . if they . stayed a little bit longer . Maybe Cold War . would have . ended in late '60
 In 1963, my father announced the program to reduce the Soviet armed forces to half a million, cyclic program, to stop production of the conventional arms . "Cycleic program" stopped production of conventional arms, he says .
 "We need these resources to increase production of food and apartments. And we need them," she says . "And we need it," she adds .
 "We returned to the same Cold War behavior, producing more and more weapons, and tens of thousands nuclear weapons, fully useless," says President Obama . "And we returned to . the same cold War behavior," he says .
 It brought the Soviet Union just to the collapse half a century ago . And it brought the collapse of the USSR to the same level .
 Would it maybe if they both stayed in power, seven or eight years longer, maybe it would still be reformed Soviet Union and maybe friendly relations with the U.S. Would it .
 I’d like now to call on Josefina Vidal but, before I do that, I would like to reveal for the first time a piece of classified information about her. I'd like to call her but she would like me to reveal it to the public .
 Robert Kennedy took the lead in trying to put together deal to bring prisoners back to the U.S. Some of you may remember that after the Bay of Pigs Invasion and the imprisonment of the members of Brigade 2506, Robert Kennedy put together the deal that would bring those prisoners back .
 Cuba's future is now looking at the future of Cuba, says Cuban President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "I think, all of us who have worked with her feel that you are now looking for the future"
 Kennedy administration members of the Kennedy administration and Sergei Khrushchev sit on panel of panelists . Kennedy administration was in the midst of a crisis in the Soviet Union .
 "I remember growing up, and my father telling us about not being at home any time me or some of my brothers and sisters were born, because they were difficult times," he says . But he says he is proud of his achievements and says he's proud to have a successful career
 "Almost every year, he had to go mobilize to different places of the island," he says . "And almost every year he had had to ... go mobilize," he adds .
 I was born only two months before the Bay of Pigs and my brother was born during the Missile Crisis . And I'm not the first person to be born in the U.S. to have been born in Cuba during the Cuban crisis .
 "I was curious all my life to learn more about all these years at the beginning of the Cuban Revolution. But we grew up listening to these stories, and I was curious," she says .
 This crisis did not begin when the U.S. discovered the presence of missiles in Cuba, nor was this crisis limited to the 13 days that history reports . And for us this crisis began with the discovery of missiles, not just 13 days . This crisis was not limited to 13 days
 After this failure, the U.S. administration would consider the use of it’s own armed forces in a direct invasion aimed at overthrowing the Cuban government . The Cuban government was threatened with a direct military invasion .
 Operation Mongoose was launched in November, 1961, after the failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion . Operation was launched under the guidance of the White House . The operation was launched after the failed invasion of the U.S.
 The goal of that operation was to overthrow the government of Cuba, the U.S. says . A revolt of the Cuban people as a basis for direct military intervention by the United States, he says .
 Operation Mongoose is considered the most ambitious and sinister plan against Cuba . It included acts of sabotage and terrorism, covert operations, subversion, support from armed counterrevolutionary bands, psychological warfare and assassination attempts .
 In parallel, following the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Pentagon developed a number of contingency plans for deploying U.S. forces in Cuba . The Pentagon developed the plans following the invasion .
 And carried out military exercises to prepare the forces that might be involved in the conflict .
 The military contingency plans, together with the increase of subversive actions against Cuba beginning early in 1962, were interpreted in Cuba as clear indications of an imminent, direct military aggression . The increase in subversive actions in Cuba was interpreted as a clear indication of imminent military aggression against Cuba .
 Faced with the likelihood of a direct military attack, the Cuban government adopted measures to strengthen its defensive capabilities and ensure its national security . The Cuban government has taken steps to bolster its defensive forces .
 The Soviet Union was willing to supply the necessary weapons and military equipment . And at this moment, the Soviet Union would supply the needed weapons and equipment .
 On May 29, 1962, the Soviets proposed the installation of nuclear missiles on Cuban territory . The Soviets considered it to be the only way to deter a direct military intervention in Cuba .
 Cuba’s leadership decided to allow the missiles to be stationed in the island . The missiles are stationed in Cuba . Cuba's leadership decided the missiles were allowed to be deployed .
 The Cuban government was convinced that missiles were not essential for the defense of Cuba . Cuban government believed missiles would not be needed to defend the country .
 Any aggression against Cuba would be equivalent to an attack on the Soviet Union . The same objective could be accomplished by a military pact . The pact would make clear that any attack on Cuba was equivalent to a Soviet attack .
 Cuba allowed the missiles to be deployed in Cuba in solidarity with the efforts of the Soviet Union in it’s aspiration to improve the balance of power-the balance of nuclear weapons following the deployment of Jupiter missiles bases in Turkey and Italy .
 We had many differences with the Soviet Union at the time of the Missile Crisis, says President Obama . "We have many differences," says Obama .
 The secrecy surrounding the placement of nuclear missiles in our territory led to secrecy surrounding nuclear missile placement . And one of them was the secrecy surrounding placing nuclear missiles into our territory . The U.S. government has been accused of trying to cover up the situation .
 The Soviet leadership insisted on a secret and covert deployment of the missile . Cuba argued from the outset the principle of the right of the Cuban people to defend themselves against U.S. aggression .
 Despite warnings from Cuba, the Soviet leadership insisted the operation should not be announced until it was an accomplished fact which the U.S. would then have to accept . Despite repeated warnings, the United States would then accept .
 The deployment of the missiles became the pretext used by the U.S. to justify the naval blockade of the island that marked the outbreak of the crisis on October 22, 1962 .
 The Cuban leadership learned from Radio Moscow broadcast about the Khrushchev agreement with Kennedy on October 28, ordering the removal of the missiles from our country . The Cuban leader learned from a broadcast that the agreement was made with Kennedy .
 The news of this agreement produced great indignation in the Cuban leadership . Cuba felt that Cuba had become a bargaining chip between the two superpowers . The Cuban leadership felt it had been used as a bargaining tool by the West .
 This decision was taken without informing or consulting the Cuban leadership and without Cuba’s participation in the negotiations, the Cuban leader says . This decision, he says, was made without informing, consulting or consulting Cuba's leadership .
 The withdrawal of the missiles was agreed upon without getting from the United States a firm commitment or satisfactory guarantee that it would not attack Cuba . U.S. agreed to pull missiles from Cuba in exchange for a promise not to attack .
 The danger did not end with the so-called Kennedy-Khrushchev agreements . For Cuba, the danger was not ended with the Kennedy and Khrushchev deals .
 The October Crisis led to the November Crisis over the presence of IL-28 planes in Cuba . The U.S. continued to maintain its blockade of Cuba for a few more weeks .
 Operation Mongoose, the covert action operation, was dismantled . The operation was dismantled by the CIA . The CIA was involved in the covert operation Mongoose .
 In early ’63, the United States continued to contemplate proposals for different actions against Cuba . The U.S. continued to consider a wide range of economic and covert programs including assassination plots .
 An acceptable resolution of the October Crisis for Cuba was not reached . For the Cuban government, an acceptable resolution was reached . The Cuban government was unable to reach an acceptable solution .
 For Cubans, the crisis was a lesson that confirmed our belief that the way to defend our country was with our own forces without depending on support from abroad that might be subject to different factors of international politics .
 If the U.S. has not invaded Cuba after the Missile Crisis, it has not been out of respect for the 1962 agreement, but because of the high political and military costs that such an action would present . We believed sincerely that, if the United States. has . not invaded
 The events of 1962 left behind feelings of disillusionment and bitterness in Cuba with regard to the Soviet Union . The events were the events of the Cuban Revolution in 1962 .
 The Soviet Union accepted all demands of the United States in order to solve that conflict, but without obtaining a firm commitment of non-aggression towards Cuba, and in complete disregard of the interests and opinion of the Cuban leadership, left the Cuban government out of the negotiation process .
 From these experiences, the Cubans drew heartfelt lessons regarding the Soviet leadership’s ability in solving international conflicts . The Cubans were able to learn from the lessons learned from their experiences .
 The resolution of the Missile Crisis or the October crisis, as we call it, did not go to the root of the problem . As for the confrontation between the U.S. and Cuba, the resolution was not the solution, the author says . The United States and Cuba were at
 The roots of the problem were left intact with ever-present potential for aggression and violence . Even though a war was avoided and the danger of direct military aggression against Cuba was pushed back, the root of the issue was left intact .
 A significant opportunity, in our opinion, was lost to resolve the conflict between our two countries definitely . A significant chance was lost, says the U.S. government .
 After 43 years, we can still say that the Cold War is not over, says CNN.com . And for Cuba, after 43 years of its existence, it's still not over .
 Ted Sorensen is one of the great political writers that the country has ever known . He's called on Ted to speak to the author of the book, which he says is "a great political writer"
 Three of my students attended the recent Havana Conference and had never met Ted before or been in his presence . Three of them had never been in Ted's presence before .
 JFK press conference exchange which, I think, illustrates the question before us today . JFK press Conference exchange . JFK Press Conference exchange illustrates question: 'What do you think of the future?'
 There had been a fishing boat in the Caribbean, two U.S.-based fishermen in the boat found themselves being buzzed by a Soviet Mig Mig . The incident occurred in the early 1980s . The two fishermen were fishing from the Caribbean .
 There was somewhat of a mini-crisis in November over the IL-28s following the huge crisis in October over the nuclear missiles .
 Nobody knew whether Cuban or Russian pilots were flying the plane . The plane was carrying passengers and crew .
 It was an international incident and it came up at President Kennedy’s press conference, he says . It was a major international incident, but it was not an isolated incident .
 President Obama was trying to minimize the incident when he was asked by a reporter . He was trying, of course, to get relations as back to normal as possible, he says .
 On October 16, the President and his advisors felt like they were in such a boat . President Barack Obama is in the midst of a difficult week .
 Chairman Khrushchev was discovered to have secretly, surreptitiously, secretly, under cover of deception, moved into Cuba, 90 miles from our shore . Soviet nuclear missiles of the medium and intermediate range class were perfectly capable of reaching any major city in the United States and most
 Chairman Khrushchev, himself and his foreign minister on a visit to President Kennedy during that very week made it look all the more like an offensive move, a threat . The fact that it was done secretly, swiftly, and under cover of deception, was done under cover .
 The U.S. had to take seriously and had to respond to if it was to protect its own citizens . The United States had to show its allies in the world that it was willing to stand up to Soviet nuclear threats .
 "If we would not do so when they were 90 miles off our shores, they could hardly depend upon us to do so if the threat were to Berlin or to some other locale in western Europe, a far distance from our shores," says President Obama .
 He called together those whose judgment he wanted to advise him on how to respond to the situation . And he called together his team of experts to discuss his response .
 On October 20, 1962, exactly 40 years ago this afternoon, we called him back from a political speaking tour he was on, on that day being in Chicago . On that day, he was in Chicago for a speech on the Chicago stage .
 "All the possible diplomatic options, all the possible means of getting rid of the weapons of mass destruction that might be hurled upon us," says George W. Bush . "We need to use all the diplomatic options," he says .
 We didn't think that removing the Chairman of the Soviet Central Committee regime change would accomplish much by way of safeguarding our interests . Somehow, we didn’t think that removal of the . Chairman of . the . Soviet Central . Committee would not have been able to protect our interests
 President spoke to the nation on the Monday evening that followed, two days later, including a special address-you weren’t old enough to hear it, Josefina - to the Cuban people, making clear that Cuba was not our enemy .
 Cuba was not the highest priority in U.S. foreign policy in those days, says Josefina Castro .
 President Kennedy had no interest in regime change in Cuba either . President Kennedy also had interest in a regime change there .
 The threat was the Soviet Union and its weapons of mass destruction poised to strike the U.S. In the 1950s, the threat was a threat to the United States . In the 1960s, President George W. Bush faced the threat of a nuclear war .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said he kept the channels of communication open between the White House and the Kremlin . Putin said that he did keep the channels open between Washington and Moscow .
 Negotiations if possible were the only way to obtain the removal of missiles without a large loss of life on the part of Americans, Russians, or Cubans .
 Kennedy-cool, calm, persistent, objective leadership steered us through those 13 days . He insisted that we find a solution that would not lead to nuclear war, insisting that we not drive Chairman Khrushchev into a corner where his only choices were humiliation or escalation .
 President Obama would be required to choose escalation under those circumstances . He would have to choose between escalation and escalation .
 The conference in Havana brought to my mind and Arthur’s and Bob McNamara's-all of us who participated-as never before, how close the world came to stumbling into a nuclear exchange 40 years ago .
 The Soviets thought they could sneak missiles into Cuba without the United States finding them, or reacting to them . The U.S. didn't find the missiles or react to them, but the Soviets thought it could be a cover-up .
 The United States thought the Soviet Union would never place nuclear weapons outside of it own borders because it never had before . The U.S. thought it would never do so because it had never done so .
 Joint Chiefs recommended President Kennedy invade Cuba following an air strike against the missile sites and all other potential hostile sites in Cuba . Joint Chiefs recommend that President Kennedy invaded Cuba, following a air strike .
 Because they were certain that no nuclear warheads were in Cuba at the time, they had no nuclear weapons in Cuba . The Cuban government was certain no weapons were in the country .
 President Kennedy followed the Joint Chiefs’ recommendation and launched those air strikes against the missile sites followed by an invasion, we now know-but we did not know at that time that Soviet commanders in Cuba were armed with tactical nuclear weapons .
 Had they used nuclear weapons against an American force, we would have responded with nuclear weapons and the world would be fast heading for disaster. And clearly, had they used . weapons against a . U.S. force, they would have . responded with . nuclear weapons .
 We thought that the so-called quarantine, in effect, was a blockade against food for the Cuban people, not against oil and petroleum . But a blockade only against more Soviet military offensive weapons, parts, and supplies for the missiles, he says .
 "We were convinced that that quarantine, as we called it, was the most peaceful, the least belligerent option of those available to us," the author says . "We're convinced that quarantine was the best peaceful option"
 Soviet submarines accompanying supply ships as they approached quarantine barrier were equipped with nuclear-tipped torpedoes . It turned out, as we discovered last week, that the Soviet submarines accompanied the supply ships were equipped .
 It is now known that the commander of each submarine had the authority to fire such torpedoes in times of extreme urgency . Commander of each sub had the power to fire the torpedoes .
 The captain of one of the ships, when discovered by a destroyer in the quarantine barrier that was dropping depth charges on the submarine, felt that the time had come to fire the nuclear torpedoes .
 Two other signatures besides captain’s were required on the order, we were told . The order was signed by the captain of the team .
 The third one felt that everybody would be better off waiting for a direct word from Moscow . The third felt that nobody should wait for the Kremlin to make a decision .
 Unknown Soviet submariner probably saved the world from being blown to smithereens . And it was that one unknown Soviet submarine . The world was saved by the unknown submarine .
 "We like to congratulate ourselves, especially here at the Kennedy Library, on superb crisis management," the library says . The library's crisis management has been described as "incredible"
 As we were coming back last week from the remains of a Soviet missile site in Pinar del Rio in western Cuba, our colleague leaped to his feet, having forgotten one of the essential things he was supposed to do .
 It can be argued further that it was the most dangerous moment in human history . It can also be argued that it is also possible that it may have been a dangerous moment for humanity .
 Never before had two contending powers possessed between them the technical capacity to blow up the world . The U.S. and Russia are the world's most powerful nations .
 This was an unprecedented moment in the history of humankind, and we’re lucky to have survived it, says President Obama . "We’ve been lucky to survive it," says Obama .
 Much of the analysis of the Missile Crisis goes back to the Bay of Pigs . Much of this analysis is based on the events of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 The Bay of Pigs was not an adventure that Kennedy would have initiated . Kennedy would not have initiated such an adventure, he says . Kennedy was president of the United States in 1961 .
 The disposal problem was what to do with the 1200 Cuban exiles who had been trained for almost a year in Guatemala . The disposal of the 1200 exiles was a huge problem .
 Eisenhower administration was prepared to go forward and to take Castro out of Cuba . Kennedy administration was showing the like fetter, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "They would say that Eisenhower administration . was prepared"
 This would, Mr Dulles said, have great impact in Latin America in strengthening the appeal of Fidel Castro . This would be great impact on Latin America .
 A former naval lieutenant vetoed-an expedition ordained, organized, and blessed by the commander of the greatest amphibious landing in history, June 6, 1944, he would have been subject to severe criticism . If he cancelled-a former naval Lt. vetoed- an expedition, a former naval
 The expedition was, as some historian described it, the perfect failure . Some historians have described it as a "perfect failure" by the expedition .
 The U.S. invasion of Cuba left the impression on the minds of both Havana and Moscow that the United States would, in time, invade Cuba itself .
 Though President Kennedy had no idea of invading Cuba by military force, I do now see how one can easily understand why the Castro government and the Khrushchev government felt otherwise .
 Kennedy’s main objective, main policy toward Latin America was the Alliance for Progress . Kennedy was the president of the U.S. in the 1960s and 1970s .
 The Alliance for Progress was a multilateral effort to raise living standards and strengthen democratic institutions throughout South America, throughout Latin America . It was a multi-nation effort to increase living standards .
 A great showcase for the Alliance for Progress was Venezuela which had, at that time, a progressive democratic government under Romulo Betancourt . Venezuela had, during the time of the Alliance For Progress, the government was progressive democratic .
 Fidel Castro was involved in supporting and arming guerrillas seeking to overthrow the Betancourt regime in Venezuela . The Castro regime was overthrown in Venezuela in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Kennedy administration regarded Castro regime in Cuba as an impediment to peace . Castro regime was seen as a threat to the peace, Kennedy administration said .
 The possibility that Cuba might become a Soviet military base in the midst of the center of the U.S. zone of and this, too, should be considered in the background of Operation Mongoose . Another reason was that the possibility of Cuba becoming a . Soviet military bases in Cuba might
 This strengthened the Soviet view and the Cuban view that we were bound on invasion. But this strengthened the view of the Soviet and Cuban view of us .
 The Bay of Pigs was an important, significant, effective, and expensive education for President Kennedy . President Kennedy learned from the lessons he learned from his administration's mistakes .
 "If it weren’t for the Bay of Pigs, we might be deeply involved militarily in Laos,"" he said, showing him some telegrams from the general Lemnitzer, the Chairman of the Joint Chief, urging military intervention in Laos .
 President Obama rejected their recommendations during the Missile Crisis . And that's why he had not hesitated about rejecting them during the crisis .
 I think, you look back at the Missile Crisis, I do not think that there was ever a moment when the U.S. or the Soviet Union would have initiated war . The United States and the Soviet Russia would not have started a war, he says .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev, too, were concerned about command and control, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The great concern of Kennedy and the great concern probably was the issue of command control," he says .
 Dr. Strangelove situation would be like a Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. situation where the mad general launched a nuclear weapon directed toward Moscow . The situation is reminiscent of the Dr. Stangelove-style of the Cold War .
 Kennedy understood this, and took every precaution to make sure that nothing would go wrong down the line . And Kennedy understood that this would be the first time he had been in the hospital .
 We learned more vividly than ever before before before the extent of the Cuban resentment of the Soviet Union . We learned last week at the conference, we learned . .
 He would have liked to have joined the Warsaw Pact, or have Soviet troops stationed in the island . He would like to have had Soviet troops on the island, he says .
 By the way, we learned that there were 42,000 Soviet troops in the island . The island was invaded by Soviet troops .
 Fidel Castro argued for making this a public transaction, doing it in the open . Fidel Castro: "Doing this in the public is the answer to the question"
 There was nothing illegal about the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba . That would have made it very difficult for the U.S. to respond . The United States would have been very difficult to respond to the move .
 Khrushchev’s insistence on secrecy and deceit gave, in a certain sense, a moral advantage to the U.S. The U.K. had an advantage over the Soviet Union in the Cold War, author says .
 Castro made a great sacrifice for the benefit of the solidarity of the socialist bloc, Castro says . Castro made the sacrifice when he discovered Khrushchev had decided to withdraw the Soviet missiles . Castro says the solidarity did not extend to the consultation or even the notification of Cuba .
 I got the impression at the recent Havana meeting that Castro was far madder at Khrushchev than he was at Kennedy . Castro was mad more than Kennedy, he says, at the time of the Cuban crisis .
 Kennedy’s effort to explore the possibility or normalization of relations in the autumn of 1963 led to the fall of 1963 . It was this disillusionment of Castro which led to Kennedy's effort to normalize relations with Castro .
 Castro communicated his rage, his disillusionment, his disenchantment with the Soviet Union to Sekou Ture, the Dictator of Guinea . Ture was the President of Guinea, who ruled the West African nation .
 Sekou Ture communicated some of this to the American Ambassador to Guinea, Bill Attwood . Attwood is the ambassador to Guinea . Ture is a former Guinea President, President of Guinea .
 Bill Attwood got polio, a mild attack of polio, and returned to the U.S. Attwood was polio victim of polio . Attwood: "I'm not afraid to go back to the United States"
 While recuperating, she was assigned to work with Adlai Stevenson at the U.N. She was working with him at the UN .
 Attwood, having learned that Castro was fed up, or seemed to be fed up with the Soviet Union, conceived the idea of a normalization of relations, at least an exploration thereof . Attwood: Attwood's idea of normalizing relations with Russia was an exploration of relations .
 JFK "heartily endorsed it. He got the support of Averell Harriman, of Robert Kennedy, of McGeorge Bundy for this project," he says .
 Bill Attwood and Lechuga, the Cuban Ambassador to the U.N., worked out the modalities of the deal . Attwood: "It's a good step forward, but it's a step further down"
 Ambassador Lechuga has written a book about this effort, which seems to be unknown . The ambassador has written about the effort .
 If they had ever wanted to invade Cuba, the most reasonable pretext for it was presented by the Cuban acceptance of nuclear missiles . The U.S. should have been able to use their nuclear missiles, the author says .
 JFK was always determined on the peaceful removal of the missiles, decided against it . JFK who decided, I think was always ... determined on peaceful removal, decided not to do it .
 The Kennedys were all behind the exploration of the normalization of relations with the U.S. in the summer and the autumn of 1963, he says .
 'It’s even scarier now that we know the full possibilities of horror and holocaust,' says the author of the book . "It's even scary now we know that we have the full possibility of horror," she says .
 We were very lucky to have leaders in the U.S. and the Soviet Union of wisdom and restraint-belated restraint in the Soviet days, perhaps, perhaps .
 If you'd like to ask a question of our distinguished panel, step up to the microphone in the center aisle . If you have a question, please step up in the middle of the aisle to speak .
 Please, if you don't mind, state your name, and it’s always interesting to know where you're from .
 Please try to be as brief and succinct as possible as possible so that those behind you could also ask a question . Also, please try to keep the conversation brief and briefest possible .
 The embargo should have been removed with the end of the Cold War, if not before, the author says . The embargo was lifted with the help of the U.S. State Department officials .
 The end of the Cold War meant that Castro was no longer a possibility for the Soviet military base, and he’d long since ceased his support of guerrilla operations of armed conflict in Latin America .
 The best way to deal with the Castro revolution would be to drown it in a flood of American tourists, U.S. investors . Castro's revolution would drown it out of Cuba, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I think that all the embargo and blockading with any country only increases tension . I think it only increases tensions with any nation, especially Iran .
 If you're lifting embargo, it will help this country to the transformation to a better life, and to the democracy, and will help people .
 "If you impose an embargo, you're just punishing the ordinary people, not the leaders of the countries," he says . "You can't impose a trade embargo, not an embargo," he adds .
 I'll speak first because that way Josefina can rebut me, which she will want to do. Well, I’ll speak first . Well, it’s a good idea, she says. She'll want to rebut him, he says .
 I agree with Arthur that it’s a long time overdue that the embargo should have been dropped . The embargo should be dropped, he says. I agree .
 American merchants and farmers are having a natural market taken over by Canadians and French, Germans and Swiss and Mexicans, and everyone else . Americans are having their natural market of their trade taken over, says CNN's John Sutter .
 I think that dropping the embargo may upset Fidel, having been nice enough to invite Arthur and others down there last week, I am concerned . Second, I'm concerned that dropping . the embargo . may upset him because he uses the embargo to blame the failure of the Cuban economy, he
 The Cuban government is interested in negotiating a range of issues between the U.S. and Cuba, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "I don't know whether the Cuban government wants to negotiate a number of issues"
 The embargo is one of many things we need to negotiate away from the embargo, says President Obama . "We should negotiate away," he says .
 President Obama hopes Cuba can enter into negotiations on democratization, including the release of political prisoners . But he would hope that the Cubans would be able to enter into the negotiations .
 "With all due respect, I have to disagree with the idea that the embargo is convenient for us," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not sure if the embargo will continue to be convenient to us"
 "This is one of the reasons why we have a staff in Washington, working very hard for many years now in order to educate American people to understand that we want the lifting of the embargo," she said .
 At least we are able now to buy food in the United States, which is the first step in many years . At least this is a good step for many years, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Mr Sorensen participated in a panel at the Kennedy School of Government Friday in which he participated . The panel discussed whether President Kennedy authorized attempts to assassinate Fidel Castro .
 "I don't have any doubt in my mind. If that question is aimed at me, let me say I don't doubt it," he says .
 I testified before the Church Committee that President Kennedy would never have authorized attempts to assassinate President Castro . President Kennedy never authorized assassination attempts to kill Castro, says former CIA operative .
 Assassination efforts by the CIA began, not only with respect to Cuba, began under the previous administration . The previous administration also targeted Congo and other countries .
 Kennedy administration may have been involved in efforts to get Kennedy administration . Kennedy administration's efforts may have continued during the Kennedy administration.
 It is possible that Robert Kennedy was aware of some of those efforts . Robert Kennedy, who headed a special committee, may have been aware of efforts .
 President Kennedy would not have endorsed them, he says . But I do believe that he would have backed them, the author says .
 The Eisenhower administration hired ""The Mob"" to-establish Sam Giancana and John Rosselli in a Miami hotel in August of 1960, months before Kennedy became President . The mobsters were established by the Eisenhower administration in 1960 .
 I do not believe that Eisenhower or Kennedy knew about or authorized these assassination projects . I do believe Eisenhower or JFK knew about the assassination projects.
 CIA, operating under the possible deniability creed, kept the word from the President . I believe that the CIA operated under the . possible deniable creed . The CIA kept the . word from President .
 Dick Helms testified before the Church Committee that they had not informed John McCone, who Kennedy brought in to clean up the CIA after Dulles resigned .
 They had not told John McCone about the assassination efforts, the assassination operations, he says . The assassination efforts were not told by McCone, he adds .
 "There seems to be unanimity against the embargo. I look at the panel, and there seem to be unanimousity against it," he says .
 So I'm assuming that the gentleman advised Kennedy to give Cuba to the Soviet Union at the time in order to avoid the crisis . So I’m assuming that . Kennedy to Cuba to avoid crisis, he said .
 The shift in U.S. foreign policies from containment and deterrence to preventive war is a most dangerous and ominous shift, says George W. Bush .
 There were people who were in favor of preventive war during the Cold War . There were also people who supported preventive war in the 1950s .
 "None of them ever came into power in any democratic state. Fortunately, none of them never came to power," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Minority Report's precogs foretell crimes that have not yet been committed in time to avert those crimes . But the basis of Minority Report was a group of people known as precogs . precogs are psychically equipped to foretell crime that have yet to be committed .
 Donald Rumsfeld and Vice President Cheney are a couple of Precogs, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "History is filled with surprises, and continues to outwit our certitudes and to arrest war-life and death-particularly in this dangerous world," he said .
 I don't think that I’m the right person to advise President Bush, the American President. I don’t think that he’d be the right to advise Bush .
 John F Kennedy was a good teacher at the feet of a pretty good teacher, says President Kennedy . "I say what I learned about presidential decision-making I learned from him," he says .
 "I learned from him not to make a decision of life or death, war or peace, without having all the information, and having the opportunity to review all the options," she says .
 "All of the options, including the military options, are all the options," says President Obama . "As I said in the previous remarks, the military option, the diplomatic options," he says .
 President Bush "hasn't had any opportunity to see all the options," Bush says . "Strangely enough, not having been consulted by President Bush," he says .
 There are other ways to get rid of those weapons of mass destruction than a preemptive strike, I’m convinced. And there's other ways, I'm convinced. There's a way of getting rid of them than a strike .
 I would like to-first of all, say that while I was with the administration at that time, I was not involved in the administration . I would also say that I would not be involved in that administration .
 I was given charge of war in Asia between the Chinese and the Indians over a territory that nobody knew previously had existed . I had been given charge . of war .
 "It was the only kind of military operation in which I could rejoice," says President Obama . "I could rejoice. It was the kind of . military operation," he says of the operation .
 The fuss in India and China was over as it suddenly was over, and not through any intervention of us, I was back in Washington . The further observation I have to make is that after that fuss was over it was suddenly over, it suddenly happened .
 The advice that we've had here tonight from the people who have assembled for this discussion is very much as I would wish it, says President Obama . The advice is "very much as it would have been"
 I end these remarks with my wish in which I trust everybody in this room shares, that we could have the four men and the distinguished woman that have been here tonight take charge of our policy in relation to Iraq .
 "I don't know what Josefina may be thinking about becoming a member of the National Security Council," she says . "Josefina is a woman who has been married for more than 20 years."
 Before we close, I’d like all of us to thank collectively our four panelists, our four distinguished and diverse panelists . The panelists are diverse and distinguished .
 On October 26, 1962, a young 22-year-old man from Minnesota was holed up in a basement apartment in Greenwich Village owned by the folksinger, Dave Van Ronk . The incident took place in the basement apartment owned by VanRonk, a folksinger .
 He was known as Bob Zimmerman, but by that time had preferred the name Bob Dylan . He was born Bob Dylan, but had preferred to be called Bob Dylan.
 Each line could serve as the last line in case there was no time to write any more lines . And he wrote that song, so he told a biographer later on, so that he told him later on .
 For you out there who don't recall this, I’d suggest that you think about this event every October . For you, think about it at least every October.
 "We don't have a physical presence to go to here, but I’d urge you to keep that flame alive long after all of us up here have gone," he says .