 Both Cuba and the Soviet Union have closely guarded the histories of their sides of the event . Information about the U.S. side of the crisis is relatively plentiful .
 The main pre-glasnost Soviet treatments of the crisis include Anatoly Gromyko, ""The Caribbean Crisis,"" Voprosy istorii, Nos. and 8 , trans. and trans. The main Soviet treatments are those of Anatoly Gromyko .
 Khrushchev Remembers: The Last Testament, trans. and ed. Little, Brown, 1970). Khrushiev Remembers is published in 1970s and 1980s, and Khrushimchevich Remembers by Edward Snowden . Snowden's book is published by Snowden in New York
 We are unaware of any Cuban treatments of the crisis that deal with the diplomacy of the event in any detail . We are not aware of any treatments that deal on diplomacy .
 Burlatsky, Mikoyan, Shakhnazarov, Bundy, McNamara and Sorensen also participated in the Moscow conference in 1989 .
 We organize our treatment by topic-and, where possible, in chronological order-on the assumption that the reader will be familiar with the main events of the crisis itself . We organize this treatment by topics-and where possible-in chronological order .
 We highlight areas where recent discussions have most advanced our understanding of the event . We highlight those areas in which recent discussions most significantly advanced our knowledge .
 Owing to delays in clearance and translation, specific page number references are not yet available for the forthcoming transcript . Specific page numbers have not yet been provided for the transcript .
 Soviets have continued to deny any direct connection between the Cuban missile crisis and the unstable Berlin situation . Andrei Gromyko added his voice to the chorus .
 The desire to deter an American invasion of Cuba emerged shortly after the crisis itself as the official Soviet rationale for the deployment of the Cuban missile system .
 The missiles were withdrawn in return for an American pledge not to invade Cuba . Most Western commentators have dismissed or discounted this motivation, however, because it seemed calculated to justify the public terms on which the crisis was ultimately resolved .
 Several wellplaced Soviets have insisted that fears of an American invasion were in fact uppermost in Khrushchev's mind . But several wellplaced Soviet leaders have insisted fears of a U.S. invasion were not in fact .
 These fears were grounded in what appeared to be a consistent and deliberate pattern of American activity designed to subvert and overthrow the regime of Fidel Castro . These fears included the use of U.S. military force if necessary .
 Khrushchev stated that this was his sole purpose in deploying mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles (MRBMs and IRBMs) in Cuba . In his speech to the Supreme Soviet Supreme Soviet on December 12, 1962, he said this was the only purpose for deploying the missiles
 Jorge Risquet said Khrushchev told him in August 1964 that the ""sole idea"" behind the deployment was to defend Cuba . Jorge Riscquet also said that Khrushvic told him that the 'sole idea' was to protect Cuba from the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy cut off all diplomatic relations with Cuba in January 1961 . He also eliminated the Cuban sugar quota in March; and approved the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion in April .
 The operation was a dismal failure, but it did not dissuade the CIA from pursuing a substantial covert action campaign . Operation Mongoose was intended to bring about the liquidation of the Castro regime .
 Castro's position began to look especially precarious in January 1962 . The United States managed to persuade the Organization of American States to declare the government of Cuba incompatible with the inter-American system, to ostracize Castro .
 Malinovsky reportedly told the Soviet premier that Cuba could resist a full-scale American invasion for three or four days-hardly long enough to send reinforcements . The Soviet premier reportedly said Cuba could withstand the invasion for only a few days .
 Khrushchev maintained at meetings with Presidium members that ""there was no other path"" to save the Cuban revolution than through the installation of nuclear missiles . Ambassador Alekseev: "There were no other paths" to save Cuba .
 Khrushchev may have believed that a deployment of conventional forces to the island as a trip wire would not have sufficed . He may have thought that the Soviet Union could not credibly deter an American invasion by threats of retaliation elsewhere .
 Khrushchev's analysis was contradicted by Cuban participants in Moscow conference . Cuban participants sharply contradicted his analysis in several ways . The Cuban participants disagreed with Khrushchevitch's analysis .
 Cuban Politburo member Jorge Risquet contended that Cuba could have resisted the U.S. attack for more than three days . He expressed indignation at the estimate attributed to Malinovsky .
 Sergio del Valle, chief of staff of Cuban army in 1962, claimed that Cuba had armed and mobilized 270,000 people-double Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara's estimate .
 In a later interview, del Valle claimed that 270,000 armed and mobilized troops were divided into fifty-six existing divisions, which had been brought up to full strength from reserves . In a second interview, he claimed that the 270,000 armed and mobilized forces were divided
 Each division had on average 4800 men, considerably smaller than the American division . Although they varied considerably in size, each division was smaller than American .
 Twenty-eight divisions deployed on the western side of the island included some of the largest and strongest . This was where the first wave of an invasion was expected to land .
 The commander in-chief of the Atlantic Command prepared three contingency plans for military action against Cuba . The commander-in-chief prepared three contingencies .
 Although the deployment posed certain risks for Cuba, the Soviet Union had already taken risks in support of the Cuban revolution . The Soviet Union took risks in order to support the revolution, including the Cuban people .
 Cuba's national pride is better preserved by these claims than by the admission that Cuba required assistance from another nation, in the form of a nuclear deterrent, to protect her own sovereignty and independence . It is clear, however, that Cuba's .
 In 1962, both del Valle and Aragones were attracted to the idea of the deployment largely because of its potential for deterring an American invasion . In subsequent interviews, both Del Valle .
 Moscow conference highlights the link between the deployment of missiles to Cuba and the Soviet desire to redress the strategic nuclear imbalance .
 Raymond Garthoff's remarks, MCT; and CINCLANT Historical Account of Cuban Crisis , ch. 1 . See Raymond Garhoff and Cinclant .
 Claude Julien's interview with Fidel Castro, Le Monde, March 22 and 23, 1963 . Julien: Castro was the Cuban leader of the Cuban revolution .
 Emilio Aragones was the subject of a series of interviews with Emilio Del Valle . The interview was published in 1989 .
 Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric's destruction of the ""missile gap"" myth may have increased Soviet anxiety about American first-strike capability . Khrushchev's hitherto very assertive foreign policy, which rested heavily on pretended Soviet nuclear superiority and overt nuclear threats, may have
 The disparity in strategic nuclear weapons appears to have been greater than was appreciated at the time . Thus the disparity appears to be even greater than thought it was .
 A successful Cuban deployment could have more than quadrupled the number of warheads that Soviet missiles could have delivered on the U.S. The United States was hit by Soviet missiles during the Cold War .
 Most Western analysts have assumed that some such calculation was the primary, though not fully articulated, initial motivation for the deployment of missiles . The missile strike is believed to have been launched by North Korea in 2009 .
 Cuba presented a unique opportunity for quickly and cheaply redressing the strategic imbalance . Cuba therefore presented an opportunity for quick and inexpensive redressing its strategic imbalance, says the US ambassador to Cuba .
 The CIA reported that the Soviet Union was installing twenty-four SS-4 MRBM launchers in Cuba-four each at four sites near San Crist6bal, and four at two sites near Sagua la Grande . On October 19, the CIA said that the Soviets had installed twenty-
 Each launcher could have been equipped with two missiles, for a possible total of forty-eight MRBMs . Each launcher was equipped with a total of two missiles .
 With one warhead per missile (25 kt-2 MT yield for the SS-4s), seventy-two warheads could have been deployed to Cuba . The SS-5s could have had a maximum yield of 3-5 MT yield . The missiles could have deployed seventy-
 Although they did not represent a serious first-strike threat, they might have succeeded in delivering some number of nuclear warheads on the United States in the event of war . Although these were severely constrained operationally (because of geographical, logistical, and technical factors, and although they were not a
 The missiles in Cuba probably no more than doubled the number of nuclear weapons of all kinds that the Soviets could have delivered, though an accurate estimate of this increment is impossible to make . The missiles were in Cuba, therefore, probably .
 Several Soviets, including Volkogonov himself, maintain that the missiles served a ""dual purpose" The missiles were launched in the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Biryuzov may have supported the idea primarily for its strategic value . The idea may have been supported primarily by the Russian president .
 Different individuals within the Soviet decision-making establishment, and different branches of the Soviet state, seem to have understood the deployment in different ways . Khrushchev's task of enlisting support for the terms on which the crisis was ultimately resolved may have complicated his task .
 Khrushchev was attracted to the idea of deploying missiles to Cuba partly because of its apparent symmetry with the deployment of U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 His speeches in Bulgaria in May, 1962-where, he writes in his memoirs, the idea of the deployment first occurred to him-refer repeatedly and vehemently to the presence of American nuclear missiles so close to the Soviet border .
 Khrushchev denied the deployment of missiles to Cuba was a cost-effective solution to the strategic nuclear imbalance . Stationing ICBMs on Soviet soil would have been a more sensible solution, he said . The move required nothing extra in the way of conventional defenses .
 He therefore discounts the strategic nuclear rationale behind the deployment of missiles to Cuba . He says he also discounts the rationale behind deploying missiles there .
 The Soviets were experiencing difficulties in producing three-stage long-range rockets . His argument, however, overlooks the difficulties that the Soviets faced, he says .
 Khrushchev seems to have been on the mind, but there is no evidence that it rivaled the other motivations in urgency or importance . The Soviet Union is now the world's most powerful state of power .
 It is more likely that the perceived symmetry with the Turkish deployment bolstered, rather than led to, the idea in the first place . It's more likely than it was the idea that the deployment of the U.S. troops in Turkey would have bolstered the idea .
 In any retrospective discussion, of course, it is appropriate to ask whether motivations and contingencies were, in the event itself, well-thought-out in advance .
 Gromyko argued that the deployment had been decided upon only after a thorough, careful, ""cool-headed" evaluation .
 American intentions toward Cuba in 1962 have long been the subject of debate, and continue to be so . U.S. intentions toward the island nation in 1962 are subject of much debate .
 The crucial question is whether or not the Kennedy administration intended, or not, to use American military force to oust Fidel Castro . Castro's regime would be more congenial to American interests, he says .
 Soviet and Cuban fears that this was the case seem to have played an important part in the decision to deploy nuclear missiles . disavowals of any such intention by former Kennedy administration officials have long been received with skepticism by Soviets, Cubans, and revisionist historians .
 The supposed symmetry between the two deployments was far from obvious to the members of the Kennedy administration, who noted that the Soviet deployment was much larger than the American deployment . It involved no dual-control arrangements, and, perhaps most importantly, it was undertaken in strict secrecy behind a cloak of
 The issue sheds light on the role of perceptions and misperceptions in the genesis of a crisis . It sheds important light .
 McNamara insisted, however, that despite the extent of U.S. covert operations against Castro, the Kennedy administration did not intend to invade Cuba . McNamara said that no serious discussions to consider such an operation had taken place .
 The Cuban and Soviet delegations in Moscow expressed skepticism on this point . The Cuban delegation in Moscow expresses skepticism about this claim .
 Several publications have called into question the veracity of McNamara's disclaimer . McNamara has been accused of defamation of defamation .
 Recently declassified documents show that the Kennedy administration actively sought to destroy the Castro regime .
 One memorandum suggested late October 1962 as the target for Castro's ouster . Another suggested that U.S. military force might be required to accomplish that .
 The claim that documents show the Kennedy administration had actually decided to use American military force against Cuba is speculative . However, the stronger claim is that such documents show that the administration actually decided on the use of U.S. military force .
 The tapes of the White House discussions on October 16, immediately following the discovery of the missiles in Cuba, strongly evince a belligerent attitude on the part of the president and his advisers, but nowhere refer to any prior decision to invade Cuba, or any established intention to invade .
 If indeed there had been serious consideration of the possibility, one would expect it to be reflected in those early, formative discussions . An invasion would have been a comparatively well-formulated option already on the table, he says .
 President Kennedy's reluctance to use more than a display of force during the crisis itself reinforces doubt that he had harbored an intention to initiate serious military action against Cuba before the discovery of the missiles .
 There is no evidence of intent on the part of the Kennedy administration to invade Cuba prior to the deployment of the missiles . Cuba and the Soviet Union quite understandably applied worst-case analyses to the various covert activities of CIA operatives in Cuba and to the activities of the American military .
 The Cuban participants at the Moscow conference reported that Cuba had wellplaced informants in the American defense and intelligence communities who kept them abreast of the various contingencies under consideration .
 Ambassador Alekseev explicitly claimed that the Cubans had ""precise data"" about American plans to invade the island . The Cuban ambassador said that the U.S. is planning to invade Cuba .
 Operational plans and contingencies are not conclusive evidence of political intentions, but are nevertheless strong evidence of the worst possible case . They were apparently interpreted by Cuban and Soviet intelligence as reflecting a policy decision of the Kennedy administration to invade Cuba .
 McNamara correctly refers to these interpretations as Soviet and Cuban ""misperceptions" He correctly points out that mistaken conclusions were drawn from the available evidence . McNamara calls the interpretations of these interpretations "misperception"
 Bundy, however, said he viewed American covert operations against Castro as a ""psychological salve" Bundy said he had no expectation that they would succeed in their stated goals . Bundy said that he viewed U.S. covert operations as a "psychological salve"
 It was the avowed policy of the U.S. to destabilize the Castro regime . Part of that effort involved convincing Cuba of its vulnerability to American attack, he says .
 The Kennedy administration actively promoted the very ""misperceptions"" that led, in part, to the Soviet decision to deploy nuclear missiles to Cuba . Kennedy administration, therefore, actively promoted, the very 'misperception' that led to the decision .
 Khrushchev claims that the idea to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba first occurred to him when he was in Bulgaria, between May 14 and 20, 1962 . But, according to Sergo Mikoyan, he had already discussed the idea with First Deputy Premier Anastas I Mikoy
 Khrushchev told Mikoyan the aim would be to deploy missiles very rapidly under a cloak of secrecy . The aim was to reveal their presence to the U.S. president after the mid-term congressional elections in November .
 Khrushchev first discussed the idea with him on the flight home from Bulgaria . Gromyko reports that Khrushvic first discussed it on the plane home from the country .
 The whole Presidium was included in the deliberations . Shortly thereafter, the whole . Presidium .
 Khrushchev was clearly the ""dominant figure" during the formative phase of the Cold War . Gromyko: "The discussions were candid and exploratory, though Khrushche was the dominant figure"
 Only other Finnish Presidium member reported to have expressed doubt in Presidium meetings was Otto Kuusinen .
 Gromyko told Khrushchev in May that deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba would trigger a "political explosion" in the United States . Gromykos says he told the Soviet leader that a deployment of nukes would trigger an explosion in the U.S.
 Gromyko voiced pros and cons of Khrushchev's proposal . It is quite plausible that he voiced his thoughts on the idea of a new Soviet state .
 If his testimony is accurate, Khrushchev ultimately decided to disregard the cautions of both Mikoyan and Gromyko, two of his advisers who knew U.S. politics best . If true, it would be a sign Khrushche decided to ignore the advice of both
 Aleksandr Alekseev was at that time a Soviet press representative in Cuba . He was on very friendly terms with both Fidel Castro and his brother, Minister of Defense Rauil Castro . Aleksandandov was in Cuba at the time of his visit .
 Alekseev was recalled to Moscow at the beginning of May and informed that he would be the new ambassador to Havana . He replaced Sergei M Kudryavtsev, whom Castro strongly disliked .
 Alekseev was officially appointed ambassador effective May 31, by order of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet on May 7 . He was appointed as ambassador by order by Presidium, the supreme Soviet Supreme Soviet Council .
 Alekseev was informed of the plan to deploy nuclear missiles to Cuba and was included in the decision-making circle . When Khrushchev returned from Bulgaria, he was told of the plans .
 Khrushchev asked him how Castro would react to the proposal . Alekseev reports that he expressed grave doubts that Castro would agree to the idea .
 Khrushchev decided to send a special mission to Cuba to find out if missiles could be installed secretly . Khrrushchev sent the mission to determine whether the missiles had been installed .
 A ten-day Soviet ""agricultural mission"" traveled to Havana at the very end of May . The mission was part of a 10-day mission to Cuba .
 Alekseev reports that Gromyko told him privately in August 1962 that he had ""strong reservations"" about the idea . Alekseyev says he had expressed his reservations to Khrushchev in private .
 Alekseev claims that he thought Castro would not accept the missiles was that he would jeopardize his support in Latin America if he were to be perceived as too tightly bound to the Soviet Union . Malinovsky, evidently strongly in favor of the plan, took exception to his doubts
 Alekseev says he underestimated Castro's internationalism . He now believes Castro was sincere when he said he would accept missiles to bolster socialism on the world scale . He says he now believes he was sincere .
 Alekseev informed Raul Castro that ""engineer Petrov"" was actually the commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces . The meeting was arranged with Fidel Castro for that same evening .
 According to Alekseev, Fidel Castro expressed immediate interest in the proposal . Fidel Castro left to confer with the other five members of the Cuban secretariat .
 Aragones reports that all five-Rau'l Castro, Che Guevara, President Osvaldo Dorticos, Blas Roca, and himself- were unanimously in favor of the idea .
 Biryuzov returned to the Soviet Union with Fidel Castro's agreement and with an optimistic assessment of the chances of deploying the missiles secretly .
 At a meeting of the Presidium on June 10, Biryuzov reported the results of the negotiations . The negotiations were held at a meeting in Moscow .
 Presidium orders Defense Ministry to develop specific plans for missile deployment . Presidium has ordered the defense ministry to develop plans for deployment of missile missiles .
 In early July, a Cuban delegation led by Rauil Castro visited Moscow to discuss Soviet arms shipments to Cuba . The trip included a visit to discuss operational details of the missile deployment .
 Khrushchev led by Raul Castro and Marshal Malinovsky met for two weeks . Delegations led to installing network of latest Soviet SA-2 surface-to-air missiles around island .
 SAMs and supporting equipment for the MRBMs were shipped at the very end of July . The first SAMs were shipped to the United States in July .
 The reasons for Biryuzov's personal optimism are unclear . Sergio del Valle notes that Cuba's geography lent itself to a secret deployment .
 Sergo Mikoyan believes that Biryuzov's estimate was influenced by his fervent desire to redress the strategic nuclear imbalance . Sergo Mikhoyan: Biryukov's desire to reverse the strategic imbalance was influenced .
 At the time of the crisis, no IRBMs were present in Cuba, and the first IRBM was not expected to become operational until well into December .
 Authors' interview with Othon Montero, Researcher at the Instituto de Historia de Cuba, May 15, 1989, Havana . Author: "Othon was a researcher in Cuba and a researcher for Cuba's history .
 Rauil Castro and Malinovsky signed each paragraph of the agreement, and space was provided at the end of the document for the signatures of Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev .
 The two leaders intended to sign it at a public ceremony in Havana in November . But the two leaders never did so . The deal was never signed .
 Rauil Castro returned from Moscow with a draft of the document in hand, his brother elaborated and modified the wording of the preamble . Castro's brother later revised the document .
 His amended version declared that the purpose of the agreement was ""to provide mutual military assistance"" rather than ""to save the Cuban revolution,"" and it strongly affirmed the legality of the deployment .
 Che Guevara and Emilio Aragones traveled to Moscow at the end of the summer (August 27-September 2) to secure Soviet approval for Castro's changes . The changes were approved by the Soviet Union .
 They proposed that the agreement be made public prior to the deployment itself . It would remove any pretext for a hostile American reaction .
 The Cubans warned the Soviet leadership that the situation in the U.S. was becoming,increasingly volatile . The Cuban government warned the Soviets the situation was becoming more volatile .
 Concerned by the prospect that rising suspicions in the U.S. might eventually lead to war hysteria, they sought to draw international attention to the legality of the deployment . Concerned about the prospect of rising suspicions, the group sought international attention .
 Aragones reported that they told Khrushchev that there might be ""a preventive strike with severe consequences for us"" if the Americans were not given 52. The Americans did not get 52.
 Khrushchev insisted that making the deployment public would be a terrible mistake . Khrrushchev said it might precipitate the very invasion the missiles were intended to forestall .
 Khrushchev: If U.S. attack Cuba in the meantime, then he would promptly send the Baltic Fleet . If the Americans did attack Cuba, he would send a Baltic Fleet to Cuba . The Soviet leader says he would then send his Baltic Fleet into Cuba .
 The Cubans deferred to Khrushchev's assessment of the Americans, because of the Soviets' greater experience in foreign affairs, and agreed to let the matter drop . Though skeptical of the promise of naval support, the Cubans let the issue drop .
 At the Moscow conference, the Cuban delegation identified Khrushchev's judgment as a serious mistake . At the same time, the Soviet Union was in full control of the White House .
 The Soviet expedition to Cuba was under the overall command of General Issa Pliyev, a former cavalry officer with no experience with nuclear missiles . The expedition was led by an ex-cavalry officer who had no experience of nuclear missiles.
 Ambassador Alekseev suggests that he did so to throw U.S. intelligence off the scent . Why Khrushchev chose Pliyev is unclear, though one plausible explanation is offered by Ambassador Aleksandev . The ambassador says he did it to throw off the U.
 As part of the operation, over 40,000 Soviet troops were sent to Cuba, under secrecy so tight that only the commanding officers of the units dispatched knew where they were headed .
 "We were deferential to the Soviets' judgments, because, after all, they had a great deal of experience with the Americans," she says . "They had superior information than we had. But, you know, we were deference to them," she said .
 Khrushchev believed from the start that the U.S. would react to the news of Soviet missiles in Cuba with moderation . He believed that the United States would react with moderation.
 The Soviet Baltic fleet would have been completely incapable of providing timely or effective naval support . It is difficult to credit the claim that Khrushchev was serious on this point .
 When asked whether the deployment could have been undertaken openly, Gromyko insisted that a secret deployment was the only viable option . The Soviet Union did not want to reveal the extent of the operation .
 Theodore Sorensen asserted that the president would have found it much more difficult to mobilize world opinion on his side if the deployment had been done openly . McGeorge Bundy strongly agreed with Theodore Sorennsen .
 This clarifies the rather unclear passage on this point in Alekseev, ""Uroki karibskogo krizisa,"" 5.5. 5.6.7.7 . 5.8.8 .
 Volkogonov's report is consistent with Sergo Mikoyan's claim at Cambridge conference that 42,000 Soviet troops were involved in the Cuban deployment . The report was published in Moscow, Russia, in the summer of 1961 .
 Some Soviet sources claim that the commanders of the vessels involved in the operation were instructed to open sealed orders, at a predetermined point in the voyage, that charged them to scuttle their ships if an attempt was made to stop and search them . Soviet personnel would dance on deck in an
 The first SS-4 MRBMs arrived on September 15,63 eleven days after President Kennedy's first major warning against the deployment of ""offensive weapons"" to Cuba . President Kennedy warned against deployment of offensive weapons .
 The missiles and related equipment were off-loaded under cover of darkness . The shipments went undetected, with elaborate precautions to ensure that the shipments went unnoticed .
 As part of the deception, Soviet troops wore civilian sportshirts to disguise their numbers and identities .
 One of those who came off a Soviet ship was the thirty-year-old commander of a motorized infantry regiment . Lieutenant Colonel Dimitry Yazov is now Soviet Minister of Defense .
 Only Soviets were involved in unloading, transportation, and installation of the missiles . The total number of Soviet military involved in the deployment was closer to 44,000 .
 Previous American intelligence estimates ranged from 4,500 to 16,000 in October and November, 1962, and later went to 22,000 . This figure is much higher than previous estimates, which ranged between 4,000 and 16,500 .
 Basti6n, March 30, p.; reprinted as ""The General Who Gave the Order to Fire,"" in the Granma Weekly Review, April 23, 1989 . Basti 6n: "The General Gave to Fire"
 The Cuban armed forces' role in the deployment was limited to guiding the preliminary exploration of the terrain, choosing the routes from the ports to the missile sites, and building roads .
 The Soviets' failure to camouflage the missile sites permitted American intelligence to discover the deployment prematurely, by means of reconnaissance photographs taken on October 14 . The Soviets failed to camouflage their missile sites .
 Soviet standard operating procedures for constructing nuclear missile sites did not include the use of camouflage . It appears that the reason the Soviets failed to camouflage the missiles is that the Soviets did not use camouflage . The reason the Soviet missile site was not camouflaged .
 All previous installations had been on Soviet territory . The installation crews in Cuba overlooked the importance of disguising their activities on foreign soil .
 Castro is reported to have expressed his dismay that Cubans had not been consulted on camouflage measures . Castro maintained that the sites could easily have been disguised as agricultural projects, had the Soviets only asked for help .
 One of the more persistent puzzles of the Cuban missile crisis is whether or not nuclear warheads for the Soviet MRBMs ever reached Cuba . The Soviets had no nuclear warheads in Cuba .
 American intelligence never detected nuclear warheads in Cuba . It interpreted the assembly of likely warhead storage bunkers at the missile sites as evidence that they had not yet arrived .
 The Kennedy administration operated on the assumption that they had. But the Kennedy administration, in the face of uncertainty, operated .
 Jorge E Mendoza was Director of the Instituto de Historia de Cuba, Cuba, May 15, 1989, Havana . He was the Cuban director of the Institute of Historia, Cuba .
 See,g., Ray S Cline, ""Nuclear War Seemed Remote,"" Washington Post, February 5, 1989, p.m. Cline: "Nuclear war Seemed remote"
 The United States had solid intelligence that warheads were on the way to Cuba aboard the freighter Poltava when the quarantine was imposed . The U.S. had been told the freighters were carrying warheads to Cuba .
 The Poltava stopped short of the quarantine line and returned to the Soviet Union . The ship was the last ship to leave the USSR and returned home .
 Apparently, the Soviets did not keep the Cubans well-informed of the warhead shipments . Cubans were not informed of the shipments .
 General del Valle, the Cuban chief of staff, was informed on October 23 or 24 by General Pliyev merely that ""everything was ready,"" which he interpreted to mean that warheads had arrived . General Del Valle interpreted that to mean warheads had already arrived in Cuba .
 Only later did he learn the details of the warhead shipments, and discover that they were incomplete . Only later he learned the details, and discovered that they had been incomplete .
 Volkogonov: WMDs arrived in Cuba were kept away from missiles themselves . No measures were taken to mate them, even when alert levels were raised following President Kennedy's speech .
 Had the order to prepare the missiles come down, Volkogonov claimed, they could have been targeted in four hours . The countdown of 15 minutes would have required a subsequent countdown of fifteen minutes .
 Both conditions had to be satisfied before the missiles were to be used . Both conditions were satisfied before being used .
 The orders defined the limits of the local commanders' authority to launch nuclear missiles, however, none of the Soviets interviewed for this study . None of the Soviet leaders interviewed for the study was interviewed .
 The details of the deployment in Cuba evince a high degree of Soviet self-reliance, and an equally high level of Cuban deference . The details evince an equally great degree of Russian deference, the author says .
 There may have been a dearth of trust on the one side, and an excess of it on the other . There may be a lack of trust between the two sides of the fence .
 American intelligence estimated in 1962 that the fastest an SS-4 missile could have been fired from a cold start was eight hours . The fastest a missile could be fired in eight hours was expected to last eight hours, according to intelligence .
 CIA memorandum on the construction of missile sites in Cuba, October 19, 1962 . CIA memorandum . CIA memo on the . construction of . missile sites .
 On October 18, Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko paid a visit to the White House which he described as ""the most complex discussion"" of his diplomatic career . During that week, on October 18, on Oct. 18, he described the visit as the "most complex discussion"
 Kennedy did not ask Gromyko directly about the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba, nor did he volunteer any information about them . Both were relieved by the lack of any information .
 Gromyko has since asserted that he was instructed to be forthcoming if confronted directly . He has since said he will be forthcoming when confronted by the media .
 At the Moscow conference, he maintained merely that he would have given a ""proper answer"" to a direct question from the president . In a subsequent article, he claimed that he was instructed by Moscow to say that the Soviets were deploying a ""small quantity of missiles of a defensive nature
 President Kennedy went on national television to announce the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba . He announced the intention to impose a naval quarantine on all shipments of offensive weapons to Cuba .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk handed Ambassador Dobrynin an advance copy of the president's speech . Secretary Rusk had been given the speech an hour earlier .
 Dobrynin had not been informed by his own government of the deployment . He was not informed by the government of his country .
 Khrushchev apparently reacted to Kennedy's speech with anger, ordering work accelerated on construction of the missile sites . The naval quarantine, scheduled to take effect at 10:00m. on Wednesday, was due to take place on October 24 .
 Khrushchev publicly took a conciliatory, cooperative attitude toward resolving the crisis . Not until October 26, he would publicly address the crisis publicly . The crisis was over for months .
 The Cuban response to Kennedy's speech was also angry, bellicose, and defiant . Unlike Khrushchev's, it appears not to have mellowed as the days passed .
 Neither the United States nor the Soviet Union backed away from its public position, but both sides avoided a confrontation . Neither the U.S. nor the . United . States and Soviet Union .
 At 1:00 a.m. on October 26, an official at the Soviet embassy in Washington known to be the senior KGB official in Washington, met ABC's State Department correspondent John Scali .
 Fomin asked Scali to determine whether or not the U.S. would be interested in resolving the crisis by pledging not to invade Cuba in return for the withdrawal of the nuclear missiles . Fomin asks Scali whether the United States would be willing to withdraw the missiles .
 Scali replied at 7:30m. that the administration was interested in Fomin's suggestion . Fomin: "The administration is interested in the suggestion"
 At a press conference on February 6, 1963, McNamara revealed that on the evening of October 23, eighteen Soviet ships had been bound for Cuba . McNamara said the ships were bound to Cuba .
 Later that night, 16 of those ships, including the five large-hatch ships suspected of carrying missiles, had turned back . The ships were tracked into the Baltic and the Mediterranean .
 Two ships, the Gagarin and the Komiles, appear to have continued toward Cuba, with submarine escort . The Komiles stopped just outside the quarantine area before 10:25m., October 24 .
 If Medvedev's report is accurate, one is left wondering when the order to hold course for Cuba was given, when it was rescinded, and whether it originally applied to all eighteen vessels, or just some .
 Khrushchev sent a private letter to Kennedy between 6:00 and 9:00m. on Friday, October 26, proposing to conclude a deal along the same lines as Fomin had suggested to Scali . The State Department began to receive a private, conciliatory letter from
 Most students of the crisis have assumed that the letter merely formalized Fomin's earlier trial balloon . But now it appears now that this assumption is incorrect . The letter appears to have been written by Fomin himself .
 The American embassy in Moscow had begun to receive the message at 4.43m. The message was sent at 4:43m . The U.S. embassy in Russia had begun receiving the message .
 Moscow time (early Friday morning) is early Friday morning in Washington, Washington, many hours before Fomin's initiative . Fomin: "The initiative was launched by Fomin in Moscow at 7.30 a.m. local time (before Fomin)
 The Fomin-Scali communication would have been too late to influence the content of the letter . The letter would have had to be made public by the government of Italy .
 Khrushchev's tone of somber realism convinced many in the ExComm that he was looking for a peaceful way out of the crisis . Many in Cuba thought he was losing his nerve and that he would cave in to U.S. pressure .
 Khrushchev later reported a feeling among some of his military advisers during the crisis that a harder line was in order . He later reported feeling among military advisers that a tougher line was needed .
 Western suppositions, that Khrushchev at this point faced a divided Presidium and threats to his own authority, have been unequivocally denied by knowledgeable Soviets . Western suppsitions have been strongly denied by the Soviets .
 The Origin of the Turkish Missile Trade . President Kennedy responded to Khrushchev's letter of the day before . A second letter, taking a harder line, was broadcast by Moscow .
 Robert Kennedy asked Robert Kennedy to disregard messages from other channels of communication because they did not reflect his views . Dobrynin reports that Robert Kennedy had asked him on October 26 to disregard other messages .
 Khrushchev recalled feeling pressured by ""military advisers"" to take a harder line . Khrushvic recalled feeling pressure to take action against the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev's quick about-face has always puzzled Western students of the crisis . Members of the ExComm show considerable surprise and confusion in the transcripts of the October 27 meetings .
 In 1987, Georgy Shakhnazarov conveyed a message from Anatoly Dobrynin to the participants in the Cambridge conference . The message indicated that the idea for the missile trade had been hatched in the Soviet embassy in Washington, D.C.
 Dobrynin's cryptic remark remained unclear until the Moscow conference, where Dobrynins provided further details previously unknown . His rather cryptic remark remains unclear .
 He and Robert Kennedy met secretly on the night of Friday, October 26, as part of a series of private, late-night back-channel discussions between the two . Robert Kennedy: "I'm not going to be surprised if you know what happened to me"
 Dobrynin: The reaction to the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba was puzzling in view of the fact that the U.S. had deployed similar missiles in Turkey, next door to the Soviet Union . The United States had also deployed similar missile launchers in Turkey .
 Dobrynin says he was acting on his own initiative, not expecting it to be interpreted as part of a negotiating position . He says he didn't expect the issue to be taken into account as a negotiating point . Dobrynins: "I was acting entirely on my own initiative"
 He was merely attempting to make the point that the Soviet side had an equal right to provide for its own security, he said .
 For the text of the letter, see Larson, The ""Cuban Crisis"" of 1962, 185, for the text . Larson: "The Cuban Crisis" of 1962 was the Cuban crisis of 1962 .
 For an account by a Soviet journalist who waited outside Khrushchev's office while this letter was being written, see Sturua, ""Dialektika karibskogo krizisa,"" 5. For a more detailed account of the letter to the Soviet Union, see
 Sturua recalls watching through an open door as Malinovsky and other military stood before a large map, responding to Khrushchev's questions . Sturua: "I was in a state of war with the Soviet Union, but I was not in a war zone"
 It is worth noting that the idea of a missile trade was not a new one, and that, indeed, the president seems to have been expecting the Soviets to propose it .
 The missile trade was also proposed by Walter Lippmann in his October 25 column in the Washington Post, and had been the subject of considerable public debate .
 No one at the Moscow conference offered the latter interpretation, even though some, such as Andrei Gromyko, were presumably in a position to know .
 If Dobrynin's story is accurate, then some traditional understandings of the climax of the crisis must give way . The story is likely to change the way people understand the end of the Cold War .
 The tapes of the ExComm meetings of October 27 clearly indicate that the question of the missile trade dominated the discussion, and that the president himself was its strongest advocate . The tapes show that the President himself was the strongest advocate of missile trade .
 At no point in discussions did the president or his brother discuss Robert Kennedy's meeting with Dobrynin of the previous day; nor did they reveal that they had already communicated to the Soviet Union that the Jupiter missiles in Turkey were negotiable . The president or brother did not discuss Robert
 The president's reticence in the transcripts of the October 27 meetings suggests that the ExComm had become largely irrelevant to the president's decision-making at the height of the crisis .
 Crucial decisions were being made by the president and a few close advisers, well away fromand unknown to the ExComm as a whole .
 U-2 reconnaissance aircraft was shot down over Cuba by an SA-2 surface-to-air missile fired from the Los Angeles battery, near the port of Banes . The ExComm was left out of important aspects of decision-making at its climax .
 It has generally been supposed in the West that the missile that downed the aircraft was fired by Soviet troops, because the SA-2s were believed to have been under strict Soviet 99.99 rules .
 It has always been difficult to imagine why Khrushchev would have risked a serious escalation of the crisis at that point . But it's always been hard to imagine that he would risk serious escalation .
 Some have surmised that the shoot-down was the unauthorized act of a Soviet officer in Cuba . Others have supposed that Cubans had in fact fired the missile .
 Castro once claimed that he himself had shot down the aircraft . The Soviet side released new details confirming that the shoot-down was indeed an unauthorized act by Soviet air defense forces .
 Alekseev: Two generals were involved in the decision-making when the U-2 was detected at approximately 10:00m. on Saturday, October 27 . Alekseyev: "Two generals were in charge of the decision to launch the attack"
 General Volkogonov publicly identified one as Pliyev's deputy for air defense, the late Lieutenant General Stepan N Grechko . General Volkovkovkovsky identified one of the late air defense officers as Lieutenant General Pliyeva's deputy .
 General Rafael del Piflo, a prominent Cuban defector, had told the CIA during his debriefing in 1987 that a Soviet officer shot down the U-2 . CBS News made public the fact that General del Pflo had said in 1987 .
 Robert Schackne, Special Report on ""Sunday Morning,"" October 25, 1987, CBS News. Robert Schakne was the subject of a special report on "Sunday Morning"
 Ellsberg intercepted radio message from Soviet naval base at Banes indicated that fire had been exchanged with ""non-Russians,"" and that casualties had been taken . According to an intercepted message, fire was exchanged with non-Russian forces .
 The clash was reported to have taken place at the Los Angeles SAM site on Friday, October 26 . The day before that very same site shot down the American U-2, the same day .
 Hersh and Ellsberg speculate that Cubans might have seized control of the site and downed the American plane . The plane was downed by the Cubans, the authors say .
 At the Moscow conference, Ambassador Alekseev claimed that the incident was a mishandling of ammunition, which resulted in an explosion at the SAM site and several Soviet casualties .
 Sergio del Valle, however, claims that the event occurred in 1964 at Guantana, in Pinar del Rio, at the other end of the island . The event is said to have taken place in 1964, in the same place as Guantana in 1964 .
 Sergo Mikoyan reports that neither he nor, so far, he knows, his father, ever heard of any conflict between Soviet soldiers and Cuban regulars, from either Soviet or Cuban sources . Sergo says he and his father never heard of the conflict .
 Mikoyan did admit the possibility that there may have been a skirmish between Soviet forces and one of the many bands of anti-Castro ""worm squads"" known to be operating in the area .
 Castro, however, denied this in an interview with Jim Hoagland, February 12, 1985 . Castro's denial was confirmed at the Moscow conference by Jorge Risquet, who noted that at the time, Castro was on the other end of the island .
 After unsuccessfully trying to contact General Pliyev, they decided to shoot on their own authority . After attempting unsuccessfully to contact the general, the men decided to go to the scene .
 Voronkov, now retired and living in Odessa, claims that there was ""no direct prohibition"" against firing on American aircraft . Alekseev was criticized by Khrushchev, but defended himself by saying that he had only followed standing orders .
 Castro authorized his own anti-aircraft artillery to fire at groups of two or more low-flying American planes . On October 26, he ordered his AA units to fire on any American aircraft within range .
 Voronkov received an order to begin operating the radar stations . That same day, he received a request to operate radar stations in Russia . The radar stations were ordered to operate .
 The downing of the U-2 was a tremendous boost to Cuban morale . News of it spread rapidly throughout the island, and was greeted everywhere with wild celebration .
 Risquet: "our people felt that we were not defenseless" 106.11l2 But 106.2l2
 BJA discussions at the Soviet Central Committee and the Soviet Defense Ministry Institute for Military History, July 1989 . Discussion was held at the defense ministry Institute of Military History .
 In 1987, General Igor D Statsenko told Sergo Mikoyan that he personally gave the order to fire on the U-2 . In 1987 General Statsenko said he gave the orders to shoot down the aircraft .
 Statsenko was in Cuba with the Strategic Rocket Forces . He was not in the air defense decision-making loop . Statsenko did not join forces in Cuba's air defense operation .
 Statsenko may have sought to make public the fact that the shoot-down was indeed an unauthorized act by Soviet forces . Military secrecy would not have allowed him to release the identities of those who actually did make the decision .
 Cuban Armed Forces had no surface-to-air missiles, only artillery . According to both Othon Montero and Sergio del Valle, the Cuban armed forces were not armed with missiles .
 Khrushchev's memoirs indicate that he believed that it was Cubans who had shot down the American plane . This contradicts the English version of his memoirs, which contradicts his claim that Cubans shot it down .
 The Russian language version of Khrushchev's memoirs published by Progress Publishers (currently in limited special circulation in the Soviet Union) also states that Cubans shot down the plane because it is a re-translation of Talbott's English version .
 There is some evidence to suggest that there may have been a partial, unsuccessful cover-up attempt by the Soviet military .
 Ambassador Alekseev reported that he did not find out that Soviets were responsible for the shootdown until over a decade later . He speculated that Malinovsky himself may have tried to prevent details of the event from spreading in order to prevent embarrassment to the Ministry of Defense and the responsible
 Khrushchev must have been seriously shaken by the event, which made it painfully clear that his control over developments in Cuba had significantly eroded . The event, however, must have shaken the former Soviet leader .
 Later that same day, an American U-2 on a routine air sampling mission in the Arctic strayed into Siberian air space as the result of a navigational error .
 Statsenko himself told U Thant that Cubans shot down the American U-2 . It is worth noting that Statsenko said U.2 was shot down by Cubans .
 According to several Soviets at the Moscow conference, the risks that unintended actions might lead to an escalation were very much in the forefront of Khrushchev's mind .
 Robert Kennedy telephoned Dobrynin to request another meeting . At 7:15m. on Saturday, October 27, Robert Kennedy asked for a meeting . Robert Kennedy was the only person to request a meeting with Dobrynins . The resolution of the crisis was reached by Robert Kennedy
 Ambassador Dobrynin in Moscow contradicted the reports of important aspects of Robert Kennedy's Thirteen Days . The reports of the meeting were starkly contradicted by the Ambassador in Moscow . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Robert Kennedy reported telling Dobrynin that "we had to have a commitment by tomorrow that those bases would be removed" Robert Kennedy said that the bases had to be removed by the end of the day .
 Dobrynin denies that Robert Kennedy issued an ultimatum or made any threats . Dobrynins denies that Kennedy issued any threats or issued any threat to the Soviet Union .
 He further denies that Robert Kennedy warned of an imminent coup or loss of civilian control of the military . This contradicts to Soviet accounts of the meeting, including Khrushchev's own .
 Robert Kennedy soft-pedaled the danger of imminent American action, Dobrynin says . He claims that his cable to Moscow reporting the meeting was similarly low-key on that point .
 Khrushchev's letter of October 28, in Larson, The ""Cuban Crisis"" of 1962, 192. See Khrushchen's letter in Larson's book, "The ""Cubans Crisis""
 Ellsberg's conclusion is that Khrushchev well understood that he no longer controlled the Cubans, and that he may also have lost control over the SAM batteries . The Soviet leader was compelled to interpret Robert Kennedy's message as an ultimatum, requiring an immediate cessation of the
 Dobrynin revealed that coded messages from the Soviet embassy in Washington were transmitted to Moscow via bicycle courier and Western Union . The messages were transmitted via bicycle couriers and the Western Union, he said . The Soviet Embassy in Washington sent coded messages to Moscow .
 President Kennedy had just transmitted a letter to Khrushchev . He asked me what offer the U.S. was making, and I told him of the letter .
 President had been anxious to remove missiles from Turkey and Italy for a long period of time . However, I said, he said, the President was anxious for the missiles to be removed .
 Dobrynin insists that it was Robert Kennedy who pursued the idea of an explicit ""deal"" on the Turkish missiles . He says that he never said that the president had already ordered their removal . He said that within a short time after this crisis, those missiles would be gone .
 Dobrynin's version of the meeting was confirmed in an important respect at the Moscow conference by Theodore Sorensen, who edited Thirteen Days prior to its publication . The meeting took place at the end of the 1980s in Moscow .
 Sorensen confessed that the missile trade had been portrayed as an explicit deal in the diaries on which the book was based, and that he had seen fit to revise that account in view of the fact that the trade was still a secret at the time, known to only six
 Khrushchev sent the president a letter after the crisis, in which he described the withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles as an integral part of the agreement on which the crisis was resolved .
 Sorensen conceded that this letter had been received, but explained its absence from the collected KennedyKhrushchev correspondence by noting that the administration decided against acknowledging the withdrawal of the Jupiters as a quid pro quo .
 Western students of the crisis have long wondered what caused Khrushchev to do so at that particular time . Western students now wonder what caused the crisis to happen .
 Dobrynin's claim that he did not interpret Robert Kennedy's message of October 27 as a threat or an ultimatum only adds to the puzzle, since Kennedy's account of the meeting has been widely regarded as the best explanation of Khrushchev's urgency .
 Fyodor Burlatsky accepted Kennedy's non-invasion pledge in return for withdrawal of missiles from Cuba . According to Burlatky, the letter was prepared at Khrushchev's dacha thirty kilometers from Moscow .
 When the letter was finished, a man was dispatched with it to drive very quickly to the radio station . The letter was sent to a radio station in New York City .
 Scali angrily threatened that there would be an American attack within hours if the missiles were not removed . Khrushchev's Friday letter was quickly superseded by a letter demanding a missile trade . Scali threatened that the missiles would be removed .
 Khrushchev sent Fomin a personal message to Scali that his outburst had been ""very valuable" Fomin said his outburst was 'very valuable' after the resolution of the crisis . Fomin's outburst was a valuable moment in history .
 Later in the day on October 26, Soviet intelligence reversed its earlier estimate, possibly encouraging Khrushchev to toughen his terms in the second letter . The second letter may have been a good sign for Khrushchechev .
 Soviet and Cuban intelligence appear to have concluded that an American attack could be expected momentarily . But some time still later on October 26 or October 27, they appear again to have decided not to attack the U.S.
 If this indeed was their assessment, it may have weighed heavily in Khrushchev's decision to end the crisis . Other factors apparently played a significant role .
 The U-2 shoot-down and the inadvertent straying of another American U.2 over Soviet air space on October 27 indicated that events were slipping out of control . The shooting down of the U.S. U.K. aircraft and straying over Soviet airspace indicated that
 Khrushchev was influenced by a communication from Castro through Alekseev on October 27 . The message appears to have been made by Alekseyev .
 Castro's message came to light at the Moscow conference, and was reported in the press as Castro's attempt 131 . That message was reported to be a message from Castro . Castro said the message was a message of support .
 The number of cases where representatives of the governments of the superpowers appear to have conducted freelance diplomacy appears quite striking in retrospect . It appears to be quite striking that representatives of superpowers appeared to conduct freelance diplomacy .
 Fomin in proposing terms for settling the crisis; Dobrynin in raising the issue of Turkish missiles . Robert Kennedy in suggesting a deal (with the president's knowledge, but not the ExComm's) Scali in delivering an ultimatum .
 There is a good deal of discussion about the dangers of unauthorized and inadvertent acts on the part of the military . These episodes suggest that a certain amount of effort should be devoted to exploring the dangers and consequences of inadvertent diplomatic acts .
 The Ambassador reported that Castro had given him the report face-to-face . Castro gave the report to the Ambassador . The Ambassador said Castro had told him that he had been given the report .
 Castro informed Castro that he had reliable information that an American invasion would take place within a few hours . Castro informed him that he would be ready for the invasion . Castro said that the U.S. invasion would happen within hours .
 The telegram was intended to communicate the Cuban people's willingness to fight to the last man and the last bullet in the event of an American attack, and to urge Khrushchev to show firmness . According to both Ambassador Alekseev and Emilio Aragones, the
 Both Alekseev and Aragones believe Khrushchev misinterpreted the telegram as urging a preemptive strike . Until the cable itself is made public by the Soviets or Cubans, the issue cannot be resolved .
 A great deal depends upon the precise wording of the telegram, and whether it accurately reflects Castro's verbal communication to Alekseev . The telegram was sent by Castro to Russian President Vladimir Putin in 1961 .
 This passage did not appear in the manuscripts that were delivered to the West in 1970 . This passage was not found in manuscripts delivered to West in the 1970s .
 Cuba had 'no atomic culture' at the time, meaning Cubans had not yet developed the understanding of the consequences of nuclear explosions . This is an understandable attitude; as del Valle put it, Cuba had no atomic culture .
 The consequences for Cuba of a full-scale American invasion would not have differed from the consequences of a nuclear war in important respects . In either event, Cuba faced devastation; in either case, it faced devastation .
 Castro's apparent willingness to see Soviet nuclear missiles fired from Cuban soil in the event of a full-scale invasion must be understood from this perspective . Castro's desire to see the missiles fired must be seen in the context of the situation, writes David Cameron .
 In this case, a misinterpretation may have facilitated a rapid resolution . In other circumstances, it might have complicated one . In the case, it may have been a quick resolution .
 Castro's displeasure at Khrushchev's failure to consult him before agreeing to withdraw the missiles from Cuba is a matter of record . Castro was angered by the decision to pull missiles from the country .
 Jorge Risquet insisted that the ""five conditions"" Castro had publicly proclaimed as the price for his assent to the withdrawal of the missiles had indeed been within reach, including American withdrawal from Guantanamo . At the Moscow conference, Jorge
 If Castro was convinced that this was a concession to the United States would agree, it bespeaks an appalling ignorance of U.S. political realities on Castro's part . Castro was not in touch with the reality of American political realities, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Aragones maintains that Castro's five conditions shchev Castro's conviction, based on intelligence sources, that an American attack was imminent . Aragone says Castro agreed to the conditions .
 If indeed Cuba had informants well-placed in the U.S. defense and intelligence communities, then the president's instructions on the morning of October 27 to prepare for a possible attack on October 30 may have been an important factor .
 Scott Sagan has suggested to the authors that ""pathfinder"" teams may have been infiltrated into Cuba as part of the contingency planning . The detection or capture of one of these teams would have been interpreted as strong evidence of a forthcoming invasion .
 It has also been claimed that Soviet military intelligence had tapped into Washington phone lines in 1962 .
 Dobrynin reported at the Moscow conference that in a confidential letter to President Kennedy on October 29 or 30, the Soviet Union did raise the issue of Guantanamo . President Kennedy wrote that any hopes of American concessions were realistic .
 Cuban troops surrounded missile sites on October 28, and only stood down after the arrival of Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan in Havana . Cuba had been badly treated by both superpowers .
 Moscow conference shed light on the issue and has raised interesting new questions in the process . The Moscow conference and subsequent discussions have shed light upon the issue .
 Ambassador Alekseev believes the troops that took up positions around the missile sites were in fact Soviet soldiers in Cuban uniforms . He insists that there was no danger of a Soviet-Cuban clash at that time .
 Both Sergio del Valle and Emilio Aragones insist that the troops were Cuban anti-aircraft units deployed to protect the missile sites from low-level attack .
 The American demand that Cuba relinquish weapons intended for the Cuban Air Force, wholly independently of the Soviet missile deployment, only added insult to injury . The U.S. demanded that Cuban air force weapons be relinquished .
 Castro's initial attitude toward the Soviet representative was softened by the sudden death of Mikoyan's wife at the very moment he arrived in Havana . Castro was angered by the death of his wife .
 Cuban testimony: U.S. views of negotiations involving bombers are mistaken in a variety of ways . But the published American views of the negotiations are mistaken, Cuban testimony says . The Cuban government says the negotiations took place in Cuba in 1959 .
 American intelligence believed in 1962 that forty-two Il-28s had been that he believes Khrushchev deliberately chose not to consult Castro on the removal of the missiles, because he knew he would not agree with him .
 The Cuban delegation to the Moscow conference added that Khrushchev's explanation for his failure to consult Castro-that there was simply insufficient timewas wholly plausible . The Cuban delegations added that the explanation was wholly plausible.
 Castro's telegram may have been responsible for convincing Khrushchev that time was so short . Indeed, Castro may have helped convince him to stay in the Soviet Union .
 The Cuban delegation insisted Khrushchev should have made the October 28 deal contingent upon Cuban agreement . Khruschev's October 28 agreement was supposed to have been made contingent on Cuban agreement, Cuban delegation said .
 Between October 24 and 28, fifty anti-aircraft batteries were mobilized from the reserves and assigned to protect missile sites . Del Valle explains that the anti-missile batteries were deployed from the reserve .
 On October 28, when dismantling of the nuclear missiles began, these units started to withdraw . The dismantling of these nuclear missiles started on October 28 .
 None of the three Cuban bombers had been uncrated during the crisis, and the Soviets simply withdrew them at the same time they withdrew their own bombers . The operation was facilitated by the fact that the aircraft were all located at the . same bases .
 It may be, therefore, that none of the bombers had yet been formally transferred to Cuba, and that Mikoyan did not have to persuade Castro to relinquish something he had already been given .
 President Kennedy's message to NATO allies of November 19, warning that if the bombers were not promptly withdrawn, air strikes might be necessary to destroy them . Second, some analysts have believed that some analysts believe that Mikoyan's task was abetted by the President Kennedy message .
 Emilio Aragones, who was present throughout the negotiations between Castro and Mikoyan, does not recall any discussion of the American threat . Emilio also does not believe that it was communicated to Castro .
 Khrushchev was attempting to deny that the nuclear missiles in Cuba were, in fact, ""offensive,"" and was indeed attempting to avoid using the word ""missiles" in his letter to the president of October 28 .
 According to del Valle, the Cubans planned to use their Il-28s in a coastal defense role, primarily against mother ships from which smaller craft would carry subversives and counterrevolutionaries attempting to infiltrate the island .
 Mikoyan launched into a long, confusing exposition on Soviet-Cuban friendship, on the overthrow of the Tsars, and all kinds of things that had nothing to do with the problem at hand .
 The Americans requested the withdrawal of the Il-28s, he said . And then at the end he said that the Americans had requested that the withdrawal .
 The Il-28s-obsolete, short-range bombers believed to have a nuclear capability - but for which no nuclear weapons had been supplied - were to be withdrawn . But the effect was to give the U.S. carte blanche to specify which weapon systems were to
 The withdrawal of the Il-28s was a blow to Cuba's national pride . It further strained Soviet-Cuban relations . The withdrawal further strained relations with the Soviet Union .
 As Sergo Mikoyan put it, the Soviets fell victim to their own ""propagandistic tendencies" The Soviets were caught in the trap of their own propaganda .
 Western students have not seen a single Soviet or Cuban document against which to check the recollections of Soviet and Cuban participants and scholars . To date, Western students of the crisis have not . seen a . single document against . which to . check .
 Cuba and the Soviet Union have no history of declassifying diplomatic documents . The relevant diplomatic archives in both Moscow and Havana are probably sparse by American standards .
 According to Soviet testimony, no written records of Kremlin decision-making were kept prior to October 22, 1962 . This was to avoid breaches of secrecy, according to testimony from Soviet testimony .
 The Cuban government in 1962 was so young and disorganized that it had not yet established procedures for handling paperwork . Most relevant decisions were made in conversations that were not recorded . The next major step in the historiography of the Cuban missile crisis will have to await the release of those documents
 Not all key players have survived to give their testimony, and others, because of advancing age, have little time left in which to do so . Perhaps most frustrating is the fact that not all of the key players in the trial have survived .
 We believe that the Soviets and Cubans who have spoken out have treated the opportunity to do so with due seriousness . Their contributions have greatly improved the understanding of the causes, conduct, and implications of the Cuban missile crisis, the authors say .