 The U.S.A, Soviet Union, and Cuban countries were so close they could feel nuclear war breathing down their necks . The three countries were at risk of a nuclear war .
 The build up of the Cuban missiles is known as the Cuban missile Crisis . The Cuban missile crisis was known as October 1962 .
 On October twenty second, 1962, John F Kennedy revealed the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba . The crisis was nearly a weak old old crisis . On October 20 second, 1963, Kennedy revealed that the missiles were on Cuba.
 This declared that the purpose of these bases could be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere . The purpose of the bases was declared by the U.S. government .
 Kennedy called for a prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all offensive weapons under the United Nations supervision . Kennedy calls for the withdrawal of offensive weapons .
 It was actually taken five months earlier, it was both a high-stakes gamble and the logical product of sustained provocation . It was both high stakes gamble and a logical result of sustained provocations .
 In Fact, the soviet leader persuaded his politburo colleagues that United States aggression against Cuba was all too likely and could only be overcome by the installation of the medium-range R-12 ballistic missiles and intermediate-range missiles .
 Between October fourteenth and October twenty-eighth 1962 the world was never closer to a nuclear war, than the events that happened during those 13 days of the Cuban missile crisis .
 The United States had John F Kennedy, the Soviet Union had Nikita Khrushchev, and Cuba had Fidel Castro, a dictator over Fulgenico Bftista . The U.S. had JFK, the USSR, the U.K. and the USSR also had a dictator
 Americans became increasingly disturbed at the rapid buildup of Soviet military assistance to the Republic of Cuba in 1962 . Americans were disturbed by the rapid military assistance of Soviet forces .
 The situation increased in intensity as the governments of the U.S. and the Soviet Union exchanged hostile statements . The situation escalated in intensity .
 The Kremlin indicated that the increase of arms and technicians to Cuba was required by the continuous threats by aggressive imperialist circles with respect to Cuba . The Kremlin said the increase in arms and . technicians was required .
 On the twenty-fifth of October, U-2 planes took pictures of the missiles in Cuba . U.2 planes flew over Cuba to take pictures of missiles .
 During September, President Kennedy increased the schedule of U-2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba . After that, during September, the U.2 increased its reconnaissance flights .
 Cuba is home to the largest island nation in the world, Cuba . The island nation has been home to over 100,000 people in the past year . Cuba has been a source of inspiration for the island nation .
 The Soviets and Cubans had the power to kill two-hundred-million people a day . With these cities targeted, the Soviets and Cubanans had to kill 2,100,000 a day. The Soviets had the ability to kill more than 100,000 people every day .
 The force used for the invasion wasn’t United States soldiers, but about one-thousand five hundred Cuban exiles . The force was not United States troops, but Cuban exilees .
 In December of 1962, the United States exchanged $53 million worth of United States supplies to Cuba for the safe return of the exiles . After the crisis, the U.S. exchanged the exchange of supplies for the return of exiles to Cuba .
 The U.S. ships stopped all ships going to Cuba to check for missiles or parts . The United States stopped ships going into Cuba to search for missiles .
 He spurned the normal diplomatic channels in favor of a naval blockade, an act of war . The blockade is a naval blockage, a declaration of war, and is considered a violation of international law .
 Kennedy decided to place the prestige of the United States on the line by public confrontation . Rather than present to the Soviet Union and ultimatum in private before the presence of the missiles was disclosed to the world .
 Castro panicked and said he was going to have the missiles fired . Khrushchev thought that was unnecessary and gave into United States demands . Castro panicked when he said he wanted to have missiles fired, Khrush
 On the twenty-eighth Khrushchev ordered the missiles out of Cuba, and the crisis ended without a nuclear war . The crisis ended with the end of the Cuban missile crisis in 1959 .
 After the crisis was over Kennedy, chose not to say or do anything that might be degrading to Castro . Kennedy didn’t want to humiliate him any more . Castro was the leader of the Cuban rebels .
 The conference went well and the issues were better understood afterward . The conference was held in New York City, New Jersey .