 The Soviet decision to cooperate with the Harvard project reflects the new foreign-policy line under Gorbachev . The Harvard project is part of a new foreign policy line under the former president .
 As Soviet rhetoric shifts from confrontation with the West to cooperation, the missile crisis is being held up as a case study in how the superpowers avoided a nuclear apocalypse by their willingness to compromise .
 Until now, scholars have relied on the records and recollections of U.S. administration officials in reconstructing the most dangerous postwar confrontation between the superpowers .
 Alexander Alexeev, the former Soviet ambassador to Cuba, wrote in a Soviet magazine, Planetary Echo . He related his reminiscences in an interview with the magazine Planetary Echo.
 The article was the first detailed account of the crisis by a ranking Soviet participant . It was published by a leading Soviet participant in the 1980s .
 Alexeev: Some of the 42 Soviet missiles in Cuba were fully operational by the time the U.S. announced its blockade of the island . Alexeeva: Some 42 Soviet missile missiles were operational when the blockade was announced .
 Alexeev also said a local Soviet commander was responsible for shooting down an American U-2 plane over Cuba on Oct. 1962 . The incident triggered the most tense phase in the two-week crisis . The U.2 plane was shot down over Cuba in 1962 .
 It is now clear that neither President Kennedy nor Nikita Khrushchev, then the Soviet leader, ever learned the truth about this vital episode . President Kennedy and then Soviet leader never learned from each other .
 They interpreted it as a sign that Khrushchev was ready to go to war over the missiles . The missiles were launched in the 1960s and '60s .
 Khrushchev's memoirs indicate he was convinced the Cubans had shot down the U-2 . He was convinced he had been shot down by the Cuban government .
 Soviet officials have told the Harvard team that a high-level military cover-up kept Khrushchev in the dark . The Harvard team will try to find out what happened in the 1960s .
 The six-man Cuban delegation will be headed by Vice President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez . The delegation will include six members of the Cuban government .
 Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., will head the United States delegation, which also will include Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Ted Sorensen, Pierre Salinger and Gen. Gen. John Kennedy Jr.
 William Smith, former chief aide to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. William Smith is a former aide to Joint Chiefs chairman of Staff . Smith: "It's a good thing for the U.S. to have a strong presence in the world," he says .
 Alexeev gave a dramatic description of a Kremlin meeting in May 1962 at which Khrushchev announced his decision to deploy missiles in Cuba . Alexeeev gave a detailed account of a meeting in Moscow in 1962 .
 Alexeev said the key motivation was the wish to protect Cuba from a U.S. military intervention . The key motivation for the Cuban government is to protect the island nation from a United States military intervention, he said .
 Castro reacted angrily when Khrushchev decided to dismantle the missiles without consulting or informing him . Alexeev said Castro was angered by the decision to dismantle missiles .
 Putin suggested tension was much lower that during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis because Russian relations with the U.S. have moved on since the Cold War . At the same time, Putin suggested tensions were much lower than in the 1962 Cuba missile crisis .
 U.S. is listening to Moscow's concerns about its missile plans, he says . He also said he believes the United States is listening about its concerns .
 Putin said his relationship with U.S. President George W Bush helps solve problems in relations with the United States . Putin said he is a friend with Bush, calling him a good friend .
 State Department spokesperson Sean McCormack disputed the comparison of the missile crisis with the missile defence system . State Department spokesman: "The missile crisis is not a missile crisis"
 The letters reveal Kennedy was not bound, as Americans thought he was, by a public pledge he made not to invade Cuba in return for the Soviet removal of nuclear missiles they had covertly placed in Cuba in October 1962 .
 Kennedy never considered the agreement with Khrushchev to be binding and continued to retain the option of an invasion . Kennedy was not convinced that the agreement was binding .
 The State Department and the White House reversed the option to keep that option open in 1983 . It wasn't until 1983 that the decision was reversed, the letters reveal .
 The State Department feared that Reagan might actually invade Cuba . It happened 21 years after the Kennedy-Khrushchev pact when the U.S. finally got a president that the State. Department feared might invade .
 State Department legal experts reversed themselves on the interpretation of the agreement . They were afraid Reagan would use the 21 years of classified, back-and-forth legal debate as justification to invade .
 America's first nuclear weapons agreement with the Soviet Union was not, in fact, an agreement at all, but an understanding . The Kennedy-Khrushchev letters were signed by the Soviet leader in 1959 .
 For years, as far as the American public knew, the U.S. was under a pledge not to invade Cuba because of the peaceful resolution of the missile crisis . The United States was under the pledge to not invade Cuba from the start of the crisis .
 The letters were declassified to coincide with a conference in Cuba on the missile crisis . This year, because of a four-year-long effort by an indefatigable group, the private National Security Archives .
 The National Security Archives is still seeking several hundred related documents, but so far, the State Department is refusing to turn them over . The State Department refused to turn the documents over .
 Our associate Dale Van Atta has obtained several of these top-secret documents . Dale van Atta: The documents were obtained by Dale's associates .
 Kennedy resisted Khrushchev's attempts to pin him down to a firm promise to leave Cuba alone . Kennedy was a shrewd bargainer who resisted attempts at pinning him down on a deal .
 The world thought the crisis ended on Oct. 1962, when Khrushchev blinked and both men said they had reached an agreement . The world had thought the end of the crisis was the end .
 Kennedy sent the Soviets a new and expanded list of weapons he wanted taken out of Cuba . Five days later, the Soviets received a new list of the weapons Kennedy wanted . The list was expanded to include weapons from the Soviet Union .
 The list went far beyond the nuclear missiles that had sparked the crisis in the first place . That list includes the list of missiles launched in the 1980s .
 The list includes surface-to-surface missiles, bombers, missile launching equipment and torpedo boats . The list is still classified ""secret,"" and it includes surface to-surface missile launchers and bombers .
 He sent his brother Robert Kennedy to a meeting with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy sent Robert to meet with the Soviet ambassador . He sent Robert Kennedy's brother Robert to the meeting . Robert's brother was killed in a car crash in 1968 .
 classified documents reveal that Kennedy was inflating the list so he had some room to bargain . Kennedy inflated the list to get a deal with the government .
 The two men still had no binding agreement about an invasion, and Khrushchev knew it . But the two men later agreed to discuss a possible invasion of the Soviet Union .
 State Department lawyers changing their minds on the deal . Then, the classified record reveals a memo from State Dept. lawyers . The State Department changed their minds .
 Sources say they began calling the non-invasion pledge binding because of a trigger-happy president . Sources say the pledge was made binding because the pledge is binding .
 The record of agreements between superpowers should not be kept a secret for 30 years . Government officials interpret those agreements based on their own whims . The record should be kept secret .
 In several galleries of displays, visitors follow the progress of the crisis while looking at artifacts such as a 35foot-long Soviet SA-2 missile . Visitors also see film canisters from the U-2 spy planes that took photos of missile sites under construction in Cuba .
 Also on view are props from the new movie ""Thirteen Days,"" starring Kevin Costner . Also in view is props from a new movie, "Th13 Days"
 The film is based on Robert F Kennedy's book of the same name about the crisis . It was released in March 2013 .
 The museum paints a picture of the Cold War atmosphere . Ranging beyond a narrow focus on the crisis, the museum includes a wide range of images .
 There's even a classroom bulletin board re-created by Joan Hammill, a third-grade teacher at St. Mary's .
 A timeline introduces museum visitors to the crisis, which is delineated day by day . A timeline introduced by museum visitors introduces visitors to museum visitors .
 Kennedy's sobering announcement to the nation of the situation follows with the shooting down of an American U-2 plane over Cuba . The almost unbearable tension that followed as millions wondered whether it would lead to war . Kennedy and Khrushchev negotiated negotiations between Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Kh
 Fidel Castro angered by Khrushchev's agreement not to attack U-2 planes that he defiantly went to a anti-aircraft site to shoot one down himself . Fidel Castro was so angered that he shot one down at a site in Cuba .
 The huge SA-2 missile will be housed in its own gallery with its nose pointed directly at a replicated window of a home . The missile's nose will be pointed at a replica window in a replica of a house .
 The missile is not yet in place; it is to be delivered by the Defense Intelligence Agency after its warhead is removed . The missile will be delivered after it is removed from the U.S.
 Museum personnel went to Havana to get current and historical materials from the Cuban Museum of the Revolution, the National Library and other sources . Museum personnel traveled to Havana for the latest information .
 They also bought dozens of well-executed paintings from street vendors . The group also bought several paintings from vendors .
 The props used in the ""Thirteen Days"" movie are extraordinarily detailed . The props were used to create the film's set .
 One dossier on Khrushchev is a multipage dossier . Another is a dossier on Aleksandr Fomin, the KGB chief in Washington who was a go-between in negotiations .
 A Zenith radio from the period was used, along with a Civil Defense siren and bus posters . Civil Defense posters, bus posters and Civil Defense radio were also used .
 Each character was supplied with well-researched personal items, such as Pall Mall cigarettes smoked by Secretary of State Rusk .
 Other exhibits include a pressure suit and helmet used by U-2 pilot Al Rand and a hat said to have belonged to Fidel Castro .
 James Alvord is a San Diego attorney and a free-lance writer . Alvord: "It's a good thing for you to be optimistic about the future," he says .
 Brugioni, a world-class aerial reconnaissance expert, has 35 years of CIA experience . He is a world class aerial reconnaissance specialist with 35 years experience .
 The author's self-admitted role as a damage-control operative for the CIA . Author's unabashed pride in carrying out various disinformation assignments for the agency .
 While we may question the author's hidden agenda, the man does know his aerial reconnaissance . The author of this article is known for his knowledge of aerial photography .
 Brugioni: The best view of the crisis is from 72,500 feet above Cuba . He says the best view is from a vantage point in the Cuban capital .
 Brugioni's job in 1962 was to make sense of the U-2's long-distance snapshots . He helped brief President John F Kennedy on just what it was he was looking at .
 On Oct. 1962, what Kennedy was looking at was a series of nuclear-tipped missiles aimed at the Unites States . On Oct., 1962, the U.S. President Kennedy was in the midst of a nuclear missile strike .
 Two days earlier, a U-2 flight out of McCoy Air Force Base in Orlando, Florida, conducted a photo mission over Cuba . The U.S. military says the mission was a "miracle"
 From a distance of more than 14 miles straight up, the powerful cameras of the spy plane captured six long, canvas-covered objects . The objects were captured from more than a distance from 14 miles up .
 Photo interpreters subsequently determined the objects to be offensive missiles . The objects were later determined to be missiles .
 Brugioni offers the CIA perspective of the war . The threats, posturing and negotiations that followed have been told many times .
 We see Adlai Stevenson as wimpish, but not strong enough to stand up to the Soviets . We see him as a wimp, but he was afraid of standing up to them, says historian John Sutter .
 Eisenhower paved the way for the original U-2 spy missions in 1954 . Eisenhower is seen as a most positive fellow, fascinated by the technology of it all .
 The author describes Ike's role as that of a genuine American hero . Tracing the history that brought the world to the nuclear brink, the author says . Ike is a hero of the American Revolution .
 U-2 pilot Gary Francis Powers is shot down over the Soviet Union . Ike's phony cover story to the Russians and the American public about a weather research project gone bad is dismissed not as a lie or deception .
 President Kennedy is cast as a tough leader, courageous and unafraid to fight . President Kennedy was also cast as courageous and courageous in the film .
 Kennedy sought the advice of many around him to decide whether to go to Cuba . Kennedy sought advice from many of his friends and family .
 Most seem to think a strategic strike to take out the missiles was the least we could do . Most seemed to think it was the best thing to do . But they said it was not the least .
 Soviets in this tale are consistently portrayed as colossal blunderers . United States military figures are the ultimate straight-shooters awaiting only the order to fire .
 Brugioni describes the CIA's new director, John McCone, as having ice water instead of blood flowing through his veins . McCone is the agency's new chief of staff, who is a longtime CIA insider .
 An ironic and possibly crucial bit of information is dished out but then forgotten by the author . This is an example of the author forgetting something important to say .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was a 17-year-old Marine assigned to a radar installation at Atsugi Naval Air Station in Japan . That base was used as staging area for U-2 flights .
 Despite the fact that Brugioni can't seem to stop cheering for the home team, his book offers a wealth of inside information that is at once both frightening and fascinating .
 The book serves to remind us that once there was a time when the end of the world wasn't all that far away . Above all, the book serves as a reminder of the time when it was all around .
 According to a top Soviet officer, the Soviet Union secretly sent short-range nuclear weapons to Cuba during the crisis . The Soviet Union authorized their use against a U.S. invading force .
 Gribkov, who was in Cuba at the time of the crisis, made the disclosure at a Havana conference that ended Sunday . The disclosure was made by a Moscow-based journalist .
 The crisis was precipitated by the discovery of intermediate-range Soviet missiles in Cuba . Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the medium-range missiles in exchange for a pledge by President John Kennedy not to invade the island .
 Robert McNamara: '99%' sure Kennedy would have ordered retaliation if U.S. forces had been attacked . McNamara says it was ''99%'' sure Kennedy had ordered retaliation on Cuba .
 McNama ra was quoted in today's editions of The Washington Post as saying he didn't know about the presence of the short-range warheads in Cuba until the Soviet general's disclosure . McNama was quoted saying he was unaware of the existence of the warheads .
 State Department laments death sentence handed down by Cuban court to three Miami residents accused of subversion . State Department: Three Miami residents will die in Cuba for subverting .
 Daniel Candelario Santovenia, 36, Pedro de la Caridad Alvarez Pedroso, 26, and Eduardo Diaz Betancourt, 38, were arrested Dec. 31 . They were arrested aboard a small boat, reportedly carrying explosives and weapons .
 Relatives have asked President Bush to intercede . None of the three is a United States citizen . Relatives say the task is made more difficult .
 U.S.-China trade talks opened last week over United States claims that China has pirated of United States copyrights and patents . The talks are expected to last for several weeks .
 China is one of the worst violators of United States copyrights, U.S. trade rep says . China must specify how it will assure copyright protection, she says . The deadline is set for Thursday .
 Three dams along the Tigris and Euphrates rivers would have resulted in catastrophic economic damage and put Baghdad under two feet of water, the newspaper says . China has said it was weighing retaliating by imposing high tariffs on $1.1 billion worth of U.S. goods .
 The newspaper said the U.S. planted word in Baghdad that it would be at tacked with nuclear weapons if Saddam Hussein carried out his threat of chemical or biological warfare . As a ruse, the newspaper said .
 42,000 Soviet soldiers were in Cuba in the fall of 1962, according to Garthoff's article . This is the most eye-opening revelation in the article .
 Khrushchev decided to secretly place nuclear-tipped SS-4 and SS-5 missiles in Cuba without a formal decision by the policy-making Politburo . The missiles were placed in Cuba by the Soviet leader without official approval .
 Khrushchev considered running a naval blockade ordered by Kennedy but was dissuaded by Anastas Mikoyan, then deputy Soviet premier . Kennedy ordered a blockade of Soviet Union ports in 1960s .
 Khrushchev did not authorize a proposal by the KGB station chief in Washington, Aleksandr Fomin, to John Scali, an American journalist, that was long thought to have been the key to ending the crisis . Fomin's proposal to Scali was thought to be the
 Soviet leaders cut a diplomatic deal to get their missiles out of Cuba because they thought a U.S. invasion of the Caribbean island was imminent . Soviet leaders thought a United States invasion of Cuba would be imminent .
 The decision to shoot a U-2 spy plane over Cuba in the crisis was made by a Soviet one-star general on the scene . Igor Statsenko helped spur Khrushchev to lower tension in Cuba .
 Fyodor Burlatski was a member of Khrushchev's inner circle . Sergo Mikoyan is the son of an expert on Soviet-Cuban relations . He is also a former Soviet diplomat and expert on Cuban relations .
 Garthoff also quoted a number of unidentified Soviet officials who he said were well-placed but not ready to step into the spotlight . He said the unidentified officials were well placed but not yet ready to be photographed .
 More disclosures are possible at an international conference on the Cuban missile crisis .
 'SOVIets open up on CUBAN CRISIS', says St. Lo uis P o s t-Dispatch Cit at ion Associated Press .
 In World War II, he was electrical technician on the USS Oyster Bay in New Guinea . He provided food, fuel and ammunition to torpedo boats traveling to fight in the Pacific theatre .
 Tarka could have left the military after the war, but chose to stay in the military . He could have done so much more for his country .
 His deployments included deployments in the Korean War on the aircraft carrier USS Essex . He also served in the Mediterranean as the chief electricians mate aboard the USS Halfbreak .
 He circumnavigated Africa during the Suez Canal Crisis in 1956 . He was part of a blockade along the South American coastline during the Cuban missile crisis .
 Before retiring in 1967, he deployed to Vietnam as the executive officer on the oil tanker USS Tappahannock . Before he retired, he served as an executive officer .
 He work for military contractors in New London, doing technical writing and testing new equipment . He is a freelance writer and test engineer for the military .
 His wife of 59 years, Anna, died in 2010, but he has three daughters, three daughters and seven grandchildren . He has seven grandchildren and eight great grandchildren, including seven great grandchildren .
 He does a lot of yardwork around his Griswold home . In his spare time, he enjoys reading he's rereading his encyclopedia, and is up to Fairbanks and Fair Deal .
 Cary Grant and Tony Curtis were on the island filming in Key West in the late 1950s . They met the officers and their wives in a reception .
 "The best part is that I was always busy learning new things and visiting new places," she says . "I was always always busy visiting new things," she said .
 A failure to diplomatically resolve the crisis might have developed into a nuclear exchange that turned into a total nuclear war . The crisis lasted from Oct.-28, and lasted from October-October .
 At that time the U.S. had about 27,000 nuclear warheads and the Soviet Union about 3,000 . The United States had 27,500 nuclear warheads at that time .
 It is extremely difficult to manage a crisis between countries if communication is lacking and a catastrophic development may ensue . It is difficult to deal with a crisis in a country without communication between countries .
 On Oct. 1962, a U.S. reconnaissance plane detected the construction of sites for medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles in Cuba . On Oct., 1962, the United States discovered the sites .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy publicly announced the discovery of the sites in Oct. 1962 . President Kennedy made the announcement on Oct. 31, 1962 .
 Kennedy initially was inclined to attack the Cuban missile sites by air . Faced with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev's inflexible stance, Kennedy initially attacked the missile sites .
 Kennedy eventually opted to establish a military blockade of Cuba to prevent the entry of Soviet nuclear weapons into the island country .
 Khrushchev announced in October that the Soviet Union would remove its nuclear missiles from Cuba . U.S. indicated through talks that it would not invade Cuba and secretly agreed to remove certain nuclear missile sites from Italy and Turkey . The crisis was brought to an end after Khrushche announced
 If Kennedy had carried out the air raid, the Soviet Union and Cuba could have retaliated with nuclear weapons . Cuba and Soviet Union could have responded with nukes .
 Such an act could have triggered a nuclear retaliation by the United States . Such a strike could have led to a total nuclear war . The U.S. has not responded to the threat of a nuclear strike .
 The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency believed that nuclear warheads had not yet been brought into Cuba . According to the late Robert McNamara, the late defense secretary of the Kennedy administration, during the crisis the United States believed .
 A U.S. U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba in October . The plane was a U.K. reconnaissance plane that was downed in Cuba .
 The United States regarded this as a provocation by the Soviet Union, but later it turned out that a Soviet missile crew had ignored an order by Khrushchev and shot it down .
 Kennedy and Krushchev remained in communication and reached an agreement that ended the crisis . The two men were able to reach an agreement after the war .
 The United States and Soviet Union agreed to establish a hot line to allow direct communication between their leaders with the aim of reducing the risk of a nuclear conflict . The U.S. and the Soviet Union subsequently agreed to set up the hot line .
 McNamara said luck also played a role in averting a nuclear war during the Cuban missile crisis . McNamara: luck played a key role in avoiding a nuke war .
 Accidents, miscalculations and misunderstandings of the other party's intentions can make a situation uncontrollable . In a crisis situation, accidents can make it uncontrollable, says CNN.com .
 This is an important lesson for any country, but especially for nuclear powers . The lesson is that nuclear weapons should not be allowed to be used in nuclear weapons, experts say .
 The Cuban missile crisis shows that security based on nuclear deterrence is shaky and that a nuclear crisis can happen . Security based on a nuclear deterrent is shaky, says David Gergen .
 "No efforts should be spared to reduce and eventually abolish all nuclear weapons," says President Obama . No efforts should also be spared, he says .
 Japan and China are involved in a diplomatic crisis over the Senkaku Islands . China and Japan should make every effort to ensure that clear lines of communication exist, especially between leaders .
 Robert McNamara and Theodore Sorensen attended private screening . They were joined at a private screening by other Soviet-era officials, including former U.S. defense secretary Robert McNama .
 McNamara and Gribkov attempted to describe the danger that emerged in October 1962 . The U.S. disclosed that the Soviet Union was deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba in 1962 .
 McNamara was one of Kennedy's cooler heads who prevailed over Pentagon hawks . Gribkov, who later became chief of staff of the Warsaw Pact joint armed forces, singled out McNamara as a cool head .
 He praised McNamara for helping push through a naval ""quarantine"" of Cuba rather than attacking Soviet positions there .
 Cuba had been a source of Soviet-American discord since the 1959 revolution that brought Fidel Castro to power . The disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion two years later when the U.S. unsuccessfully attempted to topple Castro .
 McNamara told his Russian listeners that mistaken beliefs on both sides led to the crisis . McNamara: "Mistakes were made by both sides" McNamara said .
 The Soviet Union wrongly believed the United States would invade Cuba and incorrectly thought it could introduce nuclear weapons on the island secretly . The CIA believed the U.S. did not have nuclear weapons in Cuba, while the CIA did .
 Burlatsky characterized Khrushchev as an ""adventurist"" whose risky actions showed just how dangerous nuclear weapons are in the wrong hands . Burratsky: Krushchev's actions showed how dangerous dangerous weapons are in the wrong hands
 The shroud of secrecy made it hard to take responsible decisions, he said . He also said it also made him take responsibility for his actions .
 Wednesday's encounter was friendly, and seemed to reflect a genuine effort at understanding the causes and lessons of the game . Wednesday's game seemed to be an attempt at understanding and understanding each other .
 McNamara said both U.S. and Russia need to understand the value of history . McNamara called for deep cuts in offensive nuclear weapons, to reduce alert status of such weapons .
 Russian viewers said they were disappointed the movie only showed the American side . Some Russian viewers were disappointed with the movie's lack of realism .
 The Russians also contested facts in the film, with Gribkov saying the missiles were never deployed in an upright position, were never fueled, and were never set to be fired as shown in the movie . The Russians say they never deployed missiles in upright position and never fired .
 Three-day conference on the 1962 Cuban missile crisis ends with sobering realization the world was only a 'hairsbreadth' from nuclear war .
 Several former aides to President Kennedy who attended the conference warned that Bush is misinterpreting history by citing Kennedy's actions during the missile crisis as justification for a preemptive military strike against Iraq .
 Newly declassified documents reveal how close the world came to nuclear confrontation in October 1962 . The conference was held on the 40th anniversary of the Cold War's worst moment .
 On October 27, 1962, a U.S. Navy destroyer dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine near Cuba without realizing it was carrying a nuclear weapon . The most dangerous day of the 13-day standoff was the day when a Soviet sub was carrying the weapon .
 Kennedy's decision to establish a naval quarantine around Cuba was the opposite of a pre-emptive strike . Theordore Sorensen, a former Kennedy speechwriter who attended the conference, said the decision was not to invade .
 A Political Vision 40 Years Later,""" was a generally friendly affair, more like a 50th college reunion than a sparring among old adversaries . The event was more like an old college reunion .
 This is one of a half-dozen conferences held on the missile crisis in recent years . This is the first time a conference has been held on missile issues in the past decade .
 Ex-CIA officer Dino Brugioni interpreted U.S. spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Anatoly Gribkov, a former Soviet general who in 1962 was in charge of the missiles, peered at the site .
 The conference was divided into three major sessions, the first dealing with the period leading up to October 1962 . The second dealt with the 13-day crisis itself, and the third dealing with its aftermath .
 The sessions themselves took place around an enormous square conference table . They were generally closed to the media .
 Castro criticized the Soviets for lying to the U.S. about placing nuclear missiles on the island . Experts say this gave Kennedy the political high ground when he had proof that the contrary was true .
 A former Soviet military official takes a shot at the United States' foreign policy . The former military official says the U.S. should not be allowed to engage in the fight against Russia's foreign policy.
 Some of the previously classified documents released at the conference provided a startling window into the crisis . The documents showed, again, how close the world came to a nuclear confrontation .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff and McNamara, the Defense Secretary, were being inundated with the latest military information -and discussing possible air-strikes and a massive U.S. invasion of Cuba . Joint chiefs of Staff were being . inundated . with latest information .
 First came a report of possible Soviet ground forces with modern equipment in Cuba, according to notes of the meeting . Continued construction of strategic missile sites, report says .
 Reports of a missing U.S. spy plane over Alaska and downing of another U.K. plane over Cuba . Then came a report of a . missing United States spy plane . The United States has been involved in two of the world's most deadly drone strikes .
 Maxwell Taylor, the Joint Chiefs chairman, tells the group after returning from a meeting at the White House . Taylor: "The Joint Chiefs will continue to work together in the near future"
 The crisis ended the next day when the Soviets agreed to remove their missiles in exchange for a pledge from the United States not to invade the island . The U.S. agreed to pull missiles from the Soviet Union in exchange with a pledge not to attack .
 McNamara said the figures were provided by Jorge Risquet, a member of Cuba's ruling Politburo .
 Soviet officials had previously been evasive about whether nuclear warheads had actually reached Cuba . State Department official at the time of the crisis says Soviet officials were evasive . The U.S. State Department says nuclear warheads were not actually reaching Cuba .
 The revelation by a senior Soviet military expert came in a conference that brought together for the first time the top-level Soviet, American and Cuban officials involved in the Caribbean showdown . The conference was held in Havana, Cuba, Cuba and Cuba .
 One of the participants, Sergi N Khrushchev, son of the late Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchell, said the 20 warheads in Cuba were never attached to the missiles .
 The October 1962 showdown between President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev over the Soviet attempt to install a nuclear missile force in Cuba is widely regarded as the closest the world has come to nuclear war .
 McNamara and the Cuban ruling Politburo. McNamara . McNamara, Bundy, Bundy and members of the Cuban party. The White House security adviser. Bundy .
 The two men discussed the possibility that the Americans would remove Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey if the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba . Kennedy on the evening of Oct. 31, 1962 .
 Robert Kennedy, the president's brother and attorney general, wrote in his memoirs that the U.S. refused to publicly trade the Turkish missiles . The missiles were scheduled to be removed anyway, but they were scheduled for removal anyway .
 Dobrynin told the conference that he understood that he had understood that the two sides had an explicit deal to make such a trade . He said he understood he had agreed to the deal .
 Khrushchev took the seemingly reckless step of sending nuclear weapons to Cuba . The discussion did not resolve the hotly disputed question of why he sent the weapons .
 The former Soviet leader said in his memoirs, and many leading Soviets maintain, that he did it to prevent an American invasion of the island . The Soviets feared the invasion of Cuba was imminent, he said .
 Khrushchev was motivated more by the large American advantage in nuclear weapons, analysts say . Other Soviet and Western analysts say they believe he was motivated by the U.S. advantage .
 Some American participants said the conference brought home more strongly than previous evidence that the Soviets genuinely believed the Americans intended to invade Cuba . The conference was held in Havana, Cuba .
 Recently declassified government documents showed that top U.S. officials made active plans for the overthrow of Castro . They seriously contemplated sending American troops to help overthrow Castro, documents show .
 McNamara insisted that those plans never reached the point of intent to invade . McNamara said he told the gathering he now appreciated the Soviet perception .
 Russia says U.S. creating 'threats' near Russia's borders . But he says Washington is creating ""threats"" near the borders of Russia .
 Putin was speaking at a press conference after meeting EU leaders at a summit in a former royal residence in Mafra, some 40 kilometres from Lisbon . The Russian leader was speaking after meeting with EU leaders in the Portuguese town .
 Forced to choose between which of the three one would voluntarily sit through again, one would have to go for the missiles . The missiles are the most powerful weapons in the world .
 The film would at no point feature any suggestion that anti-gravitational devices and extraterrestrial visitors were involved . That's for no other reason .
 The Cuban missile crisis carries with it an eternal topicality, reminding us of the ever-present threat of nuclear war . We all live on as long as nukes sit silently in silos in the middle of American wheat farms .
 The truly scary thing about the Cuban missile crisis was how global thermonuclear war could have been triggered by such trivial things as a traffic jam, a stalled elevator or a misunderstood nuance . A traffic jam could have triggered a nuclear war, the author says .
 Despite the ""declassified" proclamation in the program title, there's very little material presented here that we didn't see in Roger Donaldson's excellent 2000 movie, Thirteen Days .
 Looking for Victoria, ABC, 7.30pm . Timed to coincide with the impending Australian tour of Prunella Scales' famous one-woman show about Queen Victoria . BBC two-part sop job has a gliding steadicam dancing around .
 The sensible thing would have been for the BBC to either do a solid one-hour documentary featuring, rather than focusing on, Scales, or simply make a high-quality film version of the show . Scales is the subject of a new BBC documentary, which will be broadcast on
 A poorly padded excuse for a historical documentary that looks too much like an extended plug for the tour . Instead of a documentary, what we get is a poorly padded .
 This smells like the BBC's thank you to Scales for the royalties from Fawlty Towers tape and DVD sales . Pardon the cynicism, but this smells like a thank you for the money .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were at the center of the 1962 missile crisis . Historians believe the crisis was the closest the world has come to nuclear war . Kennedy's father and mother were both assassinated in 1962 .
 He compared the defense of Cuba to the U.S. commitment to defend the former West Berlin .
 In 1962, Cuba began building missile bases with the intent to pose a threat to the United States, barely 90 miles away . The island nation of Cuba, backed by the Soviet Union, began building bases in 1962 .
 What ensued was a tense diplomatic tug-of-war that nearly ended in nuclear fallout . The two countries engaged in a tense exchange of words over nuclear weapons .
 President Kennedy and Soviet Prime Minister Nikita Khrushchev negotiated a deal that the Soviet Union would remove its missiles from Cuba and transport them back to their country . The United States would agree to never invade Cuba and would also withdraw missiles from bases in Turkey and Italy .
 The effects of this led to further strained relations with the Soviet Union and other Communist countries for decades to come . The effects were the result of this strained relations between the two countries .
 "Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War" by Michael Dobbs details the thoughts of the world leaders involved in the struggle .
 Khrushchev's plan to destroy the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo, the accidental flyover of the Soviet Union by an American spy plane, the movement of warheads around Cuba during the height of the crisis, and the work of CIA agents .
 For a look at the Soviet perspective on the confrontation, check out "October Fury" by naval analyst Peter Huchthausen . For a more detailed look at Russia's perspective on its involvement in the Cold War, visit CNN.com .
 American Secret History from Hitler to al-Qaeda"" by Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Thomas Powers . Pulitzer Prize winning journalist Powers .
 "We were more aware than ever of threats that existed beyond our borders," says President Obama . "We are more aware of threats than ever," says Obama .
 The constant menace of an impending nuclear attack led to bomb shelters being built . Bomb shelters were built, a greater sense of suspicion of foreigners and widespread theories for surviving the attack .
 Speaking Volumes is written by Manatee County Public Library System staff members . Speaking volumes are published each Sunday by the library .
 Ericka Dow is the Supervisor of the Central Library's Adult Services section . Dow is a supervisor of the library's adult services section . She says the library will be open to the public for the first time ever . Dow: "It's a good time for people to visit the library
 Russian leader recalls Cold War face-off in speech on U.S. defense plans . Russia's President Vladimir Putin spoke to the U.N. on Monday in Moscow .
 Comments made at the end of a summit between Russia and EU that failed to resolve several festering disputes . Latest in a series of belligerent statements from Putin from the assertive Putin .
 Emboldened by oiland gas-fueled economic clout, Russia is increasingly at odds with U.S. and much of Europe . Emboldered by oil and gas, Russia has been on the rise on issues ranging from energy supplies to human rights .
 Putin reiterated Russia's stalwart opposition to U.S. plans to put elements of a missile defense system in Poland and Czech Republic . Poland and the Czech Republic both are now NATO members . Putin: Russia's opposition to putting elements of missile defense in former Soviet bloc countries .
 "Such threats against our country are being created,"" he said . "We have withdrawn the remains of our bases from Vietnam, from Cuba, and have liquidated everything there," he added .
 Khrushchev removed his country's nuclear missiles from Cuba because they could have been used to launch a close-range attack on the U.S. Khruschev removed the missiles because of a threat to the United States .
 The U.S. imposed a naval blockade on Cuba and the world teetered on the edge of war before the Soviets backed down . The world was on the brink of war when the Soviet Union backed down on Cuba .
 Putin suggested the tension was lower than in 1962 because the U.S. and Russia are now ""partners,"" not Cold War enemies . Putin also suggested that the United States and Russia now are now "partners"
 The Russian leader said there has been no concrete U.S. response to his counterproposals for cooperation on missile defense . He added that the United States is now listening to Russia's concerns about its plans and seeking to address them .
 The United States plan is part of a wider missile shield involving defenses in California and Alaska . The U.S. says it is to defend against any long-range missile attack from countries such as North Korea or Iran .
 Russia opposes the idea, saying Iran is decades away from developing missile technology that could threaten Europe or North America . It says the U.S. bases are aimed at spying on Russian facilities and undermining Russia's missile deterrent force . Russia says Iran's missile technology is years away from threatening Europe
 Putin travels to Portugal, which holds the EU's rotating presidency, for talks with leaders of the 27nation bloc . Putin traveled to Portugal to meet with EU leaders for talks . Portugal holds the rotating presidency .
 Putin used a news conference at the summit's conclusion to reiterate Russia's stalwart opposition to U.S. plans to put elements of a missile defense system in the former Soviet bloc countries of Poland and the Czech Republic . Both countries are now NATO members .
 October 1962 crisis erupted when President Kennedy demanded that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev remove his country's nuclear missiles from Cuba because they could have been used to launch a close-range attack on the United States . Now `partners'
 Putin suggested the tension was much lower than in 1962 because the U.S. and Russia are now ""partners,"" not Cold War enemies . Putin also suggested that the United States and Russia were now "partners" not enemies .
 Russia strongly opposes the idea, saying Iran is decades away from developing missile technology that could threaten Europe or North America . It says the U.S. bases are aimed at spying on Russian facilities .
 Despite positive spin put on the Russia-EU summit by Russian President Vladimir Putin and EU President Jose Manuel Barroso who called it ""open, frank and productive"" there were no major breakthroughs .
 The EU and Russia have been without a new cooperation agreement for more than a year . Many European capitals have grown skeptical about the reliability of Russia's energy supplies and trade policies .
 Topping the list of concerns is Russia's energy policy . The reliability of supplies and the intentions of state-run oil and gas companies are key concerns .