 Rotonda resident was a radioman aboard a P-2V 'Neptune' U.S. Navy patrol aircraft that kept a close eye on Russian freighters taking Soviet rockets out of Cuba . The Bay of Pigs Invasion was the year before a small army of Cuban conscript
 The CIA cooked up a plan to have Cuban insurgents hired by the CIA invade Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro and his Communist government . The plan was hatched during the closing months of the Eisenhower administration .
 The president got cold feet at the 11th hour and withheld supporting U.S. firepower when the Cubans went ashore . It became a dismal flop because of the president getting cold feet and withholding support .
 Nikita Khrushchev secretly proposed putting Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba in 1962 . The following year, 1962, Nikita proposed putting the Soviet missiles into Cuba . The proposal was rejected by the Soviet Union .
 Cuba became a Soviet satellite complete with Soviet nuclear missiles . Castro agreed and, unbeknownst to officials in the U.S. government, Cuba was a satellite of the Soviet Union .
 An American U-2 spy plane picked up the missile sites under construction in Cuba on Oct. 1962 . The missile sites were discovered by an American spy plane in 1962 .
 The U.S. blocked the island nation with Navy warships and ordered them removed . The United States contacted officials in the Soviet Union and told them they would not permit offensive nuclear missiles there . The island nation was then blockaded by the United States .
 Khrushchev wrote Kennedy a letter saying that blockading Cuba constituted 'an act of aggression' but behind the scenes the Russian ruler negotiated with the president to pull the offensive missiles out of Cuba .
 U.S. would remove missiles pointed at Russia along the Turkish border if it removed them . Turkey agreed to remove the missiles along the border if Russia removed the missiles . Russia agreed if the United States would remove its missiles .
 The crisis was averted when Khrushchev blinked first and agreed to pull missiles out of Cuba . The crisis averted by the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 'We had command responsibilities for all of the Navy patrol squadrons flying over the Russian ships pulling the missiles out of Cuba,' Mengel said .
 By the time he was involved in the crisis, the U.S. and the Russians had choreographed a plan to pull back from the brink of nuclear annihilation .
 In return for pulling the Russian missiles out of Cuba the U.S. agreed to pull its missiles from Turkey,' he said . 'In return for pull the missiles from Cuba the United States agreed to withdraw them'
 'We would get behind them and wiggle our wings to indicate we were on an official mission,' he said .
 A photographer aboard our plane would open a rear window on the plane and take pictures of the missiles . A photographer would open the rear window to take photos of the missile missiles .
 A U.S. Navy destroyer would be brought up beside the Russian ship . When that happened a United States Navy destroyer was brought up next to the ship .
 If they still refused another destroyer was brought up the other side . If they didn't, another destroyer would be brought up in the next round .
 'We did encounter several Russian submarines while we were on patrol,' he said . 'We had several encounters with Russian submarines'
 When the crisis was over we went back to Jacksonville, we continued to make flights to train pilots how to fly P-2Vs . When the war was over, we went to Jacksonville and continued to fly .
 I was discharged from the Navy a short time later after four years of service . "I was discharged short of interest," says Navy veteran .
 He and his wife, Darlene, retired to the west coast of Florida three years ago .
 The couple have two children, Christopher and Jennifer, and several grandchildren . They have several grandchildren, Christopher, Jennifer and Jennifer .
 ICBM crew's resolve: ""If you've got to fire this thing, fire it' ZALUSKI: Crisis prompted quick exit from Guantanamo .
 The U.S. military elevated its threat level to an unprecedented Defense Condition Two . That day, for the first time ever- or since- the United States military elevated the threat level . The first time-ever-or since-the United States .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union were on the brink of nuclear war . Colton and his crew were prepared to kill millions of people, if so ordered .
 President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba . Two days earlier, President Kennedy announced to a stunned nation that spy-plane reconnaissance photos had confirmed the presence of Soviet medium-range nuclear missiles on Cuba .
 Colton, 75, retired as a lieutenant colonel and now lives with his wife, Linda, off Catharpin Road in Spotsylvania County . "We were in a state we had never been in before," he said .
 Japanese cities were destroyed by the first two nuclear bombs, dropped in August 1945 . The first two atomic bombs were dropped in Japan in 1945 .
 Colton's crew was responsible for an Atlas F intercontinental ballistic missile carrying a 4-megaton warhead nearly a thousand times as powerful as those World War II bombs . The Atlas F missile was capable of carrying a warhead that was 1,000 times more powerful than the bombs
 He knew that the missile could potentially kill millions of people in Eastern Europe . "He knew that he knew that . He knew he was going to be able to kill millions," he said .
 After graduation, he was commissioned a second lieutenant and assigned to the National Security Agency at Fort Meade, Md .
 Atlas ICBM squadrons have been formed around the country . President Obama visited the country to discuss the formation of the squadrons . He also visited the U.S. Embassy in Washington .
 Plattsburgh was a part of the Strategic Air Command based in Omaha, Neb. Plattsburg was a component of the SAC based in Plattsburger, Nebraska .
 The military's Atlas program was so new at the time, he recalled, that ""not all the sites were ready to go" so the frequent shifts were necessary .
 There are seven Atlas squadrons spread out across the country, each with 12 missiles . There were seven squadrons of Atlas missiles spread across the U.S.
 Colton and the crew would arrive at the silo to relieve the previous crew, and change from their uniforms into white coveralls and gray hard hats . Colton would change from his coveralls to white hard hats and hard hats. Colton was the first person to die in the
 The clothing change ""was so as not to bring any outside contamination inside"" that might affect the consoles and equipment, he said . The clothing . change was not so as to bring outside contamination into the consoles .
 Colton still has his helmet, Air Force cap and a few other mementos of his days underground . Colton says he still has a helmet, cap and other memorabilia .
 Messages would come in from SAC headquarters, Looking Glass, the president and Joint Chiefs of Staff . Messages would be sent from the president, Joint Chiefs, the JPs and SAC .
 Through that September and into early October, the crew responded to routine drills .
 Colton and his lieutenant carried launch-commit keys and ""go codes"" in sealed envelopes to confirm if a launch order was received . Colton carried launch keys and "go codes" to confirm launch orders if they received .
 Target information was sent from an early computer to the missile guidance system . The warhead was armed and fuel preparation was completed . The missile was sent to target targets from a computer .
 Giant counterweights hoisted the missile up the silo lift, and massive steel blast doors would open . Giant countersweights and massive counterweights would lift the missile into the silos .
 " statistically, we didn't think we'd ever have to do it," he said . "We didn't want to do this," he added. "Statistically, it's not the first time we've had to do that."
 Each man knew that, if the Soviets attacked, they might survive but their families above ground would probably die . The men knew that if they survived, their lives would probably be in danger .
 An incoming warhead would take 20 to 30 minutes to arrive; the preparations in the silo were 15 minutes . The launch message was received from the launch message to the actual launch-was about 15 minutes to get ready .
 Officers carried .45-caliber pistols in case something went wrong underground . Officers carried handguns in case .
 So many safeguards had been built into the system, he said, that an unauthorized attack was considered all but impossible . An unauthorized attack would have been impossible, he added .
 "Dr. Strangelove,"" in which a deranged Air Force general provokes a nuclear strike, is based on a plot in "Stangelove" The movie is about a plot involving a general provoking a nuke strike in which he provokes it .
 Kennedy pulled back quarantine line around Cuba and raised nuclear forces readiness to DEFCON 2 . On Oct. 1962, Kennedy raised the level of readiness for Cuba's nuclear forces . Kennedy also pulled back the quarantine line .
 Three days later, a U-2 spy plane monitoring the situation was shot down over Cuba, further escalating the crisis . Three days after that, the U.2 was also shot down by a U.S. spy plane .
 On Oct. 31, the Soviets agreed to dismantle the missile sites . The stalemate broke, with the Soviets backing down and agreeing to dismantle sites .
 Colton went to Vietnam as an Air Force adviser, then to Germany . He worked for John Hughes, who briefed the nation on the Cuban missiles during Kennedy's speech .
 He worked for several defense contractors before taking a sharp career turn-into ministry . He has been in charge of the defense ministry since 2003 .
 He's been pastor at several churches and currently serves at Triangle Baptist Church . He has served at several different churches .
 Colton Colton still thinks back on his days in Plattsburgh, and reflects on how the nuclear arms dynamic has changed . Colton says he still has a lot of respect for the U.S. military .
 "You never hear about them or read about them,"" though the major superpowers still stockpile thousands of warheads . "You don't hear about these warheads or read them," says Pentagon spokesman .
 Just 90 miles from Florida, that put the missiles well within striking distance of the United States . The missiles are located in Florida, just 90 miles away from Florida .
 Nikita Khrushchev and President Kennedy made moves and countermoves . For the next 13 days, the world held its breath as they made moves . The world held their breath as the world waited .
 Kennedy initiated a naval blockade surrounding the island of Cuba . U.S. armed forces were on alert for a possible invasion of the island . Kennedy initiated the blockade .
 If a U.S. warship fired on a Russian vessel or United States forces invaded, the unthinkable could have occurred — nuclear war . If a United States warship . fired on Russia's vessel or . United States troops invaded, nuclear war would have occurred .
 Dick Carr was a first lieutenant at the time and was watching a football game with his wing commander at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colo. Carr was watching the game with the wing commander when he was killed .
 Carr was seated in a RC-121 reconnaissance aircraft at McCoy Air Force Base, just south of Orlando, during the Cold War . Within 24 hours, Carr was in a reconnaissance aircraft .
 SAC diversified their planes throughout the country during the emergency so the Russians could not destroy them if war did break out . Carr said the planes were diversified so they could not be destroyed by the Russians .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff implemented the radar missions as part of their deterrence policy . The radar missions are part of the Joint Chiefs' policy .
 The radar was not as sophisticated as today's radar systems, Carr said . Carr said they encountered many unknowns because of the radar system .
 There were numerous commercial flights heading in and out of Cuba and every so often they would confront an unidentified aircraft . The unidentified aircraft would confront commercial flights in Cuba .
 Carr said he flew at night, accompanied by fighter jets, and on one occasion his relief aircraft did not show and he was running low on fuel . Carr said one of his greatest fears was that he would not be able to fly again .
 The Soviets dismantled their missile bases and the United States would remove theirs from Turkey . The U.S. would remove their bases from Turkey, something that was not revealed until 25 years later .
 The organization is raising funds for the site work for the Wall, which will be built in Laishley Park . The Wall is being built in the park .
 NUCLEAR-ARMED SOVIET SUBMARINE SOVSOVIETS considered firing . St. Shipper's BOMBS ALMOST HIT Nukes .
 A U.S. Navy destroyer dropping depth charges off the Cuban coast almost accidentally hit the hull of a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear warhead . The most dangerous day of all was Oct. 1962 when a United States Navy destroyer dropped depth charges .
 The U.S. military "did not have a clue that the submarine had a nuclear weapon on board,"" Thomas Blanton, director of the National Security Archives, says .
 U.S. intelligence officials had photographed only 33 of the 42 mediumrange missiles in Cuba that the Americans later discovered later were there at the time . Another document showed that the United States had only photographed 33 of 42 missiles .
 Intelligence officials also never found any nuclear warheads, which they learned later had been kept on the island . Intelligence officials learned later that the warheads were kept on island .
 Fidel Castro prepared to shoot down U.S. combat aircraft if they invaded Cuba . Top-secret military directive to Gen. Gen. Carlos S. was issued in October 1962 . Cuban President Fidel Castro was preparing for an airstrike on Soviet facilities in Cuba .
 A portion of the documents made available to The Associated Press demonstrates that the crisis did not end on Oct., 1962, with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove the offensive weapons, as was widely believed .
 Khrushchev worried that an ""irrational" Castro would renew tension with the United States and perhaps provoke war . The Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba .
 Khrushchev said in a l etter Nov., 1962, to diplomatic aides in Cuba . Cuba ""wants practically to drag us behind it with a leash, and wants to pull us into a war with America by its actions"
 'CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS WAS WORSE THAN IMAGINED IN 1962, U.S. SHIP'S BOMBS ALMOST HIT NUCLEAR-ARMED SOVIET SUBMARINE SOViets . 'C
 Ecker's RF-8A reconnaissance jet developed in Jacksonville, Fla., on Oct. 1962 . Ecker continued on in the same aircraft to Washington .
 The bunker, now whitewashed, is surrounded by towering palm trees . The black and white photograph of the bunker shows several men standing on the roof and several in front .
 Ecker's team took photos of an apparent missile launch site at a military installation about 80 miles west of Havana . Other photographs show a missile launching site at an apparent military installation . Ecker: "It's a good sign that the Cuban government is doing well"
 The visits follow a two-day gathering of American, Cuban and Russian protagonists in the missile crisis drama . The visits Sunday follow a meeting of the U.S. and Cuban leaders .
 In the afternoon, Sorensen stood next to another former aide to Kennedy, Arthur Schlesinger Jr., underneath a medium-range Soviet R-2 missile displayed at an old Spanish fortress on Havana Bay . The missile was displayed at a grassy slope outside a grassed slope
 Three other shortto medium-range Soviet missiles of that era were also on exhibit . Anti-aircraft missile like the one that shot an American U-2 spy plane over Cuba at the height of the crisis on Oct. 22, 1962 .
 'PILOT, EX-AIDES TO JFK RECALL MISSILE CRISIS', St. Lo uis P o s t-Dispatch Cit Cit Cit at ion The Associated Press .
 'PILOT VISITS SCENE OF MISSILE CRISIS MISSION', says St. Louis Air Force pilot . 'Pilots' were sent to the scene of the shooting, but were not armed .
 Cuban, American and Russian protagonists were told the most dangerous day of all was Oct. 1962 . They studied newly declassified documents at a conference on the crisis .
 A U.S. Navy destroyer dropping depth charges off the Cuban coast almost accidentally hit a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear warhead . That was when a United States Navy destroyer dropped depth charges near the Soviet submarine .
 The U.S. military "did not have a clue that the submarine had a nuclear weapon on board,"" Thomas Blanton, director of the National Security Archives said .
 Documents show that the crisis did not end Oct., 1962, with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove the offensive weapons, as was widely believed . Documents also show that this was not the end of the crisis as it was believed to have ended .
 Khrushchev worried that an 'irrational' Castro would renew tensions with the U.S. Khrushcherchev feared that an "irrational" Castro would provoke war with the United States .
 Participants looked at American covert actions following the disastrous CIA-backed invasion of Cuba's Bay of Pigs in April 1961 . Participants also looked at how they intensified Cuban fears of a United States military attack .
 The historic papers underscored the danger of a nuclear attack that existed during those tense October days . The papers were published by the U.S. government .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro participated in the conference's closed door sessions . Former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara also took part in the sessions .
 The crisis began in October 1962 when President Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the U.S. President Kennedy became aware of Cuba's nuclear missiles .
 Thirty years ago a U-2 spy plane returned from a reconnaissance flight over Cuba laden with photographic proof that Fidel Castro was turning his country into a Soviet intermediate-range ballistic missile site . By Chauncey G Parker III, .
 I wondered then and still do whether the missile crisis was in fact the first nuclear confrontation or perhaps the work of those with a vested interest to counter a mounting public perception that the vaunted ''Age of Camelot'' and its glamorous torch bearer were more showbiz than substance .
 JFK had come to the presidency through the thinnest of margins, barely 100,000 votes . These were widely alleged to have been thanks to Chicago Mayor Daley's largess with creative voting machine tampering . JFK's victory was widely believed to be thanks to the Chicago Mayor's larg
 On April 16, a brigade of Cuban exiles landed at an inlet on the southern coast of Cuba called Bahia de Cochinos, or Bay of Pigs . It was barely two months into JFK's term, the first time he was in office .
 Apologists tried to claim that JFK inherited a flawed Republican plan that was executed without Kennedy's prior knowledge, and thus the fault lay elsewhere . Apologists say Kennedy inherited the flawed plan, and therefore the fault lies elsewhere .
 One of Kennedy's first acts as president had been to order CIA chief Allen Dulles to proceed briskly in planning an invasion . As a result, Kennedy ordered the CIA chief to prepare for an invasion.
 The White House darted for cover now, using its formidable influence with the Northeastern establishment press to tar U.N. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson with having insisted air support be withdrawn, thereby dooming the invasion to failure . This notwithstanding, the White House used its considerable influence with
 JFK set off for Vienna, his first face-to-face encounter with Nikita Khrushchev . Barely six weeks later, JFK traveled to Vienna for the first time in six weeks . JFK was JFK's first face to-face meeting with the Soviet leader .
 It was the wily Soviet leader berated and badgered him, alternating between open contempt and base condescension . It was a shattering experience for him, as he was forced to sit down in front of the camera .
 JFK later explained the Soviet leader's brutal behavior, according to Michael Beschloss in his book Crisis Years . ''I think he did it because of the Bay of Pigs," JFK said .
 Their most virulent bone of contention had centered on the status of West Berlin . The West Berliners had been unhappy with the West Berlin status of Berlin .
 JFK departed Vienna convinced that Khrushchev was at the end of his tether on finding an accommodation with the West on this abnormal situation, and would act on Berlin soon . JFK left Vienna on March 4, 1962, believing that the situation was abnormal .
 In August 1961, the East Germans constructed a wall, isolating West Berlin from the rest of the city, and from West Germany itself . The wall was built in August 1961 and is still visible today .
 300,000 West Berliners poured into the streets to protest what they viewed as U.S. impotence and betrayal of its commitment to their safety and well-being . This led on Aug. 31, 2011, when the U.N. pulled out of West Berlin .
 By now mutterings are emanating, even from among the faithful, that maybe the passing of the torch to the younger generation had been premature . Mutterings may have been premature, even though some of the faithful believe it was premature .
 JFK's lament to a friend that the U.S. presidency could be the greatest job in the world were it not for Khrushchev . Small wonder, then, JFK lamented that the presidency was the best job in world were not for him .
 Castro and his Soviet protector were to yank the lion's tail with depressing regularity, each time giving the United States and those of us at the U.N. each time . Meanwhile, from August 1961 to October 1962, Castro's Soviet protector was at the United Nations .
 Not a single month would pass without the United States being hauled into one or another General Assembly committee or the Security Council to answer charges of planning a second Cuban invasion . The U.S. is accused of planning to invade Cuba .
 In 1962, a special General Assembly was convened for the purpose in February 1962 . For good measure, it was convened in February 1963 .
 For other United Nations members, watching the U.S. squirm in the international court of public opinion was delicious . For other U.N. members, the United States squirm was delicious.
 In 1962 the Cold War was in full flower and the objective was to capture the hearts of emerging Third World countries . While this ritual may appear pointless by today's standards, in 1962 it was a major event in the world .
 Understandably, then, the Soviets exploited their Bay of Pigs card to the fullest . The Soviets exploited it to the full extent .
 JFK assembled a ''specially contrived executive committee'' to explore options . JFK promptly set off on a scheduled campaign swing on behalf of a number of candidates in the Midwest .
 The U.S. Navy boarded a Lebanese merchantman chartered by the Soviets . The ship was en route to Cuba .
 No missiles were found, and it was allowed to proceed . It was the sole vessel to have been stopped by the quarantine . The ship was stopped by quarantine, but allowed to continue .
 Negotiators met but never did go beyond informing the Security Council, on Jan. 1963, that sufficient agreement existed to justify removing the so-called Cuban item from its agenda . The Security Council never met again .
 Castro has never permitted any on-site inspection and, despite all the United States posturing about the absolute necessity of verification, we never did force the issue . The Castro government has never allowed any inspection of the site .
 JFK secretly capitulated to Khrushchev's demand to remove the old thorn in the Soviet underbelly, United States missile bases across the Black Sea in Turkey . No vessel departing Cuba ever boarded to verify the Soviets were indeed making good their promise .
 Kennedy's handling of the Cuban missile crisis should rank him among the greats of U.S. presidents . Withal, those with a vested interest are at it still, seeking to perpetuate the illusion .
 Florida International Museum is home to the largest museum in the world . The museum is located in St. Augustine, Florida .
 For students of history, seeing the display is quite a learning experience . Students of history will be able to learn from the display .
 For those who lived through the crisis that brought America to the brink of nuclear war in 1962, it is enough to make your hair stand on end . For those of us who lived during the crisis, the crisis is enough .
 Atherholt began scrambling to put together six months ago when producers of the Kevin Costner film Thirteen Days called . The display was put together when producers called .
 There's a marshmallow sofa, a kitchen with garish appliances and a Mr Magoo doll . There's also a kitchen, a Mr magoo doll, and a sofa with marshmallow furniture .
 You begin to feel America's obsession with nuclear holocaust you follow the timeline from one room to another . And you begin to see America's fascination with nuclear .
 Walking into the second gallery, you find yourself in a retro living room with a black-and-white TV playing an old documentary about the Cuban missile crisis . Walking into a second gallery of the museum's collection, you see an old TV with an old Soviet missile crisis.
 Most sobering area of the display is a 1960s-era classroom . The display includes a classroom filled with students .
 Duck and Cover is a 1951 civil defense documentary starring Bert the Turtle . It was aired on the rounded screen of an old RCA Victor TV .
 As you sit down on a couch and watch the program, all the old terrors come rushing back . "As you sit . down and watch it, all of the old . terrors came rushing back. As you . sit down, watch the show," says author .
 Photos taken by high-flying U-2 spy planes show Soviet missiles aimed at U.S. missiles . The missiles were aimed at the United States by the Soviets .
 Kennedy is informed of Soviet missile bases in Cuba . U.S. launches a blockade of Cuba and Fidel Castro rattles his Russian-built missiles . Kennedy is told of Soviet bases .
 CONELRAD alert and sirens going off. And you descend into a community fallout shelter, complete with CONELAD alert, sirens .
 Items on display include a doodle of an atomic-bomb mushroom, drawn by Kennedy and dated Feb., 1961 . Items are on display at Kennedy's Museum of Remembrance .
 There's also a Soviet-built SA-2 missile, a model of Sputnik, a U-2 pilot's uniform, a jump seat from a T-33 aircraft and props from Thirteen Days . Items depicting the attempt to pin the Kennedy assassination on Cuba are also included
 The missile crisis exhibition will become a permanent display, although it will be scaled down later in the year to make room for other displays . It will become part of the museum's permanent display .
 Museum admission includes audio-guided cassette tour of Kennedy Galleries . Museum admission also includes audio guided cassette tour . Kennedy Gallery is home to the Kennedy Museum .
 Twenty themed galleries include full-size recreations of the Oval Office and the Rose Garden . Hundreds of personal items such as JFK's rocking chair, clothing, personal notes, letters and dresses worn by Jacqueline Kennedy .
 The final series of displays allow the visitor to experience the tragedy of Dallas . Dallas. Dallas. Texas . Dallas .
 Also on view is America Through the CBS Eye, with many photographs from the networks' archives . America Through The CBS Eye is on view at CBS .
 The museum has attracted 2 million visitors since it opened in 1995 . The museum is an affiliate of the Smithsonian Institution . It is located in a renovated department store building .
 St. Petersburg is within walking distance of downtown restaurants, shops and museums at the pier . The new Baywalk entertainment/shopping complex is located on the city's Baywalk .
 Fading memories over time argue more strongly for reviewing the story . Fading of memories over . time argues more strongly . for reviewing story .
 Dangers of fatal military miscalculation may be greater today than during the Cold War . Dangers are greater today today than in Cold War era, says U.S. expert .
 In the United States, our military presence in the Middle East fuels partisan political debate, but little discussion of potential confrontation with Russia . In the U.S. military presence, it fuels partisan politics but little talk of potential confrontations with Russia.
 During Oct.-28 in 1962, the Cuba crisis dominated world attention, as Washington and Moscow sparred on the edge of thermonuclear war .
 Lessons include difficulty of securing accurate intelligence, and the unpredictability of events . Lessons include difficult to secure accurate intelligence and unpredictable events .
 On Oct. 1962, U.S. reconnaissance photos revealed the Soviet Union was placing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite contrary assurances . On Oct., 1962, United States reconnaissance photos showed the Soviets had placed offensive nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Until Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw them on Oct. 6, Armageddon loomed . Armageddon loom for the first time since the withdrawal of them from the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy administration officials assumed Moscow would never put long-range missiles into Cuba . CIA director John McCone was CIA director . Kennedy administration had assumed Moscow wouldn't put missiles in Cuba .
 They erroneously calculated the Soviets also felt the move would be just too risky . The Soviets felt it would be too risky to carry out .
 Earlier, reconnaissance flights over Cuba were curtailed to avoid antagonizing Moscow . The flights resumed only because McCone aggressively pressed the matter .
 Analysis developed photographic evidence of the Soviet deception just before the missiles would become operational . Analysis developed evidence just before they became operational .
 There was already circumstantial evidence, including reports from reliable Cuba agents, that something of this nature was underway . However, there was already . evidence that something was underway, according to sources .
 As with the George W Bush administration regarding Iraq weapons, senior officials chose evidence they preferred . The Bush administration chose evidence he preferred, including that of Iraq .
 Today, United States troops are in the Mideast along with forces from Russia, Iran, Israel, Syria, Syria and various national and terrorist groups .
 Partisan politics drives the debate, not clear consideration of our national interests . Yet partisan politics drive the debate .
 Gorbachev: Missile crisis contained important and enduring lessons . Bush: U.S.-Soviet-Cuban talks contain important lessons about missile crisis . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton: "It's a good time for the United States"
 Yesterday marked the first time that ranking Soviet and Cuban officials have agreed to discuss their roles in the crisis with U.S. officials . It is the first meeting between the two countries to discuss the crisis .
 Soviet participants include former Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and former Ambassador to Washington Anatoly Dobrynin . Khrushchev's father, Nikita, ordered the stationing of nuclear missiles on Cuba and later agreed to withdraw them under intense American pressure .
 American participants include former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, former national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and former White House special counsel Theodore Sorensen .
 American participants said they got a much stronger sense than ever before of Cuban and Soviet fears of an imminent U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 In his memoirs, Khrushchev insisted that his primary motivation for putting missiles in Cuba was to deter a U.S. invasion . In the memoirs he said he wanted to deter the United States invasion .
 McNamara acknowledged that if he had been in the shoes of the Soviet and Cuban officials across the room, he would have feared an American attack . McNamara was reported by other participants to have acknowledged .
 He continued to insist that the Kennedy administration had no intention of invading Cuba before the missile crisis .
 U.S. prepared contingency plans for the overthrow of Fidel Castro's pro-Soviet regime by October 1962, papers reveal . The U.N. had prepared plans for overthrow of pro-Russian regime .
 Documents show that internal revolt by disaffected Cubans was preferred means of deposing Castro . Some administration officials favored direct military intervention, documents show .
 The opening session revealed a dramatic asymmetry in the historical record that will complicate the task of historians in getting to the truth about the crisis . Historians will need to find out what happened in the 1980s .
 Soviet officials reveal that Washington's nuclear superiority in 1962 was even greater than the 15-to-1 ratio previously thought . Soviet officials did, however, reveal that the ratio was 15 to 1 . Washington had a nuclear superiority ratio of 15-1 .
 At the time of the crisis, two-thirds of the Soviets' entire missile stock of about 60 launchers was installed in Cuba . The crisis occurred in Cuba during the early 1980s .
 "Since the Soviets were vastly outnumbered, installing missiles in Cuba was the only way he could achieve this,"" said Scott Armstrong, director of Washington's nongovernmental National Security Archive .
 Gorbachev said the sharpest conflict could be extinguished thanks to the responsible approach and good sense exhibited by Khrushchev, Kennedy and Castro . In his message to the conference, Gorbachachev said that the lesson of the crisis was that the sharpiest conflict could not be extinguished
 In his message, Bush described the conference as an example of the ""new openness of the Soviet Union"" under Gorbachev . Bush: The conference was example of a 'new openness'