 It should be read, at least portions of it, by those present-day consumers of newspapers, magazines and TV news shows who think the brief doses of what purport to be the White House capture complex presidential decision-making .
 Walter Pincus, a reporter with The Post's national staff, covers national security issues . The quick answer here is ""nothing," if what you have in mind is some stunning new fact .
 The true answer is that a great deal here is new if you want to understand the day-to-day evolution of a policy and the people involved in a crisis through all its ups and downs .
 The Soviets clandestinely bring intermediateand short-range nuclear missiles into Cuba in 1962 . They attempt to deploy them in Cuba in Cuba .
 There are secret diplomatic exchanges against a background of public statements . Secret diplomatic exchanges set to take place in the U.S.
 The U.S. puts in place a blockade and makes preparations for air strikes against missile sites and Cuban air defenses if the missiles are not removed . A full-scale invasion to follow, with the United States putting in place, is expected to follow .
 transcripts of taped meetings of the so-called Ex-Com or executive committee . What is not familiar, however, is the myriad steps and potential missteps over the 13 days .
 The editors have bolstered the transcripts with helpful historical and political notes . The editors of this week's Washington Post have provided a transcript of some of the most recent developments in the White House .
 McNamara said he went home from the White House thinking that perhaps they had taken a step toward nuclear war . If you do nothing else, read the transcript of the meetings of Saturday, Oct. 31 .
 President Kennedy and his aides dealt with the famous statements by Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev . Kennedy and aides were dealing with the statements by the then-Soviet leader .
 The first statement said that the missiles would go if the U.S. made assurances that there would be no invasion of Cuba . The first, private statement was made by a private statement . The second said that if the United States made assurances there would not be an invasion, the missiles
 The second, public announcement offered to exchange the Cuban weapons for withdrawal of United States missiles in Turkey— part of NATO’s nuclear arsenal . The exchange would be part of the exchange of U.S. missiles .
 Next came the firing on low-flying U.S. reconnaissance planes prompted by an earlier White House statement that we would retaliate for such action .
 Later, word came that an American U2 spy plane had been shot down and its pilot killed . The pilot of the plane was killed .
 President Kennedy clearly takes the lead, although other Ex-Com members, including his brother, share their thoughts freely . While in the room, President Kennedy appears to be taking the lead .
 The group goes back and forth working out responses to each event; its discussions take place against a background belief that Khrushchev will not back down . Eventually the plans under way at the Pentagon . will inevitably be implemented within the next few days .
 A United States U2 has strayed over Siberia into Soviet air space . Kennedy with McNamara’s support decides not to disclose it publicly so as not to embarrass Khrushchev with a provocation . A U2 stowed over Siberia over Siberia .
 The president and his aides go back and forth over whether to tell NATO allies that Washington is prepared to agree to withdraw United States missiles from Turkey . Nucleararmed Polaris submarines are to be stationed off Turkey as less vulnerable replacements .
 McNamara convinced that a U.S. attack on Cuba would bring retaliation against the missile bases in Turkey . McNamara suggests making the bases “inoperable’s” missile bases .
 Bundy at one point reminds the president that his desire to show the world he was prepared not to reject out of hand Khrushchev’s offer to trade Cuban missiles for those in Turkey would inevitably harm U.S. relations not only with NATO countries but other allies . Bundy at