 Lessons learned by American practitioners and academics contributed to the conduct of American foreign policy in the 1960s and to academic understanding of nuclear deterrence .
 From the 1980s, study of what in Moscow was termed the Caribbean crisis was informed by access to Soviet officials and Soviet archives . The Caribbean crisis became the forefront of the ‘new historiography’ of the Cold War .
 This collection reviews how various texts inform our understanding and how new interpretations and/or new sources of information have overtaken the original analysis . The collection reviews various texts and how they inform us about our understanding .
 This article provides an overview of this endeavour and an answer to the question of whether we should continue to study the Cuban missile crisis . This article is a look at the history of the missile crisis in Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 His argument was directed at those who drew from the events of October 1962 a theoretical approach to managing international crises . He said Americans should not draw from that event to manage international crises like this .
 The aim of this collection is to revisit some of the literature on the missile crisis, how this has developed and how it informs our understanding of events . This collection is a look at the literature surrounding the crisis in the 1980s .
 The aim is to examine how various books inform our understanding and how new interpretations and/or new sources of information have overtaken the original analysis .
 If the past is another country, then most travellers to the missile crisis are historians . The missile crisis was a major event in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Others have different academic identities and methodological perspectives . Others have differing academic identities, such as academic identities .
 James Blight, one of the North American scholars most active in developing critical oral history of the crisis, produced a psychological study that explores the role of fear in the crisis and its resolution .
 Many other texts have multiple dimensions, and some that explore theoretical aspects provide new empirical material . Some of these texts provide new theoretical material, such as theoretical aspects .
 Scott Sagan’s application of organisational theory to the command and control of nuclear weapons, for example, provided significant evidence about the risks of inadvertent nuclear war . Scott Sagan's application of organisation theory to nuclear weapons provides significant evidence .
 Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein’s use of psychological approaches reflected significant empirical work in Moscow, Russia, they say . Richard Ned . Lebow used psychological approaches in his work .
 Western academics began to gain access to Soviet sources, first through engagement with former Soviet officials, and then through (often controlled) access to archives . Cohen's article appeared shortly after Cohen’s article appeared .
 On larger questions such as why Khrushchev sent the missiles, there has been greater clarity on how decisions were made, but the debates about his objectives remain . The debates about the objectives remain.
 Different authors pose different questions, and different commentators bring different perspectives . Different questions pose different answers to different questions .
 Historians and political scientists have studied the 50 years the crisis has been studied . These questions have attracted the attention of historians and scientists for 50 years .
 Peter Catterall: Khrushchev's aim was to resolve the problem of West Berlin . Macmillan’s account makes clear concern in London and Washington, he says, that the aim was not to solve the problem .
 Many analysts and historians attached primary importance to the strategic nuclear balance . Subsequently, many analysts said the balance was important to the country's strategic nuclear arsenal .
 Raymond Garthoff observed that ‘there is a general consensus that the principal motivation was to redress the publicly revealed serious imbalance in the strategic nuclear balance’
 New sources of information about Khrushchev’s motives nevertheless generated discussion of various hypotheses . No other explanation satisfactorily accounts for the action’. ‘No other explanation satisfactory’
 Munton examines Allison and Zelikow’s revision of a seminal work of American political science Essence of Decision . Munton explores Allison and Zilikow's revision of the seminal work .
 Radchenko surveys Soviet/Russian historiography over the last two decades or more . Radchenko meanwhile surveys Soviet-Russian history over the past two decades .
 Radchenko scrutinises how emerging material has been used that in some cases show the fragility of evidence on which broader interpretations and knowledge claims are based . Radchenko: How emerging material is used that some of the evidence is fragile .
 The question of why Khrushchev withdrew the missiles has attracted the attention of those applying psychological theories, including Blight’s Shattered Crystal Ball .
 Key revelations emerged in the West and then corroborated in the East . Key revelations came from the East and were corroborated by the West .
 In 1989, Theodore Sorensen admitted that he had deliberately falsified Robert Kennedy’s memoir when it was published posthumously . Robert Kennedy's memoir was published in 1989 .
 ExComm members lied to preserve myth Kennedy stood firm and refused to trade the Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Turkey . Other former members of ExComm revealed that they had lied to protect the myth .
 Robert Kennedy’s willingness to remove them was made clear by his brother Robert in a meeting with the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoli Dobrynin, on 27 October . Robert Kennedy met with the Russian Ambassador to discuss removing them .
 Declassification of Soviet records, including Dobrynin’s report of this meeting back to Moscow, corroborates the oral testimony . Declassified records of the meeting are corroborated by Dobrynins' report back to Russia .
 Whether the ‘deal’ on the Turkish Jupiters made much difference to Khrushchev’s behaviour remains open to question . Yet, Kennedy's willingness to take action behind the backs of his North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies in a way that risked the cohesion of the
 U.S. military opposed to peaceful resolution of crisis, McNamara said . McNamara believed Kennedy would have gone the extra mile for peace . Brugioni’s commentary makes clear the opposition of the military to a peaceful resolution .
 We All Lost the Cold War and One Hell of a Gamble have demonstrated how, as the crisis continued, both leaders manoeuvred to draw back, if need be at political cost .
 This may seem a flawed counterfactual as the evidence overwhelmingly shows he was determined to retreat . This may be a flawed counterfactual as it may seem to be a wrong counterfactorial .
 If there were circumstances in which Kennedy would have accepted the missiles, Khrushchev’s original gamble might seem less hazardous and less of a gamble . If circumstances were different, the risk might be less hazardous .
 Historical revelations have provided much new evidence with which to address this question . Historians have provided new evidence to address the question .
 Both leaders followed a trajectory that began with belligerence and ended with accommodation . Both leaders follow a trajectory of belligerence that began to end with accommodation.
 Kennedy’s initial belligerent reaction to the discovery of the missiles could have augured military confrontation . Khrushchev's initial reaction to blockade could have led to military confrontation, author says .
 The closer political leaders went to the brink, the more determined they were to draw back from confrontation . However, the closer they went, the less determined political leaders drew back .
 Paul Nitze argued that the 1961 Berlin crisis was more dangerous than the missile crisis . Nitze: The 1961 crisis saw American tanks pointing their loaded cannons at Soviet tanks across Checkpoint Charlie .
 Nitze argues that American regional superiority in the Caribbean mixed with strategic nuclear superiority meant the risk of nuclear war over Cuba was nugatory . Nitze also argues that U.S. regional superiority meant risk of war was not likely .
 At root, this is an argument that U.S. deterrence was robust and successful . At the root of this is this is a case of American deterrence being successful .
 The belief that the crisis demonstrated that nuclear threats and risks could be managed, managed and manipulated informed much of the discourse of strategic studies as it took shape in the 1960s .
 Missile crisis helped frame debates about deterrence and the belief in its stability . The missile crisis thus helped frame debate about deterrence .
 Much of what has been learned in the last few decades has reinforced the view that we were far nearer the brink than was realised . Yet much of what we have learned from the past few decades reinforces the view we were near the brink .
 The risk of inadvertent nuclear war is now apparent, the risk of accidental war is apparent . Decision-makers were increasingly keen to avoid conflict but the risk is growing .
 Campbell Craig's analysis of Scott Sagan's Limits of Safety emphasises specific incidents in American nuclear command and control that require re-evaluation of the risk of accidental nuclear war .
 Craig Craig explores implications of Sagan’s work for a broader assessment of nuclear risk in the Cold War and beyond . Craig explores the implications of the work in his book, "Sagan's Nuclear Risk"
 There was fear in Washington that the Soviets might mistake the plane for pre-strike reconnaissance and launch their InterContinental Ballistic Missiles pre-emptively .
 What is unclear is if the Pentagon took this risk seriously, whether consideration was given in Washington to pre-empting pre-emption .
 Limits of Safety identifies more tangible risks, including how, as Soviet fighters scrambled to shoot the U-2 down, American fighters were sent in support .
 The prevailing defense condition alert state meant that the United States planes were armed with air-to-air missiles with low-yield nuclear weapons . Unbeknownst to political leaders in Washington, the U.S. planes were equipped with air to air missiles .
 Sagan sketches five scenarios in which nuclear weapons could have been fired . Sagan: "I don't think it's a good idea to have a nuclear bomb in the world"
 Sagan’s work focuses on American nuclear command and control . Much new information has emerged about Soviet forces in the past .
 The suggestion that the Soviets deployed a hundred or so tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba has become an accepted part of the story . The suggestion generated fierce debates in the 1990s, including whether Soviet commanders had pre-delegated authority to fire battlefield nuclear missiles .
 Michael Dobbs has shown that Soviet ground-launched cruise missiles were moved to their firing positions within range of the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay .
 The more fundamental issue concerns an essential counterfactual . However, the most fundamental issue is that the world needs to know what happened .
 The readiness state of nuclear weapons did not simply determine the risk of their use, it did not just determine their use . It did not determine the state of the readiness state, but the risk it posed .
 59 Thor IRBMs in Britain were armed with their warheads and at less than 15 minutes readiness during the crisis . Out of 60, 59 IRBm in Britain, 59 were armed and ready to be ready at 15 minutes .
 With the range to destroy Moscow in 25 minutes or less, no one has suggested they presented a serious risk of nuclear war . Moscow has a range of weapons capable of destroying Moscow in less than 25 minutes .
 The President’s trajectory was taking him further away from military action is convincing . Answers are inevitably speculative, but the belief is that the President's trajectory is moving further away .
 If there was a risk that Kennedy would have invaded Cuba, then the risk of nuclear war was greater than understood . Nevertheless, if there was ever a risk, the risk was great, he says .
 Sergey Radchenko notes the complaint of Mark Kramer about predispositions to show the crisis was more dangerous than it actually was . Radchenko: "The crisis was not a crisis that actually was"
 New revelations have excited interest in the danger of inadvertent nuclear war . New revelations about the operational level of the nuclear weapons program .
 Assessing risk of nuclear war raises complex issues, not least because Soviet nuclear command and control procedures remain opaque . Assessing the risk of a nuclear war in the Soviet Union raises complex questions, says historian .
 Among the most dramatic of events was the deployment of Soviet diesel-electric submarines, each carrying a nuclear torpedo . The submarines were each carrying nuclear torpedoes .
 The 40th anniversary of the crisis witnessed testimony from Soviet submariners who suggested that on at least one boat the captain came close to launching his nuclear torpedo .
 The target would likely have been one of the U.S. warships dropping hand grenades and practice depth charges to get the submarine to surface .
 These were ad hoc procedures that American decision-makers believed would be understood and accepted by the Soviets . The U.S. believed these procedures would be accepted and understood by Soviets .
 dropping explosives on the submarines was discussed in ExComm on 24 October and by the President himself . What is striking is that dropping explosives was discussed on ExComm and by President himself, he said .
 McNamara insisted on thinking of the blockade as a means of communicating with the Soviets . Both were greatly exercised about the need for political control over military forces .
 The events set in motion a train of events that could have led to inadvertent nuclear war . Yet they set the motion of events which could have resulted in accidental war .
 The incident may have generated the greatest risk of nuclear use in October 1962 . It may also provide the best example of the huge gap between political leaders and those who operated nuclear weapons . Political leaders and nuclear weapons operators are at odds with each other .
 In 1987, account appeared that suggested that a coded warning from Oleg Penkovsky, the Western spy in Soviet Military Intelligence, was designed to trigger an American attack . Central Intelligence Agency officers suppressed the warning, according to account .
 Political authorities thus knew nothing of the incident, so it was believed . Political authorities therefore knew nothing . It was believed that political authorities knew nothing about it .
 In 1992, Jerrold Schecter and Peter Deriabin provided a detailed account based on access to CIA files . The President was briefed on Penkovsky’s arrest, according to the report .
 Power’s message was designed to reassure his bomber crews and make clear that if in doubt they should contact headquarters . It is now clear that Power's message was intended to reassure crews .
 How far this intent to reassure was comprehended by the Soviets is not yet known . How far it was understood by the Soviet Union is unknown .
 Soviet officials began sharing their recollections and reflections with Western counterparts in the 1980s . Some questioned their motives when they shared their memories with Western academics .
 Former Deputy Director at the CIA, Ray Cline, inveighed against ‘Mikhail Gorbachev’s team of official intellectuals engaged in a program of historical revisionism . The interest in question was promotion of global nuclear disarmament .
 Historians are long familiar with the argument that debates about the past reflect debate about the present . Historians say debates about past reflect debates about present .
 The lessons of the crisis for American and NATO strategies in the 1980s involved debates in which both sides drew from their reading of history . Both sides of the debate were drawn from their readings of history.
 The hawks in 1962 (such as Paul Nitze and Douglas Dillon) were hawks just as those who were doves in the 1980s just as they were in 1962 . Robert McNamara and Dean Rusk are hawks today .
 McGeorge Bundy was firmly with the doves in the early 1980s in seeking alternatives to the Reaganite agenda . Bundy's ornithological identity in 1962 alternated with the ornithologist in 1962 . Bundy was a doves who sought alternatives to Reagan's agenda in the 1980s
 Eliot Cohen argues whether the crisis itself can and should serve as an appropriate model for those studying policy or for those conducting it . Cohen argues, We should ask whether the . crisis itself should . serve as a model either for . those studying or for conducting it, Cohen argues .
 We must, in short, ask ourselves whether the uniqueness of the crisis does not destroy its value as an archetype, or worse, make it a profoundly misleading subject for reflection . Thankfully, we have had insufficient number of nuclear crises to satisfy the yearning of social scientists for generalisability
 The Cuban missile crisis is widely seen as the nearest the world came to nuclear war . Cuban missiles crisis was the closest point of nuclear war in the world .
 Decision-makers sought to use historical analogies and draw lessons from the past, from Munich to Pearl Harbor to August 1914 . Analogies and lessons reflected very differing interpretations .
 Before the crisis Kennedy and several senior colleagues had Barbara Tuchman's Guns of August, which argued that war came inadvertently in 1914 . Robert Kennedy claimed that the book influenced his brother’s handling of the crisis .
 Harold Macmillan had also read Tuchman’s book (and had fought in the Great War) and was an assiduous reader of history books .
 Peter Catterall indeed shows that he managed to read a history of the 1688 ‘Glorious’ revolution during the missile crisis during the crisis .
 It is axiomatic that decision-makers wish to avoid the annihilation of their country. However deterrence is defined, it is defined as 'deterrence is defined'
 The idea of initiating nuclear war in a conventional conflict remained at the heart of NATO strategy during the Cold War . Yet the idea of starting a nuclear war was still a key NATO strategy .
 Castro’s exhortations to Khrushchev on 27 October to initiate strategic nuclear attacks on the U.S. might reflect a parallel logic to NATO's strategy of Massive Retaliation, which envisaged United States nuclear bombardment of the Soviet Union in response to a Warsaw Pact conventional
 Castro’s apparent willingness to provoke nuclear annihilation challenges the idea that nuclear weapons will always deter political leaders . Castro's apparent willingness for nuclear weapons challenges the notion that such weapons won’t deter leaders .
 How far the words of political leaders denote their intentions or how they would act in particular conditions of nuclear war remains imponderable . How far political leaders indicate their intentions remains impondable .
 Kennedy’s televised speech on 22 October threatened ‘a full retaliatory response’ for the use of any Soviet missiles in Cuba against any targets in the Western hemisphere . Yet, it is worth noting that Kennedy's televised . speech .
 Discussion of Castro also points to how far the study of the crisis has broadened from its Soviet–American focus . Discussion of the Castro crisis also points out how far it's been expanded from Soviet-American focus.
 Previously neglected issues have been the subject of valuable illumination, including Cuba, the U.N. and Europe . Cuba,37 the United Nations38 and Europe are among the topics discussed .
 Peter Catterall, in his article highlights the British role in the U.N. He also highlights the UK's role as a member of the United Nations . The article was published in the UK House of Representatives on Monday .
 Kennedy asked for the Prime Minister’s views on whether with the blockade in place, and Soviet work on the missiles continuing, an invasion should take place . It remained essentially at the margins, though in his telephone conversation with Macmillan .
 Catterall illuminates what the ‘special relationship’ meant, and how America behaved towards its closest ally, as well as Macmillan’s account of them .
 On some issues there was some influence, though this seemed to owe much to the personal relationship between Kennedy and David Ormsby-Gore, the British Ambassador .
 America’s allies played limited roles during the crisis . The vote of the Organisation of American States on 23 October to endorse the blockade provided a valuable legal cover for U.S. action .
 The stage at which NATO was called upon to take significant action had not been reached, writes Peter Bergen . America's NATO allies were informed but not consulted over the blockade, he says .
 The missile crisis provides much ammunition for those who question whether ‘the truth’ can be found .
 Why he withdrew them still exercises historians, strategists and psychologists, though we have a much clearer understanding of how decisions were made in Moscow, and by whom . The decision to withdraw them from Moscow is still a mystery .
 Under what circumstances Kennedy would have used force against Cuba remains central to judgements about the risk of nuclear war . Kennedy's decision to use force in Cuba against Cuba is central to assessing the risk .
 How close we came to nuclear war is inextricably linked to counterfactual questions about what might have happened . The U.S. came close to a nuclear war in the 1980s and '90s .
 Some of these require better understanding of nuclear command and control . Area of deepest secrecy in the Cold War whose details remain closely guarded . Some of the details of the nuclear weapons are still being kept secret .
 There are many ‘known unknowns’ about the missile crisis including what consideration was given by the respective military leaderships to nuclear war .
 The mysteries concern the minds of those who could have faced decisions to use weapons of mass destruction . The mystery of the mind of those involved in the decision to use WMD is still a mystery .
 Historical evidence of, and cognitive insights into, their moment of thermonuclear truth is inevitably limited . Historical . evidence of . the moment of . thermonomic truth is inevitable, but limited .
 Any evidence concerns how they anticipated what they would do. Moreover, any evidence relates to how they planned to do it .
 Whether Khrushchev or Kennedy would have been taking the decision on nuclear use should not be taken for granted . Furthermore, the decision should not have been made for granted.
 One of the debates triggered by the 1992 revelations concerned delegation of nuclear release authority, and specifically whether General Pliyev had authority to use tactical nuclear missiles . The debates were triggered by 1992 revelations .
 British Bomber Command received clear authorisation in September 1962 to initiate nuclear attacks on the Soviet Union in specified circumstances .
 The obvious circumstances which applied to all three nuclear weapons states were decapitation, decapitation . The obvious circumstance was decapitation by decapitation.
 The question is whether the respective militaries had the ability to use strategic nuclear weapons whether or not they had authority . So too is the question of whether they had the right to use nuclear weapons .
 The Jupiters and Thors were among many nuclear weapons in NATO Europe that were not equipped with electronic locks . The weapons relied on procedural safeguards as well as the military discipline and judgement of the troops concerned .
 Much of the literature on the crisis takes the use of nuclear weapons as synonymous with cataclysmic nuclear war . This assumes escalation was automatic and escalation was not automatic .
 Whether there would have been a similar reluctance to foreswear or limit retaliation in response to the use of nuclear weapons is certainly conceivable, especially where the use was judged to be tactical, limited or accidental .
 Assessments of the risk of nuclear war require a dark empathy on the part of the historian . The risk of a nuclear war requires dark empathy, historian writes .
 Organised processes and military imperatives that could have hastened escalation against the wishes of the political leaders. They also require attention to the organisational processes and . Military imperatives . They also need to be looked at closely .
 Most students of the missile crisis would agree with Eliot Cohen’s antipathy to nuclear crisis management . Cohen: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to manage the next nuclear crisis"
 Robert McNamara concluded that the decisive factor in avoiding war in 1962 was luck . That would certainly include one of the more influential proponents of crisis management, McNamara, who devoted much energy to re-examining the crisis .
 The emphasis on contingency and unacknowledged risk has accelerated with more evidence, it says . The emphasis has been accelerated with the evidence of the risks, it adds .
 The risk of nuclear war was greater than thought by decision-makers at the time and by commentators subsequently . A better understanding of the role of misperception, miscalculation and mistakes, including the actions of subordinates, suggests that the risk of war was higher than thought .
 The study of the Cold War has rightly extended beyond Soviet–American relations . Study of Cold War should extend beyond Soviet-U.S. relations .
 The missile crisis is a crisis with the potential for nuclear weapons use at its epicentre . Yet the reason why the missile crisis remains such a focus of interest is because it is a nuclear weapons crisis .
 The more we learn about the risk of inadvertent nuclear war, the less we should see nuclear weapons as epiphenomenal in the Cold War . The risk of accidental nuclear war is greater now than ever before .
 Whatever the role of political ideology in the Cold War, we need to understand that nuclear deterrence was an independent variable and perhaps a social construct in its own right . The Cold War was a 'social construct' of nuclear deterrence, says David Frum .
 So long as we confront the problems created by nuclear weapons, we should strengthen our commitment to studying the Cuban missile crisis . We need to study the Cuban missiles crisis, says author .
 This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors . Funding for the study was not required by any funding agencies .
 Blinking and Winking, Spy-Planes and Secrets’, International Relations, this issue . This issue is the cover story of the World War II .
 Essence, the Puzzles and the Missile Crisis’, International Relations, this issue. This issue is the cover story of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Cohen’s antipathy to the idea of crisis management is surely vindicated by the last two decades of research, revelations and reflection . Cohen: ‘I’m not interested in crisis management. I’ve been here for 20 years. I think it’