 The decade of the 1960s witnessed profound change in the established world order . A Decade of Revolution by Kenneth Finlayson is published by 14 Veritas .
 The post-WW II global configuration was essentially bi-polar, with the U.S.-led West aligned against the Sovietdominated East . The U.N. led by the United States and the Soviet dominated the East .
 This article will look briefly at each of these regions and the general U.S. foreign policy strategy for each . It will also look at the general United States foreign policy for each region .
 The emphasis will be on Latin America, in particular Bolivia, and events such as Cuban-instigated insurgencies, affecting U.S. engagement Mao Zedong .
 Mao’s Peoples Republic of sponsored revolutionary fervor was a major factor in China breaking with the Soviet Union in the 1960s . China broke with the United States in 1960s, resulting determining the U.S. strategy in two Communist spheres of influence .
 The Soviet Union instigated such provocations as the erection of the Berlin Wall . It was the Soviet Union that faced off against the West in the Cold War .
 The Berlin Wall divided East and West Berlin for 28 years . As the Soviets achieved nuclear parity with the United States, the Berlin Wall became a symbol of unity in Berlin .
 Construction by the German Democratic Republic began on 13 August 1961 . Construction was completed in 1961 .
 The Wall in the 1960s began to appear in the monolithic collapsed on 9 November 1989 to pave the Soviet bloc . Alexander Dubček presented a less way for German reunification .
 The ‘Prague Spring’ was ruthlessly suppressed by the Soviet Army in 1968 . The “Prague spring’s” was the result of the ‘Spring’ in Prague, Czech Republic .
 Bloc began to show signs of Nikita S. Khrushchev, June 1960, disintegration . Bloc showed signs of disintegration in June 1960 .
 Yugoslavia, Albania, and Czechoslovakia are defined as those all rebelled against Russian conflicts fought by indigenous military groups against imperial power rule . Yugoslavia, Albania, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia were defined as . those who rebelled . against Russian . conflicts fought
 The purpose is the violent pursuit of maintaining control over its political change . The purpose of the purpose is to create a new nation state grounded in Eastern European satellites, cultural community .
 Wars of worked diligently to foster National Liberation were the predominant form of conflict in the 1960s . Overwhelmingly based on guerrilla warfare, guerrilla warfare was the dominant form of war in the 60s .
 The Muslim Chechens are fighting 1950s. Chechnya is fighting against Communism in the 1950s . An example of the spread of Communism abroad would be Chechenya .
 Colombia Congo Burma Burma Western Europe was divided Bolivia Afghanistan over the best approach to Ethiopia meet the Soviet threat . On Venezuela the question of how to deal Chile Mozambique with the divided Germany .
 The Marshall Plan poured billions of United States dollars into Peru . Europe and Japan to put the war-torn nations back on their feet .
 Western Europe was popularly elected democracies or constitutional monarchies . NATO forces and reinforced by the nuclear arsenals of the West, the governments of Western Europe were popularized by the West . The West was reinforced by NATO forces .
 The fundamental issue facing the Europeans was their political and economic alignment in response to the Soviet threat, says historian Peter Bergen . Bergen: Europe's economic and political alignment was key to its success .
 The nations of Europe did align in 1949 under the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . France withdrew from the alliance in 1966, but the cohesion was disrupted when France withdrew .
 The nations of Western Europe remained committed to opposing the Soviets . In spite of this, the nations remained stable and committed .
 There was a genuine desire to advance European economic progress and a reluctance to see the spread of nuclear weapons . There was also a desire to avoid nuclear weapons spreading to nuclear weapons.
 Outside of Europe, notably Asia and Africa, things are far from stable in the Middle East .
 In the former French colonial holdings in Indochina, Khrushchev and U.S. President John F Kennedy met in Vienna, Austria, on 4 June 1961 . In 1961, the United States and the Soviet Union were involved in the Vietnam War .
 After the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Khrushchev tried to waging a war against the U.S.-backed South Vietnamese . Communist North Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh was after the Bay . The North Vietnam government was under the influence of the CIA .
 Communist insurgencies threatened weapons and modern armaments to Cuba. neighboring Laos and Cambodia . The latter eventually fell to Pol Pot’s Khmer Rouge.
 The U.S. engaged in a steadily escalating conflict in Vietnam . The United States was 16 years old when the war began in Vietnam in 1968 .
 The came to dominate American foreign policy and the U.S. transition to independence was often rocky . Many of military and became the focal point of domestic unrest in the new nations fell under dictators or military juntas .
 This was in sharp contrast to America’s role in Asia in the 1960s, the interest contrast to that of Latin America . America was decisively engaged in Asia .
 The decade of the 1960s brought more political imbalance in American policy towards Latin America change to the African continent . Two decades in Africa was minimal. of United States preoccupation with Europe and Asia created an .
 In one year, the number of new sovereigns endemic to the highest levels of government jumped to 27 . The number of countries endemic to highest level of government increased to 27 in one year .
 By 1967, the President of the People’s Republic of Vietnam had received over $6 billion in economic aid from the United States until his Agency for International Development and $1.7 death in 1969 . The Vietnamese government received $6.7 billion from the U.S.
 He waged billion via the Military Assistance Program had war against the Japanese, been distributed in Latin America, had been distributed . He waged $1.2 billion .
 Kennedy’s newly formed Peace Corps dispatched some 16,000 workers to Latin America between 1962 and 1967 . The Peace Corps conducted civic action projects, improve agricultural practices, and educate the local populations .
 Latin America was not a homogenous region; it contained regional cooperation . Latin America is not homogenous, but it contains regional cooperation, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Organization of American widely diverse countries and cultures, with diverse cultures, was one of the oldest of its kind of development . It was founded in 1948 in the United States .
 Castro’s successful Communist instability affected many countries in the region . In 1962, the nations of Latin America were America . U.S. foreign policy became predicated predominately multi-party democracies .
 By 1967, military on preventing the further spread of Cuban-sponsored juntas were in control in Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Bolivia, revolution . By 1967 military had been in control of the Cuban-backed junta in Brazil .
 U.S. foreign policy in the 1960s towards Latin America reflected a mistaken idea that there existed a hemispheric of the decade as the promoter of democracy was lost Pan-American movement . The United States. enjoyed at the beginning reflected a . mistaken idea there . There existed a
 The United States tried in subsequent years to develop a coherent, ”one-size fits all” policy, each of regimes. The U.S. has tried in recent years by its support of non-democratic regimes.
 A Soviet missile shoots down an American Lockheed U2 spy plane; pilot Francis Gary Powers is captured . The presence of Fidel Castro’s Communist Party in Cuba .
 United States Economic Assistance billions of 2005 $US $US 5 4 3 2 1 0 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 USAID USAD USAD Other Econ. Econometrics .
 President John F Kennedy signs the Charter of Punta del Este in August 1961 . The Charter was signed by the President of Italy in 1961 . President Kennedy signed the charter in 1961.
 Latin America is the second largest recipient of U.S. aid after Asia . Latin America countering the spread of Communist Cuban influence in the region .
 Cuba encouraged many of the revolutionaries in Bolivia . Land reform in Bolivia did work to the extent that region to foment unrest . The land reform movement in Bolivia led to unrest .
 The Indians were given title to their lands popular participation in government . Land reform in the after nominal payments were made to the landowners break-up of the old feudal estates called the latifundias .
 Over 19,536,850 acres, (nearly the destruction of the ruling oligarchies that maintained 31,000 square miles,) were in the hands of the Indian them; and the main objective, economic development. population by 1967 .
 The Alliance for Progress was structured to address “the most critical area in the world” these objectives and provide for security in the region . Formalized in August 1961, by the Charter of Punta del Este, the 20 signatory nations mapped out the vision .
 The Alliance was founded as the response to the Cuban threat to incite revolution . The Alliance is based on the threat of an uprising in Cuba .
 As the decade wore on, the Alliance for Progress began to lose effectiveness . But, as the decade as a result, it has been losing effectiveness .
 AFP gradually became more about social reform than economic progress . AFP was founded in 1950s . AFP became the country's first state-run state of independent republic . AFP is now the most successful organisation in the world .
 It foundered on the resistance of the landed elites to cultural change and the nationalistic sentiments of the different countries, says historian .
 President John F Kennedy greets the first Peace Corps in Washington, DC, 28 August 1961 . Bolivia received $262 million in economic and military aid from the Peace Corps by 1967 .
 AFP-sponsored programs were a deterrent to Cuban-sponsored revolution . Between 1962 and reform, 16,000 volunteers were sent to Latin America . The Peace Corps was his initiative .
 Bolivia led by Ernesto “Che” Guevara attempted to foment a Communist revolution . Cuba Dominican Republic Guatemala Venezuela Venezuela Venezuela coup . Colombia Failed Coup Assassination Failed Assassination failed Assassination .
 Che was unable to gain support from the local population and failed in his attempt to start a popular revolution in Bolivia . Che was not able to gain the support of the local people .
 Attempts at land reform and more popular participation in government elsewhere in Latin America failed . By and large, however, attempts to land reform elsewhere in the region failed .
 By the end of the 1960s, United States economic influence had waned and Argentina military juntas were the order of the day . U.S. economic influence was waned .
 In the 1960s, Latin America was divided along East-West lines, to one of regional spheres subject to a series of Foco wars and other insurgencies . The world evolved from a strictly bipolar one to a bipolar one . Latin America is now one of the world's regional spheres
 The decade was one of military, ideological, social revolution and virtually no nation went plagued the region unscathed . Map depicts instability that and social revolution .
 For the United States, an increasing military involvement in Vietnam and the need for constant engagement in Europe to shore up the front lines of the Cold War were the primary concerns .
 United States influence in Latin America waned as the decade drew to a close . After a promising beginning, U.S. influence in the region waned in 2008 .
 Kenneth Finlayson is the USASOC Deputy Command song of Cuban-sponsored revolution . The hemisphere proved particularly susceptible to the siren siren .
 Army special operations during the failure of Che’s effort is one of the few American Korean War, special operations aviation, and World War II counterinsurgency success stories in Latin America .
 The large Indian population of Bolivia did benefit from the reforms by acquiring arable land from the large latifundias . The large Indians of Bolivia benefited from the land reform . The reforms were implemented by the government of Bolivia .
 Herman F Achminow, “Crisis in Mao's Realm and Moscow’s China 14” Wright, Latin America in the Era of the Cuban Revolution, 72. Wright, ‘Latin America in Latin America’ in the era of Cuban Revolution .
 Foreign Affairs, 21 Frei, “The Alliance That Lost Its Way,” 438. A Broad-Brush Appraisal, is published by Foreign Affairs .
 Cuban Vice-President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez is quoted as saying “Cuba has the duty of carrying out, and will always carry Johnson’s Johnson .