 Debates about the Cold War continue to flourish as more original data become available for research . The Jupiter Affair, 1959-1963, is known as the "Jupiter Affair"
 First, the idea of deploying U.S. strategic missiles in other NATO countries was abandoned . The idea was abandoned by the United States in 2010 .
 The Crisis adversely affected the relationship of both the U.S. and the Soviet Union with Turkey and Cuba in regard to future commitments to the security of their respective allies . The crisis adversely affected both the United States and the . Soviet Union's relationship with Turkey, Cuba and Cuba .
 Historians recently shifted from image of President John F Kennedy who would not bargain with the Soviets, even when confronted with nuclear war, to image of a Kennedy who was courageous .
 The 'bargain' was to remove the Jupiter IRBMs from Turkey in return for the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . The deal was made with the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 Both promises had been verbal, conducted by secret diplomacy through the United States Attorney General Robert Kennedy and the Soviet Ambassador to Washington DC, Anatolii Fyodorovich Dobrynin . Since both promises were verbal, they remained the subject of speculation .
 The mere suggestion of a bargain was vehemently denied by both the U.S. and Turkish authorities alike . Both the United States and Turkey have denied the suggestion .
 A rumor began to circulate in Turkey during the mid-1960s of a trade off (presumably instigated by the Soviet Embassy in Ankara) The leftists believed it wholeheartedly and the rightist establishment continued to deny it but were however embarrassed .
 Another implication of the Crisis was that it effected a polarization in Turkish domestic politics, albeit as one factor among many . The Crisis was one factor in many of Turkey's political polarizing tendencies .
 The final, but not the least important implication of the Crisis is to do with the nature of alliances in regard to why and how alliance cohesion may break down . The Crisis is the result of the crisis in the United States .
 This is also a study of how perceptions of threat become more real than life itself . This is a case of how perception of threat becomes more real and more real .
 Turkey fears of losing U.S. economic aid in the event of a rapprochement between the superpowers . In this case, the fear was the Soviet threat to Turkey, the other one was the fear of losing economic aid .
 The Turkish government's decision to deploy IRBMs in 1959 has been subject to much political controversy yet to little academic debate within the country from the viewpoints of strategy, Turkish-US relations and the nature of decision-making at the time .
 Turkish foreign and defense policies would adhere to the status quo despite domestic changes . This indicated that Turkish foreign policy would remain the same despite changes in the country's foreign policy .
 Whenever reference to the Jupiters in the press, the missiles were described as rockets or guided missiles . Usually the Çigli base was alluded to as the rocket base .
 The word 'nuclear' was rarely mentioned, thereby removing the stigma attached to it . 'Nuclear' was used to remove the stigma associated with it. 'Nano' was often used to refer to nuclear weapons .
 To possess strategic nuclear weapons also seemed prestigious, a factor which was perceived to increase a member country's intra-alliance status . Yet to possess nuclear weapons was also seen as prestigious .
 Fear of communism on the part of the Turkish government was coupled with a fear of encirclement in the light of the leftist coup in Iraq . Distaste and a fear . of communism . on the . part of . the government was led by the government of Turkey .
 Menderes government ignored friendly overtures from the Soviets and deliberately held back from establishing closer economic relations with them . The Mendes government consistently ignored friendly relations with the Soviet Union .
 The Prime Minister was convinced that economic ties with the northern neighbor would automatically result in a Soviet leverage to re-direct Turkish foreign policy .
 The American dimension of economic dependence and its implications was not questioned by Menderes in the 'all white' or 'all black' atmosphere of the Cold War, which did not leave any room for shades in distinguishing between risk and security .
 Turkey was trying to pursue an active foreign policy in the Middle East, as a regional actor which promoted Western policies . Turkey's foreign policy was described as 'active' and 'prominent' in the region .
 Turkey's membership in the ill-fated Baghdad Pact of 1955, opened the legal route for the U.S. and Turkey to conclude bilateral bilateral agreements . Turkey had by 1959, concluded bilateral bilateral STRATEGIC NUCLEAR MISSILES in Turkey .
 The United States was not an official member of the Pact, but made bilateral agreements of cooperation with Iran, Turkey and Pakistan . The U.S. made separate bilateral agreements with the countries involved in the Pact .
 The 'Agreement of Cooperation Between the United States of America and the Government of the Republic of Turkey' was signed in Ankara on 5 March 1959, and entered into force the same day .
 The two governments affirmed their right to cooperate for security and defense . The two countries also affirmed their rights to cooperate .
 Agreement was presented to Turkish Grand National Assembly on 26 October 1959 . One observer noted that the agreement was presented in 1959 .
 Minutes of meetings of the Turkish Grand National Assembly do not reveal that a parliamentary meeting was held on 26 October 1959 . Unless of course the cabinet was notified of the Agreement on introducing modern weapons at a closed session, the meeting was not held .
 The bilateral agreement pertaining specifically to missile deployment was not made public . It entered into force on 28 October 1959, after ratification in the US, attests to secrecy surrounding the Jupiter missiles .
 In fact, there were no domestic impediments politically or legally to such a decision-making process in Turkey, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: There were no political or legal impediments to the decision to take part in Turkey's decision .
 The opposition was not taken into account by the government, and there were no socialist or communist parties to question the decision . The opposition did not take into account, according to the government .
 The agreements had to be presented to and approved by the Parliament within six months, did not leave much room for the Grand National Assembly to question foreign and defense policies .
 This study will try to assess why Turkey had been enthusiastic about deploying Jupiters against all odds . The nature of Turkish-American relations in the process; the decision-making mechanism within Turkey's ultra conservative democracy of the time; and the decision making mechanism .
 There are at least two arguments as to why Turkey should not have agreed to deploy nuclear missiles . Turkey has agreed to use nuclear missiles in exchange for a nuclear deal with Russia .
 Weapons of mass destruction are not necessarily geared to defend a particular territory, and Turkey was not an exception . Turkey was the only country in the world to have a weapon of mass mass destruction .
 Countries which share a common border such as Turkey and the Soviet Union cannot afford sustained tensions . Second, countries with a shared border cannot afford to sustain sustained tensions.
 Both countries had to limit and contain risk factors to a minimum . Therefore, both countries had a limit and contained risk factors . The risk factors must be reduced to a minimal minimum .
 Turkey chose to increase its risk factor to increase NATO's risk factor . Turkey was on NATO's periphery and as such far from the main cluster of NATO countries, it chose not to increase risk factors .
 The possession of nuclear weapons was perceived as an excellent deterrent to others . For example, the possession of a nuclear weapon was seen as a deterrent to other nations .
 NATO strategy assumed that an attack on one NATO member would be an attack all . Alliance strategy assumes that a NATO member attack on all is a threat to one another .
 In Turkey the Soviet threat was perceived to be real,' says Erdogan . The administration was on alert against any person suspected of leftist tendencies .
 A third argument against the deployment of nuclear missiles was that they had deterrence value only as part of strategy of massive retaliation . The argument was that the missiles were only part of a strategy of deterrence only .
 This strategy became obsolete as the Soviets began to develop IRBMs and ICBMs . The U.S. policy-makers were becoming ambivalent about massive retaliation .
 The concept of flexible response was adopted as policy during the Kennedy era . It is evident that the seeds were sown during the Eisenhower administration .
 In case of use, coordination between the White House, the host country chiefexecutive , respective military personnel could have resulted in loss of vital time . In Turkey's case, such coordination would have meant loss of time .
 One was to pursue nuclear warfare, and the second was to negotiate and withdraw . One of the two options is to pursue and withdraw from nuclear warfare .
 Given the horrors of a nuclear war, the second option had to be preferable . The second option would have been preferable to the first .
 A third party outside the superpowers which was involved with nuclear systems, would be the subject of negotiation . The talks would be held in talks with a third party .
 Turkey signed a bilateral agreement with the United States to accept Jupiters in 1959 . U.S. offered nuclear missiles to NATO countries in 1957, and in 1959, Turkey signed an agreement to accept the missiles .
 Certain developments, both in the Middle East and Europe, might have deterred Turkey from taking such a bold stance, but did not . On the contrary, certain developments, such as increasingly strained relations between the Soviet Union and the Western Alliance over Berlin, did not deter Turkey from such a
 Developments in the Middle East involved perceptions of Soviet threat, intervention, and infiltration to the regional countries . The Middle East was dominated by Soviet influence in the region .
 During the 1956 Suez crisis, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had publicly threatened Britain and France with a nuclear attack if the latter did not withdraw from Suez . The crisis was the height of the Suez Crisis .
 The 1958 revolution in Iraq had brought a Baathist regime to power in that country . Increased Soviet influence was a risk factor in Iraq .
 In 1958, sectarian strife in Lebanon seemingly threatened a revolution . Again, in 1958, in Lebanon, the sectarian strife seemed to threaten a revolution.
 President Camile Shamun invited United States forces into his country in 1957 . The Lebanese president invited the U.S. forces in his country . The United States pledged assistance against communist aggression .
 The American unit from Europe used the încirlik base as a staging point for this operation in mid-July 1958 . The base was used to stage the operation in Turkey . The operation was the first of its kind .
 This action was to place a strain upon the sturdy US-Turkey relationship . However, it was not the first time Turkey had taken action .
 Turkish authorities were not able to be consulted on the action; they were notified after the fact of what had occurred . Due to the need for haste in preparation of the force deployment, the Turkish government was not consulted .
 While European and American journalists had access to Incirlik, the Turkish press corps were denied entry . The Turkish press was denied entry to the base .
 He defended Turkey's position in facilitating U.S. troop transfers to a small nation facing communist threat . He defended the position in . Turkey .
 American soldiers had landed in Lebanon on 15 July 1958, but it would be safe to assume that they were already in Incirlik when the US ambassador contacted the Turkish Foreign Minister .
 Foreign Minister Zorlu did not seem to perceive a fait accompli in the matter . The data contradicts his statements about timing of the U.S. data .
 He had been recruited to the party and made a member of the cabinet from the diplomatic corps . He was made a Minister of State and then Foreign Minister .
 Zorlu was related to the Prime Minister, Adnan Menderes' family through marriage . He was a member of the Mendes' family .
 He was aloof by nature and did not mix with the other party members, nor even with other cabinet members . He was not in touch with other members of the cabinet, nor with the others .
 He felt himself to be above intra party politics and domestic concerns . He felt he was above intra-party politics .
 His mission was to integrate Turkey with the West, and strengthen its position through economic and military aid so that Turkey would emerge as the leading regional power, he says .
 The method he adopted was for Turkey to act as a 'bulwark' against communism . Turkey was a 'staunch' NATO ally and 'a bulwark against communism' in the Cold War .
 The Prime Minister as Chief Executive, and his Foreign Minister agreed in principle and method alike . The PM and Foreign Minister were in agreement over the issue . It is not the first time the two countries have agreed to work together .
 NATO has agreed to accept IRBMs in Turkey as proof of dedication to NATO . Turkey is one of the most important countries in the world to join the NATO alliance .
 There did not appear to be consensus among the military about the issue, however, however .
 If there were any objections to the deployment of Jupiters, officers kept it to themselves .
 Admiral Sezai Orkunt, for example, was with the Turkish Defense Attache's Office in Washington DC at the time of the attack .
 In a personal interview, he said he and other colleagues had sent numerous reports to the CGS about the strategic and political liabilities of the missiles . He said that he and others had sent many reports about the missile's risks .
 Whatever opposition there was to missile deployment on the part of the military, it was to be expressed symbolically . The decision to deploy the missiles was made to be seen as a gesture of goodwill .
 Turkey had grown dependent on the United States military and economic aid . Turkey's governments went along with the idea of nuclear missile deployment, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This was also another way of showing its gratitude to and solidarity with the United States . Deterioration and the threat of communist subversion were also foremost in the decision-makers' minds .
 Counter-arguments appear to have been deliberately withheld from the two foreign policy-makers of the time, Adnan Menderes and Fatin Riistii Zorlu . Counter arguments appear to be deliberately withheld in the book .
 In the ultra-conservative democracy of Turkey of the 1950s, political will on foreign policy matters was neither shared nor challenged . Political will was not challenged in Turkey of that era, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 At NATO Heads of Government meeting in December 1957, IRBMs were introduced to Italy and Turkey . The Soviet leaders prevented a general disarmament agreement .
 In the Soviet view, all European nations except the USSR should renounce nuclear weapons and missiles and rely on arms of the pre-atomic age . The Soviet view is that all European countries except the Soviet Union must renounce their nuclear weapons .
 NATO stockpiled nuclear warheads to be made available to the Alliance as and when needed . NATO had to stockpile nuclear warheads in order to keep NATO safe .
 The United States was prompted to take action because the Soviets had developed a long-range missile initiated by the Sputnik experiment in October 1957 . The U.S. was prompted by the development of a long range missile .
 The myth of a 'missile gap' between the U.S. and the Soviets soon became prevalent in the American media . The myth became a myth of the gap between the two countries .
 The myth had to be propagated perhaps in order to justify military/defense spending . The more altruistic policy was to control nuclear proliferation in Europe within the bounds of NATO .
 General Lauris N Norstad, the Supreme Allied Commander Europe, was the authority to have decided on Turkey and Italy for NATO IRBMs .
 Plans for massive deployment of U.S. air and ground forces and 'special weapons' in Turkey would be a difficult proposition for the Turks to accept if put unilaterally . In a 'Top Secret' memorandum from the United States Embassy in Ankara to the US Secretary of State on 17 April
 In any event, American lobbying with the Turks to accept 'special weapons' in the context of modernizing the Turkish military probably sufficed .
 Modernizing Turkey's military with nuclear missiles was to become Turkey's Achilles heel . Modernizing its military with nukes is to become its Achilles heel, says Turkish president .
 General Norstad's decision on nuclear deployment in NATO countries was made in light of President Eisenhower's concern about conducting the US military aid program overseas by extending protection under the nuclear umbrella .
 By September 1958, the United States State Department approved that the Military Facilities Agreement of 23 June 1954 with Turkey be amended to include USAF's development and expansion of the Çigli Airfield near ízmir . SACEUR had designated the USAF as the primary user of that
 The objective was to bring the base up to USAF standards for maneuver and rotational training operations . The base was brought in by the Air Force to meet military standards .
 In April 1959, the United States Department of State was ready to conclude bilateral agreements under the Atomic Energy Act in implementation of the NATO Atomic Stockpile concept . The United States and Turkey were set to sign bilateral agreements in April 1959 .
 Greece remained ambivalent on the southeast flank, but discussions with Turkey continued . Greece is still ambivalent about the situation in the region .
 Turkey failed to meet its financial commitments for cost sharing . Infrastructure projects were stalled in 1959 because of Turkey's failure to meet cost sharing commitments . Turkey's infrastructure projects were completed in 1959 .
 Turkey was unable to appropriate funds in its defense budget to meet expenses . Turkey had been unable to meet its own defense budget . Turkey's defense budget has been frozen at $1.5 billion .
 Reportedly, Turkey's 1959 Ministry of Defense budget for infrastructure required TL 104. million . However, it had appropriated only TL 23 million (US $2,5 million) out of counterpart funds . The 1959 budget had been allocated only $23 million, according to reports .
 U.S. officials recommended to the Secretary of State that Washington should maintain reservations until it received a satisfactory memorandum from Turkey on program deficiencies . Turkey's financial and budgetary difficulties are among the reasons for the reservations .
 It also advised that it should also re-examine its aid program 'to determine what financial measures (such) release of additional counterpart funds earmarked for use in completing host country responsibilities on high priority projects'
 Bad weather and harvests eradicated benefits to be derived from massive purchases of tractors for agriculture, trade and budget deficits had increased . The opposition began to be sharply critical; and the government became more authoritarian and oppressive .
 The IRBM issue remained alive with the U.S. State Department and USAF trying to determine how much of the costs would be met by the MAP and how much by the Air Force . Meanwhile, the IRBM is still alive .
 State Department favored a remote spot while the AF preferred one near Izmir which would locate the missiles close to a major port . With respect to the location of IRBMs, the State Department preferred a remote location .
 President Eisenhower had begun to question the presence of bases in NATO flank areas . Eisenhower had been concerned about the NATO bases in the area .
 Undersecretary of State, Douglas Dillon, reminded the President that 'it would be a very serious matter to back down on our plans at the moment, apparently under threat'
 Eisenhower pondered whether the U.S. and the Western Alliance were not behaving in an unduly provocative fashion by deploying IRBMs close to the Soviet Union . Despite these arguments, Eisenhower questioned whether the United States and the West Alliance were behaving in a provocative fashion .
 The United States military-civilian bureaucracy, keen on upholding their credibility and commitments, followed the course of deployment . The U.S. is keen to uphold their credibility .
 By September 1959, the United States Embassy in Ankara was authorized to begin negotiations with the Turkish government for an agreement to deploy IRBMs in Turkey . The U.S. Embassy began negotiations in September 1959 .
 Turks had indicated to SACEUR their willingness to accept the offer . Turkey had previously indicated they would accept the proposal .
 The State Department recommended that a public announcement about exchange of notes between Turkey and the U.S. to deploy IRBMs on Turkish territory be made, but only as a low key announcement .
 In fact, Zorlu wanted to impress upon Khrushchev that Turkey could not be bullied . In fact the Turkish leader was trying to impress him on why he wanted to do so .
 Within a week the avid Turkish government accepted the draft agreement without alterations and proposed that the Americans conclude the deal immediately . But, he failed to make the impression on Khruschev, because, within a week, Turkey accepted the United States draft agreement .
 Eisenhower deferred the signing of the agreement until the end of October 1959 well after Nikita Khruschev's September visit to the United States . Secretary of State Herter and Norstad endorsed this approach, but Eisenhower himself .
 Zorlu's eagerness to sign the agreement seems overzealous . John Haskell from the Office of Defense Advisor (US Mission to the NATO and European Regional Organizations) was supportive of transferring nuclear delivery capability to the allies .
 Soviet Union asked Turkey to account for press information regarding deployment of nuclear missiles in Turkey . Meanwhile, already in May 1959, the Soviet Union had delivered a verbal note to Turkey asking the latter to account .
 The note included a veiled threat that the Soviet Union would take measures to defend its southern borders . It also claimed Turkey was becoming party to NATO's offensive aims by allowing 'rocket bases' to be built .
 Turkey justified its decision on the basis of its membership in a collective defense pact . Turkey justified the decision by saying it is a member of the NATO-Turkish alliance .
 On 25 June 1959, the Soviet Union made a declaration on the establishment of an atom free zone in the Balkans . The Soviet Union declared on the declaration in June 1959 .
 It is quite probable that this note played a role in Greek ambivalence, albeit coupled with other concerns such as domestic opposition . It is also possible that this may have been a factor in the Greek ambivalentity .
 By 15 October 1959, a leading Turkish daily made the announcement that an agreement had been concluded between the U.S. and Turkey on building rocket sites30 although the United States had not yet ratified the agreement . The agreement was announced in October 1959 .
 The announcement appears to have been made under orders from the government in order to accelerate United States ratification of the U.S. Constitution .
 Turkey agreed to the establishment of an IRBM base in October 1959 . The missiles had the capacity to deliver nuclear warheads, classified as Jupiter IRBMs .
 Eisenhower almost had a premonition in drawing parallelisms between deploying nuclear missiles so close to the Soviets in Turkey and a theoretical deployment of Soviet missiles in Mexico . It was during the Kennedy administration that these weapons were installed in Turkey late 1961, to fulfill the 1959 agreement .
 A report such as the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy of 11 February 1961 did not stop the deployment of Jupiters in Turkey .
 Since they will not be placed in hardened bases and not be mobile, their retaliatory value is questionable . Since they won't be deployed, they may not be able to retaliate against each other .
 Construction should not be permitted to begin on the five JUPITER sites in Turkey . Construction of the five sites should not begin in Turkey, the Turkish government says .
 According to a seemingly definitive interpretation, Kennedy did not wish to look weak after his encounter with Khruschev in Vienna . According to the story, Kennedy wanted to avoid looking weak after the encounter .
 JFK convinced that Khrushchev would not shrink from pulling the nuclear trigger if his back was to the wall . JFK was convinced that the meeting in Vienna in June 1961 had left JFK convinced . JFK: 'Khrrushchev wouldn't shrink into pulling the trigger'
 The entire U.S. strategy in the Cuban missile crisis was based on this analysis, which proved to be correct . The entire United States strategy in Cuba was based upon this analysis .
 Khruschev was given leeway to maneuver, he did not reply in kind to our show of force against Soviet ships and his Communist ally, Castro, Castro .
 Khruschev's 'leeway to maneuver' after agreeing to U.S. inspection of Russian ships during the 1962 quarantine of Cuba might have had something to do with the promise that the United States would not invade Cuba . President Kennedy told us through his brother that in exchange for removing
 "I give my word I will do this, but this promise should not be made public," he said . "I promise to do this. I give a word ... but this promises should not have been made public"
 The broad technical strategic argument alone rendered the Jupiters obsolete . "The broad technical arguments alone rendered it obsolete," says the author .
 Turkish policy-makers came to the realization of how close the country might have come to becoming a Soviet target . There was resistance to all American approaches for their removal until the Cuban missile crisis occurred .
 Before the Cuban crisis, the belief in government circles was that Turkey was a target without the Jupiters, anyway, anyway . Turkey is now a target in the U.S. for Cuba, anyway.
 During the Cold War, it was difficult at best, if not impossible, to differentiate between fact and fiction .
 The ban on teaching Marxism/Leninism, Communist Systems, Russian History and Thought deprived the first two generations of the Turkish Republic of any sense of a realistic assessment of this neighbor .
 Soviet Union, Russia, Communism, Turkic People's of the Soviet Union became the monopoly of radicals, not well-versed 'communists' and not 'Pan-Turkists' alike . But, subjects such as Russia, Russia and Communism, were not the only subjects
 These groups remained marginal in the 1940s and 1950s, only to reclaim their conceptual territory, even though they lacked factual information, to the detriment of the country . These groups were marginal in 1940s, 1950s and '60s .
 The polarization of the 'right' and the 'left' in the 1970s and their resort to terrorism resulted in the third coup d'état in Turkey by 1980 . The polarization in Turkey led to a third coup in Turkey in 1980 .
 The previous ruling parties have been responsible for ideological polarization by equating dissension with treason . Dissension and liberalism is equated with treason, the author says . The ruling parties are responsible for polarization, he says .
 Under those circumstances, foreign relations entrusted to any incumbent government was naturally considered above scrutiny, in the hope of keeping foreign relations above domestic party politics . Under the circumstances, a sacrosant issue such as foreign relations was naturally thought above scrutiny .
 Turkey made a conceptual distinction between its commitments to the United States bilaterally and to NATO multilaterally, in accordance with its basic foreign policy tenets . This literally meant integrating Turkish foreign policy with NATO, alias the US, for the U.S.
 Turkey by 1958, had grown increasingly dependent on U.S. aid . Turkey was trying to attain NATO force goals, modernizing its military and strengthening its economy .
 This was reflected by Zorlu's behavior in the use of incirlik-for-Lebanon case . This is reflected by the behavior of Zorllu, who has been criticized for his actions in Lebanon .
 Prior to Zorlu's ministry, there was real concern about the image of equal partnership . Prior to his ministry, however, there were real concerns about equal partnership, says Zorul .
 "An appearance of correctness in relations prevailed. Although this would not change the substance of plans either way, it would be a good thing to see," says the PM .
 By 1958, Turkey was in deep economic crisis and U.S. economic aid was limited to the amount believed necessary by the Americans to prevent a collapse . Turkey's economic crisis was in 1958 .
 Turkey's annual deficit in the balance of payments was approximately United States $350 million (Turkey agreed to an economic stabilization program only in 1959). Turkey agreed to a stabilization program in 1959 . US aid to Turkey is expected to be $100 million .
 Vatan said that Turkey should carry out radical internal reforms to make it possible for the U.S. to assist the country economically . Vatan warned that United States interest in Turkish welfare may disappear if Washington reaches a rapprochement with the Soviets .
 Cumhuriyet called for a sharp increase in aid programs following the collapse of the country's economy . Cumhurayet also called for an increase in funding for aid programs in Turkey .
 Turkey was credited with being the only possible NATO site for IRBMs directed against Russia . Turkey refused to profit from its strategic position by not bargaining with Russia . In the same article, the article stated that Turkey was the only place in NATO to target Russia .
 The U.S. is caught between its commitment to sovereignty and excessive dependence . The statement was obviously made for American consumption, but probably dictated by a government .
 Requests for increased military aid were justified on the basis of increased Turkish share in the collective defense burden . Requests to increase Turkish share of the defense burden were justified in the case .
 The foreign aid that Turkey received in 1958 amounted to United States $359 million of which $234 million was granted by the United States . Turkey received foreign aid in 1958 of which U.S. granted $234million to Turkey .
 The rest came from OEEC, IMF, Federal Republic of Germany and Britain . The rest of the world's $1.2bn budget was spent in the 1990s .
 Domestic credits were frozen, price increases as well as shortage of goods occurred with ensuing inflation, black market and queues . Yet, given the budget and trade deficits, domestic credit was frozen, said the minister .
 Zorlu tried to account for the economic problems by stating that Turkey had incurred medium term loans for investments . He said repayment dates for these loans came before the government managed to make investments operational and profitable .
 In this way, the United States would also become dependent on Turkey through its custody of nuclear warheads on Turkish soil .
 The United States spent US$100 million on each Jupiter squadron and developed support systems . Turkey, in all likelihood, would be guaranteed continued economic and military assistance from the United States .
 NATO had expended United States $200 million on all infrastructure works in Turkey (approximately) NATO had also spent $200million on infrastructure projects in Turkey .
 By the close of May 1959, there was still not an operational POL system or a fully operational airfield . US$90 million spent on airfields and United States $60 million on POL-Petroleum, Oil and Lubricantsfacilities).
 Turks would not welcome any suggestion to reallocate national funds to meet host country responsibilities . Turks would also welcome any proposal to meet hosting country responsibilities. Turkey is hosting a large number of international delegations to the United States .
 The matter was left to negotiation along with Turkey's defense budget of FY I960.42 . In spite of its economic problems and limited military capabilities, Turkey was perceived as an aggressive nation .
 Secretary John Foster Dulles told General Norstad that some people in the Department were opposed to IRBMs for Greece and Turkey . On 4 February 1959, 1959, Secretary Dulles said some people were opposed .
 Opposition to Turkey might have stemmed from the aggressive stance that the Menderes government displayed in the aftermath of the coup d'état in Iraq in 1958 .
 Menderes wanted Turkey to take military action and eliminate the leftist coup-makers in Iraq, only to be convinced by the Americans to refrain from such an act, he says . The Turkish president wanted to eliminate the leftists in Iraq .
 General Norstad had already announced that Turkey was going to get IRBMs the previous December, in addition to Secretary of Defense, Neil McElroy, who announced on 23 January 1959, that negotiations were underway with France, Greece and Turkey for IRBM deployment .
 Norstad: If people are worried about the Turks misusing IRBMs, we could drag out indefinitely arrangements under which we would have to keep U.S. personnel present . But, Norstad said, if people were worried about it, they could drag it out indefinitely . Nor
 The Turks were obviously not ready to move into any situation of full control over the IRBMs immediately . The Turks are not ready for full control of the IRBMMs .
 Soviet Union threatens to defend its southern border with Turkey . Soviet Union says it would take the necessary precautions to defend the border .
 The Turkish Foreign Ministry responded to the June proposal of the Soviet Union regarding an atom free zone in the Balkans by stating that Turkey was not forced by the United States to accept atomic 'weapons' Turkey said that since it was under threat it had the right to legitimate self-defense .
 In accordance with the decision of the NATO Heads of Government meeting in December 1957 and the recommendation of SACEUR, an exchange of notes took place in Ankara on , between the United States and Turkey providing for the deployment of IRBMs in Turkey .
 The 'Agreement of Cooperation Between the United States of America and the Government of the Republic of Turkey' signed on 5 March 1959 . The agreement was presented to the Committee on Foreign Affairs at the Turkish Grand National Assembly only by 6 February 1960, although international agreements were to be presented to
 The clause which stated that the U.S. and Turkey 'affirmed their determination to maintain their collective security and to resist aggression direct or indirect' (emphasis added) caused consternation among the opposition .
 He reminded the Assembly that when the Lebanese President Chamun sensed that he was losing to the opposition, he declared the matter as an infiltration attempt by international communism, and invited the United States military to intervene .
 It is not within the scope of this study to assess whether Chamun was being an opportunistic politician or whether the communist threat was real in Lebanon . The study was not able to assess if Chamun or if he was being opportunistic .
 Ecevit's questioning of the Agreement was valid, but given the growing authoritarianism of the Menderes government, it was valid . But, given the government's authoritarianism, it's not a good idea .
 The government had no time to spare on details, namely, the democraticallyinclined bickerings of opposition parliamentarians . However, the government did not spare time on details of the bickering of opposition MPs .
 Throughout 1960, there were tangible developments in Soviet-Turkish relations which were hardly a reflection of easing of East-West tensions . In 1960, tensions between the Soviet and Turkish governments were high .
 Menderes complained at a Dallas Council on World Affairs meeting that the inflated defense budget of Turkey in view of the Soviet threat was causing financial problems in development projects . In October 1959, Mendere complained at the Dallas Council of World Affairs .
 Its intended rapprochement with the Soviets was based on its frustration with the U.S. aid levels for development projects . The Soviets were frustrated with the United States' aid levels .
 The Menderes government plausibly wanted to play the trump card of rapprochement against the Americans for increased levels of aid . The Mendes government is seeking increased aid from the United States .
 By April 1960, declarations were made that the Soviet and Turkish premiers would be visiting each other's country . The Soviet-Turkish premiers visited each other in 1960 .
 The visits did not take place because of a military coup in Turkey in May 1960 . The visits took place on 27 May 1960, because of the coup in which there was a coup .
 Colonel Alparslan Tiirkeç of the National Unity Committee, who served as an Under Secretary of the Prime Minister's Officedisclosed recently in his memoirs that the Soviet Ambassador, Nikolai Rijov delivered a message from Khruschev .
 The Soviet Premier offered Turkey United States $500 million annually in foreign aid in return for Turkey's abrogating its NATO membership . The Soviet premier offered Turkey U.S. $500million annually in exchange for Turkey .
 The Soviets were ready to modernize the Turkish Armed Forces . The Soviet Union was ready to become a major force in the country . The Turkish military was modernized by the Soviets .
 Rijov expressed Soviet concern over U.S. bases in Turkey as well as tactical nuclear weapons and missiles capable of nuclear delivery . The Soviet Union expressed concern over United States bases .
 The issue must have disturbed the Soviets to the point where they came up with very advantageous offers to the new ruling elite, which did not concur . The latter had not yet been delivered, but the Soviets had offered them advantageous offers .
 In 1960, HQ USAFE programmed one SM-78 Strategic Missile Squadron for Çigli Air Base, with five launch positions to be completely operational by February 1962 .
 President Kennedy asked the former Secretary of State Dean Acheson to conduct a study assessing NATO policies . A second position came on alert the following month, and the fifth and final position became operational on March 5, 1962 .
 There were suggestions in the study group that Acheson formed that IRBMs in Italy and Turkey should be removed .
 Report from Joint Atomic Energy Committee of the Congress stirred the President to search for ways to remove the Jupiters .
 President Kennedy asked Rusk to take up the matter with the Turkish government which he did during a CENTO meeting in Ankara on 1 May 1961 .
 Rusk had a walk in the garden with Selim Sarper, the Foreign Minister of Turkey, and took up with him the matter of withdrawing the Jupiters from Turkey .
 Turkish government had just gotten approval in its Parliament for the Turkish costs of the Jupiter missiles . He said it would be very embarrassing for them to go right back and tell the Parliament that the Jupiters were being withdrawn .
 Such an action would be demoralizing before the Polaris submarines became available in the Mediterranean, and that was not scheduled before Spring 1963 . Moreover, such a strike would be a demoralizing move before Polaris submarines were available .
 When Rusk briefed the President on these points, Kennedy agreed to delay any action . Kennedy agreed with Rusk that any action should be delayed .
 Kennedy's concern about looking 'weak' in Soviet eyes was enhanced by the Turkish attitude . Kennedy's concerns about looking weak in the Soviet eyes were clearly enhanced by Turkish attitude.
 In the aftermath of Khruschev's hard posture at Vienna, cancellation of the IRBM deployment might seem sign of weakness . This conclusion is based primarily on the view that in the . aftermath of the . Khrus . of the hard posture . at Vienna at Vienna might seem a sign
 When the Secretary of State raised this matter with the Turkish Foreign Minister at CENTO, the Turkish reaction was strongly adverse . General Norstad underlined the military importance of sending IRBMs to Turkey . When the Turkish foreign minister discussed the problem with SACEUR, General . Norstad
 Any attempt to persuade the Turkish military that they should abandon this project would not succeed . This made it unlikely that any attempt to . persuade them to abandon the project would succeed .
 The Secretary of State has discussed this conclusion with General Norstad, who concurs . The Secretary-of-State has discussed the conclusion with general Norstad . Norstad concurs, the Secretary-State said .
 W-49 warheads for Jupiter missiles in Turkey were released in July 1961 . By July 1961, the warheads had been released .
 In essence, a parallelism would be drawn between the Soviet missiles in Cuba, and the Jupiters in Turkey was a foregone conclusion . The Turkish press argued to the contrary, stating that Turkey was part of a collective security system while Cuba was not .
 Andrei Gromyko met President Kennedy and Secretary Rusk in Washington DC on 18 October 1962 . The Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs met with Kennedy and Rusk .
 The USSR has the right to help Cuba to develop its economy and strengthen its defensive capability, he says . Thus, the USA may have bases in those countries and conclude military treaties with them, yet you do not believe the USSR has a right .
 In fact, it was not only the Soviets who drew a parallel between the two situations . It was not the first time the Soviet Union had drawn a parallel .
 60 ismet inönü handled the repercussions of the crisis in as low a profile as possible . A Turkish journalist reacted to this by saying how grateful he was that the conservatives were in power in Britain and not liberals .
 The domestic implications of the crisis, however, later, were nowhere nearly as smooth . Later, the domestic implications for the U.S. were not as smooth as later .
 The removal of Jupiter missiles in Turkey served to widen the gap between the Right and the Left . In contrast with Italy, where the removal of the Jupiter missiles facilitated a consensus between the Christian Democrats and Socialists . In Turkey, it served to further widen the divide between the right and the
 The leftists argued that the U.S. had been bargaining with the Soviets behind Turkey's back . They said a tradeoff between the Soviet missiles in Cuba and the Jupiters in Turkey pointed only to what an unreliable ally the United States was .
 If a nuclear attack on Turkey, NATO allies would not retaliate in kind, but would probably turn issue into bargaining chip with Soviets . Turkey's membership in NATO only endangered its security, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: If there was ever a nuclear strike on Turkey it would be used
 President abandoned the idea on further thought because 'the Turks' he said 'were now in no position to make a statement to the effect that they would ask that the Jupiters be withdrawn'
 Just as these problems were being debated in the White House, the Turkish government issued a press statement rejecting outright Khruschev's public offer of a tradeoff between the Jupiters and S-4s .
 This is perplexing, given the fact that the Turkish Chief Executive was Ismet Inönü, who had conducted brilliant diplomacy during World War II so that Turkey would not get involved in the war, in spite of its military alliance with Britain and France . Turkey's chief executive was Is
 The missile crisis was made public on 22 October, and Khruschev made his proposal on 26 October . The crisis was the first to be made public in October .
 There were already indications from the Western press drawing a symmetry between Cuba and Turkey . Inönü was briefed immediately after the 22nd about the liabilities of the missiles at least in regard to the decision-making process .
 Was faith in NATO so strong, or national pride in refusing to be compared with a small island so great, that inönü did not grasp the initiative, are questions which cannot be answered definitively .
 The lack of a message from the U.S. one way or another must have given the Turks a false sense of security . The answers to these questions may well be yes, but the answers to them may be yes . Turkey has not been able to rely on the United States for
 Left to his own devices, inönü chose to stand firm against the Soviet demand . Left alone, he stood firm against his decision .
 Turkey had worked in the past when Turkey was not even a member of any alliance, it has said . Turkey has been in talks with the European Union over a decade ago .
 Inönü's and Turkey's traditional foreign policy was to remain cordial with the Soviets . Turkey's foreign policy remained cordial, however, with Russia .
 Turks took an uncompromising stance against the Soviets only when challenged by them . Turks were uncompromising against the Soviet Union only when they were challenged . Turks took uncompromising stand against the USSR only when it was challenged .
 Kennedy realized that world opinion would never comprehend why Soviet missiles in Cuba were different from American missiles in Turkey . Meanwhile, in Washington D.C. he realized that the world would never understand why . the missiles were different .
 He knew that he had to make a trade rather than risk war over the obsolete Jupiters . He decided early on that he would keep this move as his trump card, to be used only at the end of the negotiations .
 It seems clear now that he would have given up the Jupiters through some form of UN mediation, but by bluffing so well he fooled most of his advisers . He was able to force Khruschev to accept his terms without disclosing the secret concession regarding the missiles in Turkey
 The idea of 'talking to the Turks' occurred to Kennedy only after Khruschev's offer . Kennedy only thought to come up with the idea of talking to Turks . Kennedy: 'Talking to Turks' was the first time he had considered the idea .
 I have argued elsewhere that the Turks may be proud and courageous no more or less than others but were definitely not suicidal . The Turks may have been proud but not suicidal, they were not suicidal. I've argued elsewhere .
 Kennedy's personal ambition to gain a political victory against the Soviets all by himself without involving a remote third party such as inönüit nonetheless had a spillover effect in Turkish-U.S. relations .
 On 27 October, even Kennedy was in a dilemma, acknowledging that he might need the Turks . Kennedy acknowledged that he may need to help Turks .
 By then, both the Turks and the United States President had publicly launched an irreversible course, except that Kennedy had already conducted secret diplomacy with the Soviets, but not with an ally .
 President Kennedy had not taken inönü into his confidence and this factor, more than a 'bargain' or a 'trade-off, was significant for the future of the collective alliance and for bilateral relations .
 It may well be questioned whether that very moral authority would have held, had he been convinced to offer in 1962 to remove the Jupiters for the sake of world peace .
 The chances were that it would have worked despite the apparent military insistence on holding on to the missiles . The chances of it working would have been better if it had been possible .
 Good sense would dictate that the military would welcome the opportunity to clear the Turkish Armed Forces' name of having executed elected politicians . Good sense alone would dictate the military should welcome the chance to clear its name of execution .
 The Turkish Armed Forces already had a keen sense of public relations trying to distinguish itself from the coup makers of Iraq of a couple of years ago, as well as from the National Unity Committee faction .
 Four days, from 22 until 26 October (in essence, from 13 October when the Cuban missiles were identified) might have been enough time to test these hypotheses had misperceptions about Turkish behavior been absent and alliance cohesion been intact . Yet four days from 22 to 26 October was enough time
 Justified the existence of Jupiters as a NATO issue, thus distinguishing it from the bilateral relations between Turkey and the US, therefore claiming that no symmetry existed between the former and that of bilateral relations .
 Decision-makers Menderes and Zorlu were not alive by the time of the Cuban crisis . The two decision-makers who decided to deploy nuclear missiles in Turkey were not .
 They were sentenced to death following a legally flawed trial and executed in 1961 . The pair were executed following a legal flawed trial in which they were found guilty .
 Domestic concerns took priority over foreign policy as well as defense until the 1964 Cyprus crisis . Therefore, domestic concerns took . over foreign . policy . until the Cyprus crisis and tension between the United States and Turkey over the Johnson letter .
 President Johnson, by cautioning inönü that if Turkish action on the island would invite a Soviet attack, then NATO was not obligated to defend Turkey, brought home the fact that the security interests of Turkey and the Western Alliance were not necessarily the same . Inönü: If Turkish
 The 1961 Constitution had brought Turkey freedom of the press, expression, and of association, says President Erdogan . Turkey's 1961 Constitution was brought freedom of expression, expression and association, he says .
 In liberal milieu, foreign policy was also being discussed publicly for the first time .
 Johnson letter made it obvious that Turkey's national security interests were not always going to be convergent with those of its allies . Turkey's security interests may not always always be converging with its allies, Johnson letter said .
 President Kennedy agreed to a trade off of the Jupiters without informing the Turks during the Cuban crisis . News leaked from the Soviet Embassy in Ankara .
 Scholars can only recently verify such a verbal assurance from Kennedy to the Soviets, the Turkish left believed it wholeheartedly at the time . Kennedy's verbal assurance was only recently verified .
 Anti-Americanism and neutralist sentiments grew on the part of liberals and socialists alike . Coupled with the Johnson letter, anti-U.S. sentiment grew .
 All bases in Turkey were United States bases, with the exception of the Izmir NATO Headquarters . Turkey had lost its sovereignty to the United States, an unreliable ally at that, they argued .
 Disassociating U.S. domination from the entirety of Turkish security interests, came in increments . Disassociation from the United States from Turkish interests came in steps .
 The Jupiter case, although assessed without any precision, should have been the first step in that direction, but it was lost in 1970s rhetoric . Jupiter case is a good example of how the case should have dealt with the 1970s .
 Criticism was directed at the Turkish governments' accommodation of U.S listening posts, bases, and radar sites on Turkish territory .
 The Turkish soldiers only patrolled the fences of such installations, which subjected uncontrolled American military presence in Turkey to polemics alone, and not to serious debate .
 Americanism became polarized. Therefore, proand non-Americanism is polarized. Americanism is a matter of principle . Americanism has become polarized.
 A Defense Cooperation Agreement was signed by the United States and Turkey in July 1969 . It was signed to consolidate the various bilateral accords that had accumulated over the years .
 The Turkish government announced that the Military Facilities Agreement of 1954 with the US was abrogated in 1970 . The U-2 incident of 1960, RB-47 reconnaissance aircraft accident in the Black Sea, and the downing of a U.S. military aircraft by the Soviets in 1967
 Turkish State has made use of NATO bases conditional upon its own political will . From then on, with alacrity, Turkey has made the use of the bases conditional on its own will .
 The short tenure of IRBMs in Turkey remains an anomaly, but historically, no more or less of an anomaly than the Cold War itself . Barring NATO or bilateral relations with the US, the short tenure in Turkey is an anomaly .
 Latest systematic research was carried out under the auspices of the Nuclear History Project and the Cold War International History Project . Major contributions from American, German, French, Dutch, Italian and Russian scholars .
 A List of Treaties and Other International Agreements of the United States in Force on January 1, 1992 . 244. A list of treaties and other international agreements signed by the U.S. in force .
 David J Potter and Gregory J Stachelczyk, 'The Military Relationship Between the U.S. and Turkey Since 1947', (unpub.pub.): 'The military relationship between the United States and Turkey since 1947'
 Dept. of State Memo to U.S. Embassy Ankara/Paris/Athens', 17 Sept.59.59 . Memo was sent to the embassy in Ankara and Paris .
 Frederich E Nolting Jr, Acting Chief of Mission, USRO from John Haskell, 'European Production of Medium Range Ballistic Missiles ' 3 Nov.59.59 . John Haskell: European production of medium range ballistic Missiles .
 Hearings on Military Posture, Committee on Armed Services, House of Representatives, 88th Congress 1st Session Jan. 2015 . Hearings are held on military posture .
 Khrushchev Remembers-The Glasnost Tapes . Jerrold I Schecter and Vyacheslav V Luchkov . 179.5.5 . The Soviet Union was founded in 1961 .
 Illegible; 'Amerika'nm Bize Vereceği Füzeler' , Cumhuriyet, 24 Jan.59,3.59.59 .
 USNSA, Cuban Misile Crisis Box, Dean Rusk to James G Blight, 25 Feb.87.87 . U.S. National Security Council: "Crisis Box"