 "For the past year and a half, week in and week out, they have reassured us that they would never do anything as risky as put nuclear weapons in Cuba," says David Cameron . But for the past two years, the U.S. government has said they would not do
 I have issued public statements saying that the Russians will not put nukes in Cuba, but if they did, we would take them out militarily . President Obama has said that if the Russians did, the U.S. would take nukes out of Cuba .
 He is telling us that if we don’t remove the missiles from Cuba, he will order an attack on Cuba, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "He's telling us he will attack Cuba if he doesn't remove missiles."
 Instead of removing the weapons, let’s speed up work at the missile sites on the island and make them operational for a launch . Let’t remove weapons, instead of removing weapons, speed up the work to make the sites operational .
 This is your chance to destroy the U.S. if Kennedy is stupid enough to attack us, now that we are equipped with nuclear weapons . "This is your moment of truth, your . chance to . destroy the United States," he said .
 A week ago, on the morning of October 16th, President Obama's national security adviser McGeorge Bundy came to see him while he was still in his pajamas . Jack was eating breakfast when he was visited by Bundy, who was in his bed .
 Bundy broke the news that the CIA had confirmed the presence of Soviet nuclear missile sites under construction in Cuba . Bundy: The CIA confirmed the existence of Soviet missile sites in Cuba in the 1980s .
 Some medium and intermediate range missiles had also been positively identified . The missiles are believed to be capable of carrying out a range of missiles .
 In his mind’s eye, Jack could already see a “we told you so” look on the faces of his military chiefs, Republicans in Congress, many Democratic hawks, and even members of his own administration .
 Collision 71 warnings from the United States of the dire consequences that would follow such a deployment . The U.S. has warned of the dangers of deploying such a large number of troops .
 Now all the hawks will come home to roost and demand that an immediate air strike on the Soviet sites, with an invasion to follow .
 If they do, the United States is bound by its agreement with NATO to respond militarily . The U.S. is bound to respond to NATO threats if they do .
 NATO has only a token force of about 12,000 in West Berlin . Jack knows only too well that in Europe, the Soviets field an army in the millions, while NATO has just a tiny force .
 Only NATO response that might plausibly stop the Russians in their tracks is a nuclear response . Thus, the only NATO response might be to stop Russia in its tracks is nuclear response.
 The resulting nuclear war will begin with the use of NATO’s relatively small, tactical nuclear weapons . The resulting war would begin with NATO's relatively small and tactical weapons .
 It will almost surely escalate to the use of larger nuclear weapons . But it will almost certainly escalate to larger nuclear arms .
 Jack’s brother Bobby, the attorney general, had told Jack on the 16th that it seemed as if the world was on the brink of nuclear destruction, possibly foreshadowing the end of mankind . The attorney general said it seemed like the world had been on the verge of
 Unable to find words with which to respond adequately, Jack had simply nodded his agreement at Bobby's proposition . Jack nodded his approval at Bobby’s proposition, formerly so abstract, now suddenly so horrifyingly close and real .
 If the Soviets fail to agree to dismantle their nuclear missile sites and send their equipment back to the Soviet Union, the blockade can be tightened . The blockade can also be tightened to include other material .
 The Pentagon anticipates 25,000 American casualties in the initial phases of the invasion and occupation of Cuba . The Pentagon has said it expects 25,00 casualties .
 Jack is editing a letter to Khrushchev urging the Soviet leader to take this upcoming speech very seriously . Jack is edited by Jack to write a letter urging him to take the upcoming speech seriously .
 The U.S. is determined to remove Soviet weapons from Cuba if Khrushchev is unwilling to do so, says President Eisenhower . He wants Khrushche to pay especially close attention to those aspects of the speech .
 Jack will stress that any Soviet attack on any target in the U.S. or Latin America will be met with a nuclear response against the Soviet Union . In the speech, 72 The Armageddon Letters Jack stresses that any . Soviet . attack on . any target . in the United States or
 He knows that a direct nuclear challenge, made in a public forum, is unprecedented in American history . The challenge is unprecedented, he says, but it's not unprecedented in America's history .
 Jack briefs the Congressional leadership on what is in his speech . Jack briefs them on the letter to be sent to Khrushchev .
 They know nothing of what has been going on behind closed doors for the past week . "I don't know what's going on with this week," says one of the men involved .
 Jack heads upstairs to make the final adjustments to the scariest speech ever delivered by a U.S. president . Jack makes the adjustments to his final speech .
 Jack will be a little ambiguous at this point, but in just a few minutes Jack will seem to many Americans to be saying that, in that case, we will attack the Soviet Union with nuclear weapons . Jack will say that in the next few minutes, he will be ambiguous .
 Armageddon lurks in between the lines of his speech, and between lines of the letter he now sends to Khrushchev . Armageddon lurk in between his speech and his letter to the Soviet leader .
 At our meeting in Vienna, I expressed our desire and readiness to find, through peaceful negotiation, a solution to any and all problems that divide us. I expressed . At our meetings in Vienna and subsequently, I . expressed our . desire to find a peaceful solution, through . peaceful negotiation
 Collision 73 force abandonment of our responsibilities and commitments in Berlin would constitute such an action . The U.S. would resist with all the power at its command, says President Obama .
 "The action we are taking is the minimum necessary to remove this threat to the security of the nations of this hemisphere," says President Obama . "At the same time, I wish to point out that the action is the . . .
 Nikita Sergei’ich and his closest advisers in the Soviet Presidium are sitting in a conference room at the Kremlin, waiting for John F Kennedy’s TV and radio address, set to begin at 3:00m.
 Nikita Sergei’ich has dreaded such a moment ever since the deployment to Cuba began over the summer . The moment when it becomes obvious that the Americans have discovered the missiles in Cuba before they become operational .
 Nikita Sergei’ich has doubts about whether his plan to arm Cuba with nuclear weapons would succeed . The plan was intended to save the Cuban Revolution, according to Sergei .
 The Armageddon Letters deployment was completed in October . The U.S. had apparently not yet discovered the nuclear component of the deployment . Cuba is so far from the Soviet Union and so close to the United States .
 President Kennedy is acutely aware that even if the Soviets get away with it, Kennedy will find the deployment difficult to accept . Kennedy is aware that the U.S. hawks will squawk and scream bloody murder that the president should get rid of both Soviet weapons and Cuban communists .
 Nikita Sergei’ich has, in fact, been composing and revising in his mind the letter he wants to send to Kennedy on the eve of giving his speech in Cuba .
 In that speech he would announce the details of the deployment to the whole world . The president would then make the announcement to the world .
 Kennedy, he feels, will need some time to deal with his own emotions and also to plan a politically viable strategy to resist the urge to war that his hawks will doubtless try to force on him . Kennedy feels he needs time to plan his own strategy .
 Of course, he thinks, we don’t like being surrounded by American military might in Turkey, Italy, Germany and elsewhere in Europe . He thinks, of course, we can't like to be surrounded by military might .
 "No one in his right mind can believe even for a moment that the objective is to actually use these nuclear weapons," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Nikita Sergei’ich is mulling his options over in his mind when a knock is heard on the door to the conference room in which the entire Soviet leadership sits in silence . Nikita Sergei Sergen'ich was mulling over his options when the door
 Russians meditating on the possibility of a nuclear war in which they are centrally implicated may be about to begin in and around Cuba . They might be mistaken for a group of Buddhist monks except, of course, that they are meditating not on the concept of emptiness .
 He is handed a phone, which he puts to his ear while he makes notes with a pencil and paper . He is then handed the phone and puts it to the ear while making notes . He makes notes for what seems like an eternity .
 The aide, Oleg Alexandrovich Troyanovsky, at last informs the group that he has been on the phone with the Soviet ambassador in Washington . The aide then tells the group he is on a phone call with the Russian ambassador .
 The ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, has been reading the text of Kennedy’s speech to him in English . The ambassador has been read the text in English by the ambassador .
 Troyanovsky has been translating the speech and writing it down in Russian . He has been writing down the speech since it was delivered .
 When Troyanovsky is finished scribbling, Nikita Sergei’ich motions for him to tell the group the gist of the speech . The speech will be broadcast at 7.30 p.m. ET .
 Nikita Sergei’ich tells him to shut up and sit down . The minister begins to rise and elaborate on his point, but is told to sit down again .
 At last, the official copy of the speech comes through, via the U.S. embassy in Moscow, to the Soviet Foreign Ministry, then to the Kremlin . At first, the copy was sent via the United States embassy in Russia, then the Soviet foreign ministry .
 "As the other superpower, the USSR is not going to be pushed around. So we have to be careful, but we have been clear that, as the other superpowers, we must be careful"
 Nikita Sergei’ich dictates the letter to Kennedy . After a moment’s hesitation, Sergei'ich dictates it to Kennedy.
 Putin announces that the entire leadership will sleep what little is left of the night in the Kremlin . Then he announces that he will sleep the little little that little was left in the night . Putin then announces that all leaders of Russia will sleep with him in Moscow .
 The press, especially the foreign press, is bound to be curious, he thinks, if ZIL limousines begin to zoom out of the Kremlin in the middle of the night . He says he thinks the press will be curious if the press is curious .
 Nikita Sergei’ich says he will edit the text of the letter to Kennedy at the beginning of a meeting he calls for 10:00m. later on the morning of October 23rd .
 I have just received your letter, and have also acquainted myself with the text of your speech of October 22 regarding Cuba regarding Cuba . I have read the text, and also acquainted himself with the speech, and I have also read it .
 I must say frankly that the measures indicated in your statement constitute a serious threat to peace and to the security of nations . I have been critical of the measures, I said . I said the measures would be a 'serious threat' to peace'
 The U.S. has openly violated the U.N. charter, the path to aggressive actions against Cuba and against the Soviet Union . The United States has openly taken the path of grossly violating the United Nations charter, writes CNN.com's John Avlon .
 The statement by the U.S. of America can only be regarded as undisguised interference in the internal affairs of the Republic of Cuba, the Soviet Union and other states . The government of the United States of America .
 The United Nations charter and international norms give no right to any state to institute in international waters the inspection of vessels bound for the shores of the Republic of Cuba, Cuba .
 Cuba does not recognize the right of the U.S. to establish control over armaments necessary for the Republic of Cuba to strengthen its defense capability . And naturally, neither can we recognize the rights of the United States to . establish control of armaments which are necessary .
 Cuba reaffirm that armaments which are in Cuba, regardless of the classification to which they may belong, are intended solely for defensive purposes in order to secure the Republic of Cuba against an attack .
 Fidel arrives at the television studio in downtown Havana at around 8:30m. on October 23rd. Fidel arrived at the studio at around 9:30 a.m.
 Kennedy will give Cuba’s official response to the crisis that began a little more than twenty-four hours earlier, when Kennedy gave his speech announcing the “quarantine” of Cuba .
 He must sit, though his inclination is to get up on his feet, to gesticulate wildly with his long arms . Neither of which is possible in the small, cramped space .
 He thrives on the feedback of an appreciative audience . Even more importantly, he thrives in the feedback .
 He tries to keep this uppermost in his mind as he gets set up in the studio . He says it's important to keep his focus on the day he gets ready for the show .
 His only live audience is the collection of rather dour-looking government ministers and other officials . His audience is a collection of dour looking government ministers .
 At first, he squirms and seems uncomfortable with the position of the microphone . He squirms, squirms with the microphone.
 He is also exhausted; he hasn’t slept more than a few hours in the past days, as the crisis approached and finally erupted . He is tired and exhausted, as well as exhausted . The crisis has finally erupted, he says .
 Fidel warms to his task and launches into wave after wave of apocalyptic rhetoric . Fidel urges Cubans to remain calm, even serene, as the countdown proceeds toward possible nuclear Armageddon .
 He is emboldened not only by his own self-reinforcing crescendo of verbal virtuosity, but also by reports of Khrushchev's reply to Kennedy’s speech of the day before . Kennedy's speech of day before. Kennedy's response to Kennedy
 Khrushchev has been tough and uncompromising, ready for showdown with the United States of America over nuclear missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union was ready for a showdown with U.S. over nuclear missile tests in Cuba.
 Cuba, Fidel says in many different ways, now at top volume with hands and arms punching holes in the air over the microphone, will never surrender any of its inalienable rights . Cuba will never allow the Yankees nor anyone else to inspect its territory—regarding Soviet missiles .
 His voice cracks, as it always does when he is going full tilt, in a way that surprises those new to his speeches . His voice crack, as always does, when he goes full tilt .
 Collision 77 it is for him to say all he has to say in the time allotted for the speech . No matter that he sometimes speaks continuously for several uninterrupted hours at a time, he does it .
 Both the fatherland and death have never been this close, this intense, and this significant, he thinks, on this warm October evening in central Havana . The fatherland is never this close to death, he says, and death has never been so intense .
 Fidel has already told his listeners that death, if that is what comes to the entire Cuban nation, will not be in vain . Fidel has said that death is not in vain. But Fidel has also said death will not come to the Cuban nation's people .
 The Russians, it is understood, will redeem Cuba’s martyrdom by destroying the U.S. It is understood that they will redeem the country by destroying it . The Russians are understood to want to destroy the United States .
 Fidel’s small audience of officials reacts to this apocalyptic statement by breaking into uproarious laughter . Fidel's small audience breaks into laughter as he declares: “I’m going to die. I’ll die.”
 Hasten to battle, men of Bayamo, For the homeland looks proudly to you. Hasten your homeland looks proud to you, says Bayamo .
 You do not fear a glorious death, Because to die for the country is to live, says President Obama . "To die for a country is the way to live," says Obama .
 "We decidedly reject any attempt at supervision, any attempt to inspection of our country," says President Obama . "We're not going to accept any attempts at supervision," says Obama .
 "We will never abdicate our sovereign prerogative. Our country will never be inspected by anyone, because we will never give authorization for that to anyone," the president says .
 "Within our frontiers, we are the ones who rule, and we do the inspecting," she says . "We are the people who do the inspections," she adds .
 Anyone who tries to come and inspect Cuba must know that he will have to come equipped for war, says Cuban president . Anyone who visits Cuba must be prepared for war. Anyone who wants to inspect Cuba has to be ready for war .
 That is our final answer to illusions and proposals for carrying out inspections on our territory . That is the answer to the questions posed by the British government . The British government has proposed inspections of the country's borders .
 We maintain there should be no troops or military personnel in the territory of any other country . We maintain that there should not be any troops in any territory .
 78 The Armageddon Letters is our position, the principle we stand on. That is 78 the Armageddon Letters our position . We stand on the principle that we stand by .
 "Let us all support a policy for the dismantling of bases, troops, all of those things scattered throughout the world," says CNN's John Sutter . Let's all support policy for dismantling bases and troops, he says .
 We are not in agreement with a policy which calls for disarming us in the face of the aggressors. However, we are not . We are . not in . agreement with the policy . However, it is not .
 'They believe they are going to scare us with that. That is so stupid, so ridiculous, and so absurd, that it is not worth time wasting time wasting a thought about such idiocy,' he said .
 "The aggressors will not go unpunished. But we are calmed by something, and that we are calmer by knowing that the aggressors are not going unpunishable," she said .
 "We know how to run those risks calmly. And we, who are part of mankind—and a very worthy part of humanity," says President Obama . "We are very proud and very worthy of mankind"
 We have the consolation of knowing that the aggressors in a thermonuclear war will be exterminated . Those who unleash a nuclear war, those who unleash it, will be eradated, he says .
 No portion of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, or photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the prior written permission .