 The developments that emerged as a result of this shift, including legislation and technology, are the legacy of the sixties . The developments emerged from the shift in technology and legislation that emerged from this shift .
 The decade was full of competition with the United Soviet Socialist Republics, changing government responsibilities, and increased civil rights . The decade of the 1960s was filled with competition with U.S. and changing responsibilities .
 As a result of the decade, America has changed drastically in ways that can never be reversed . America has been changed drastically since the early 2000s, says CNN.com .
 During the 60's a series of welfare programs were initiated, both by Kennedy and by Lyndon B Johnson . Kennedy and Johnson initiated the welfare programs .
 The programs were started mainly as part of a way to reform America and have an equalizing effect on Americans, and provide a safety net for its citizens . The programs are now being used to help Americans equalize and provide the safety net .
 These programs were a new role that the government was fulfilling for America, and has lasting impacts, as well as the programs exist today . The programs were the government's role in fulfilling the role .
 Another lasting effect of the decade was the accomplishments of the Civil Rights movement . The Civil Rights Movement was the success of the movement .
 Martin Luther King Jr. helped make changes in American society . King was assassinated in 1968 at the hands of the White House in 1968 .
 The establishment of laws such as the many Civil Rights Acts, and government enforcement of desegregation, helped eliminate institutional prejudice . It was the beginning of the Civil Rights Act .
 In addition to the direct effects of the civil rights movement, it led to the widespread use of peaceful protest as a way to get legal changes . The use of protest by peaceful protesters in the 1960s and '60s led to a rise in civil rights activism .
 The Civil Rights Movement helped change America for the better through peaceful demonstration . Through actions such as the March on Washington, the sit-ins, and other measures the movement helped change the country .
 One of the most key parts of the 60's 60's however was not domestic but foreign . The 60's was the first time the country has seen a change in direction .
 The Cold War, while not unique to the 60's, dominated much of the foreign policy of the time .
 The two world super powers used all of their resources to try and beat the other to the domination of space and the Moon . One of the most exemplary is the Space Race . The two superpowers used all the resources to beat each other .
 While this happened, less peaceful contests occurred, such as the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was a conflict started to try and contain the spread of Communism in south-east Asia .
 The 60's would end up as a decade which forever changed the course of American history . Whether it was through domestic developments, like civil rights and welfare, or foreign involvements, the 60's ended up as one of the decade's most significant moments .
 The events of the decade have long lasting impacts both for the U.S. and the world . The events in the decade will be remembered for their impact .
 By 1964, the collapse of South Vietnam at the hands of communist North Vietnam and the Viet Cong was imminent . The collapse of the South Vietnam was imminent, but it was not until 1964 .
 The Johnson administration believed that the escalation of the American role in Vietnam was the only solution . The Vietnam war ended in 1968 .
 The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution was an unofficial declaration of war . The resolution was the official response to the incident in which it was also an unofficial war declaration .
 The resolution allowed military escalation to begin in Vietnam, resulting in over 500,000 American soldiers on the ground by 1968 . The resolution was passed by Congress in 1968 .
 This document is important because it demonstrates the attitude of the U.S. at this time . This document was important for the United States, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The document was meant as strengthening the sphere of influence of the United States while limiting that of the USSR and other communists . As was the typical course of America at the time, whenever it saw an increase in Communism's field of influence it would interfere and attempt to limit or destroy it .
 This document is part of the United States' plan for containment of communism . This document was published in the U.S. State Department .
 Containment was in this case enforced through the Vietnam War despite the document's calls for peace . The document was signed by the U.S. government in 1961 .
 This exemplifies the attitude of the U.S. at the time, as one of trying to stop communism's spread at any cost . During the Kennedy Administration a number of reform initiatives were set in place . I thought it was implemented too late, it was passed in 1973 .
 Johnson took office in 1964, only weeks after the assassination of Kennedy . He wanted to continue Kennedy's efforts to expand the welfare state .
 His vision for America was motivated by the widespread poverty and racial injustice that were present in the country at the time . His vision was inspired by the racial injustice and poverty that was present in America .
 In his 1964 State of the Union Address, Johnson outlined his goals for America before Congress and the American people . In 1964, the President outlined his plans for America .
 His main aspirations were an ""unconditional war on poverty"" and an end to racial discrimination . His main aim was to end racial discrimination and end to poverty .
 Johnson's plans for these reforms involved a series of legislation supported on national, state, and local levels . Johnson's plan was supported by legislation supported by national, local, and state governments .
 Johnson's plan was extremely ambitious, and he conceded that it would require a large level of cooperation . Johnson: "It would require cooperation. It would be extremely difficult to do this"
 This document is important because it framed the overarching goals of the Johnson administration . Many of the goals came to fruition through legislative measures . This document was important because of its framing .
 The reform program that he discussed, later referred to as the ""Great Society,"" became fundamental to Johnson's administration and a guideline for his presidency . Johnson's reform program was later called the "Great Society"
 The Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 provided training and education to disadvantaged youth . It was passed as part of the antipoverty program he had discussed in his speech .
 The Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act were envisioned in his speech . Similarly, the civil rights Act of 1965 sought to end racial discrimination, were envisioned .
 As promised by his campaign slogan, ""getting America moving again,"" Kennedy sought to strengthen the economy . Kennedy was elected to the presidency .
 His plan to end the recession involved working the business community while controlling price inflation . His plan was to work with business community and control inflation, he says .
 JFK negotiated a deal in which the United States Steel Union agreed to restrain their wage demands in return for promises that the U.S. Steel Company would not raise their prices . JFK negotiated the deal in order to keep the union's wage demands down .
 Crisis struck in April 1962 when steel companies decided to increase prices instead of raising prices . Crisis struck after steel companies increased prices in response to demand .
 Kennedy was upset at the sudden and apparently unanimous decision of various steel companies to increase their prices by six dollars per ton of steel . Kennedy discussed how he was upset by the decision .
 He told the nation how he believed the steel executives were abusing their power by increasing prices arbitrarily . He said it has been the duty of Americans to serve their nation and that the steel companies had failed .
 Kennedy: This decision by steel companies was described by Kennedy to have powerful negative effects against the public . Kennedy: The decision by the steel companies has powerful negative . Kennedy says it will have negative effects on the public, such as an increase in costs of living, automobiles, and other things
 The steel businesses eventually rescinded their price increases . They became distrustful of Kennedy's forceful approach and viewed his actions as an attack on free market system .
 Kennedy rejected excessive government regulation and control of the economy . He was not shy of pressuring people and businesses in non-legal ways such as this speech .
 The steel crisis and the animosity it provoked set the economic trajectory for the remainder of Kennedy's presidency . Kennedy's administration was hit hard by the steel crisis .
 U.S. surveillance planes were sent over Cuba and returned with images revealing ballistic missiles . The missiles could reach major United States population centers in a matter of minutes .
 With the lingering memory of failure during the Bay of Pigs Invasion still fresh, Kennedy was determined to emerge out of this confrontation successfully . Kennedy: "I'm going to be a hero. I'm not scared. I want to make history."
 On October 22, he held a meeting with members of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council .
 Kennedy later described the situation and informed the nation of his plans in a televised address . Kennedy later told the nation that he had no plans to resign .
 He declared that the Soviet's ""rapid offensive buildup"" in Cuba was a ""definite threat to peace"" and could not be tolerated . The Soviet buildup in Cuba threatened peace, he declared .
 Kennedy was determined to meet the confrontation with strength with strength . Kennedy discussed a comprehensive plan for dealing with the Soviet threat . The plan was discussed in the wake of the Cold War .
 A major aspect of this plan was the decision to enact a naval quarantine around Cuba to prevent the Soviets from importing more ""offensive military equipment"" to Cuba . The quarantine was meant to stop the Soviets bringing more offensive military equipment to Cuba.
 Early on Kennedy's advisors had urge a full-scale invasion of Cuba . However, early on Kennedy had urged an invasion .
 Kennedy realized the potential for Soviet retaliation in Europe and decided against this . Kennedy, realizing the potential of Soviet retaliation, decided against it . Kennedy's decision was made to avoid the risk of a Soviet retaliation .
 President Obama knew that it would be unwise to carry out a full-scale blockade of Cuba . It would not only be considered an act of war, but it would also be inhumane to the Cuban people .
 After the disaster at the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy could not afford to be submissive to the Soviets . After the crisis, Kennedy would not have been willing to give up on the deal .
 The idea of mutually assured destruction had promoted an arms buildup, resulting in a crescendo in tension between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The idea led to an arms build-up in the United States and Russia .
 A Soviet-American hotline was installed as a result of the crisis to prevent similar confrontations in the future . The hotline has been installed to prevent future confrontations .
 The Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963 was negotiated between the rivals, prohibiting atmospheric tests of nuclear weapons . In addition to the treaty, the limited test ban on nuclear weapons was also a treaty banning atmospheric tests .
 Naturalist, Rachel Carson was a principal figure in the movement and was famous for her book Silent Spring . Silent Spring warned the public of the dangers of pesticides and pollution .
 Her book was well received by many, but also received a fair amount of criticism, especially by the chemical industry . The chemical industry has been criticized for its use of the book .
 Congress responded by holding a hearing on the issue of environmental pollution in June 1963 . Congress responded to the issue by holding hearings on environmental pollution .
 Carson appeared before Congress to deliver a testimony during this review . Carson has been the subject of a review of the Affordable Care Act . Carson was the first to testify before Congress .
 Her statement addressed the environmental hazards control of pesticides and other poisons . Her statement also addressed the issue of pesticides control of poisons .
 She explained how the shortsightedness of businesses who are concerned with making a profit causes irreversible damage to the environment .
 Her main purpose was to show how disturbing the environmental situation was in order to convince Congress to take action . Her main goal was to demonstrate how disturbing it was to get Congress to act .
 This speech is important because it was delivered by a leading figure of the environmental movement . It helped to make the issue of environmental pollution public .
 Carson's research led the President's Science Advisory to issue a report on pesticide poisoning . Carson's work led to a report by President's science advisory . Carson: Pesticide poisoning can be linked to a variety of pesticides .
 Her work helped convince Congress to pass the Wilderness Preservation Act in 1964 . In addition, she promoted several other measures to protect the environment .
 Carson's work was crucial to setting the environmental movement on course . Carson was a pioneer of environmental activism in the 1930s and '60s . Carson's environmental work helped set the stage for environmental activism .
 Several labor unions were formed to organize strike in order to gain improvements in working conditions and pay . The strike was organized by labor unions to gain better working conditions .
 In September 1965, César Chávez and Dolores Huerta led the National Farm Workers Alliance in a strike against the grape growers in the Delano area of California .
 In 1969, Dolores Huerta issued a proclamation to explain why striking laborers wished for consumers to boycott grapes . In 1969 the striking laborers wanted consumers to boycotts grapes .
 She described how the farmers who first started working the fields of California hundreds of years ago endured suffering and hunger similar to the conditions for farmers at her time . In a statement, she described the conditions of California farmers .
 She asserted that grapes must remain an ""unenjoyed luxury,"" until the workers who picked them were fairly treated .
 Huerta hoped that a successful boycott by the NFWA would encourage other American farmers to follow suit . Huertas hopes that the boycott will encourage other U.S. farmers to do so .
 The Delano Grape Strike was one of the most innovative and influential strikes of the time . This document is important because it was important because the Delano grape strike was important .
 Besides boycotts, the strike involved other tactics, such as marches, and performing art to protest the conditions of farming .
 These strategies allowed the strike to last over five years, ending with a collective bargaining agreement . It promised more representation to farm workers .
 The success of the Delano Grape Strike inspired a series of strikes by the United Farm Workers Union, resulting in the 1975 Agricultural Labor Relations Act which established collective bargaining for California farmworkers .
 This speech lays the groundwork for many of the goals both sought after and accomplished in the 60's . The speech lays out the groundwork to many of those sought after .
 The speech starts with a prioritization of liberty over all other subjects linking to the foundation of America . The speech begins with the words "liberty" and "freedom"
 This s not too far from the connection made in the welfare policies made by both President Kennedy and . Johnson in the Great Society .
 This can be seen by the focus on poverty which had been made as a new form of oppression . The focus was made as an attempt to make poverty a form of oppressed . This is seen as an example of how poverty has been made into a 'form of oppression'
 The increase in welfare under President Kennedy was meant to combat this, and lay the groundwork for Lyndon B Johnson's Great Society . Kennedy's welfare increase under JFK laid the foundation for the 'Great Society'
 Kennedy's idea of increased government involvement did not stop at spending but also a hands-on approach to the economy, as can be seen through his dealings with U.S. Steel . Kennedy was a strong advocate for increased government spending .
 This speech also sets a focus on science and its potential for international cooperation . ""Let both sides seek to invoke the wonders of science instead of its terrors"" being a key idea throughout the speech .
 Kennedy ad a presidency that tried to have international efforts focus on science and liberty . Kennedy's administration has been criticized for trying to focus international efforts on science, liberty .
 'one form of colonial control shall not have passed away merely to be replaced by a far more iron tranny'" The speech set out an idea of stopping the spread of communism .
 Which would lead to foreign policies like the Bay of Pigs Invasion attempt . Which would be like the 'Bay of Pigs invasion attempt'
 These statements made in President Kennedy's inaugural address would establish policy not only for his presidency, and the 60's but forever changing American history and thinking .
 President Kennedy's inaugural address was an important and representative document for the 60's in the U.S. in the 1960s .
 The Space Race was started by the USSR's Sputnik 1 being the first artificial satellite . It was the first space race between the Soviet Union and the United States .
 The U.S. responded in kind with its own space program as detailed in this document .
 The United States founded the National Aeronautical and Space Administration . It was created to make develop the advancement in the race for the moon . The agency was founded by the U.S. in the 1950s .
 This document has information describing the intent and results of the space program, particularly after the successful Apollo 11 landing . This document includes information about the intent of the program, and the results of it .
 Document describes how it is hoped that this is ""a beginning – and not an end to the exploration and use of space"" placing an emphasis on the continuation of the space program . Document says that it is a beginning - and not a end to space exploration .
 Another emphasis in this is the military advantage of having space dominance . The military advantage is the ability to have space dominance, the author says .
 The document lists things like, ""Department of Defense space activities"" as a potential future of the space program . The document says the Department of Defense is looking into the future of space exploration .
 One of the clear objectives was to advance national defense through military space programs . The U.S. has been involved in space exploration in the past .
 The post-Apollo project was meant to demonstrate American leadership in science . That is because even though in the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 said the purpose was for all mankind .
 In an international frame, the Apollo programs were meant to ""win extensive admiration and respect for American achievements"", as no other project could . The Apollo program was meant to win "exception and respect" from other nations .
 This program was another example of how the competing forces of the United States and the United Soviet Socialist Republics were competing for spheres of influence . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were competing in the sphere of influence.
 The document also demonstrates how the United States repeatedly won these competitions with the USSR not only in the 60's but for the rest of the Cold War . This document also shows how the U.S. repeatedly won this competition with the Soviets .
 This speech has a lot of what was happening socially during the 1960's socially . This speech was a speech from the President of the United States .
 A new wave of progressive change was going through America, wanting social change especially towards the rights of racial minorities . The film was shot at the White House in New York City, New York .
 Martin Luther King Jr.'s speech is known for setting the standard of conduct for protest and social change . King's speech set the standard for protest, social change and social justice .
 His famous quote, ""a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character"" showed the new movement in America towards a future against racism . In addition, his famous quote showed the movement towards a new movement .
 The speech was given after a march on Washington DC . It served as a call both for the rights of people of color and a peaceful means of achieving it .
 The speech made multiple references to the founding of America, with its Bill of Rights, and how the dream would be that since ""all men are created equal" they would all have equal rights under the law .
 The march was made during this civil rights movement chiefly in protest against segregation in many southern states, but also against police brutality of the time . It was made in response to segregation in southern states .
 The Jim Crow laws were put in place in many southern states, and led to the dehumanization of blacks in those states, as well as unequal opportunity for them . Jim Crow Laws led to dehumanization and unequal opportunities for blacks .
 The speech also made clear that the elimination of things like Jim Crow laws was going to be fought against until they were destroyed . The speech was made clear of the need to eliminate Jim Crow law .
 They went to the nation's capital to ""remind America of the urgency of the Now"" that no blacks were going to fight for their rights . The group went to Washington, D.C. to remind Americans of the 'urgent urgency' of the now .
 The fight for equality was going to continue until it was resolved, earning things like the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1965 . The Civil Rights Act was passed in 1965 and 1964 .
 The speech also made it clear that the struggle for liberty was not going to devolve into violence . However, the speech also said that it would not be going to be violent .
 Martin Luther King Jr. was clear in saying that ""in the process of gaining our rightful place, we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds"" demanding that the movement remain peaceful . King was clear that he wanted the movement to be peaceful .
 This was to stop teachings like that of the Nation of Islam form spreading spreading . This was the first attempt to stop the teachings from spreading .
 Martin Luther King Jr.’s ""I Have a Dream" speech showed what the civil rights movement was focused on, that being equality achieved through peaceful demonstrations . The speech was King's first attempt to achieve equality through peaceful protests .
 The movement achieved many great things and is critical to both the 1960's and American history . It was critical to the movement in the 1960s and 1960s . The movement is a critical part of America's history .