 The Sixteen Known Nuclear Crises of the Cold War, 1946-1985" presents in detail the reality which many of us have either known or suspected during our nuclear age . The book is based on the 16 known known Cold War Crises .
 Nations with nuclear weapons will, as we know, threaten to use them, and as we also know, some circumstances, actually use them . Nations have nuclear weapons, as well as threatening to use, they will use them in some circumstances .
 Morgan establishes that we have approached that crisis, not once, but 16 times since the blasts that destroyed Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 16 times . Morgan establishes, in fact, that that crisis has occurred 16 times in the last 16 years .
 Morgan documents the times the use of the bigger ones were threatened . Those were, as we now know, minor bombs . Morgan: This paper is an attempt to inform the public about the very dangerous nuclear crises of the Cold War .
 Until these are widely understood, the great dangers of present policies will not be questioned and discussed . Until now, the dangers of the present policies are not being questioned or discussed, they are not widely understood .
 The U.S. is the least secretive of all the world's great powers, with its Freedom of Information Act . The Freedom Of Information Act is one of the fewest secretive countries in the world .
 Much of the information in this paper has been made available by the benefit of this Act . Much of this paper was made available to the public by this Act.
 There are 36,000 nuclear weapons in the world in 1996 . The threat of the destruction of civilization by these weapons remains very great .
 The more that nuclear weapons increase military power, the more they decrease national security . The more nuclear weapons decrease military power than increase national security, experts say . Nuclear weapons are more likely to be used in the U.S.
 Only escape from this paradox is by the balanced reduction and eventual total abolition of these weapons on a rigid schedule . The only escape is by a balanced reduction .
 The U.S. tested the first H-Bomb in 1953 . A-Bomb was used during the Vietnam War . It was the first weapon developed by the United States .
 The RELENTLESS ARMS ARMS RACE, 1969-1983, featured in Crisis #12. 1969 . 1969 . 1970 . 1970s . 1969-83 .
 U.S. develops submarine-launched MIRVs, multiple warhead ICBMs . Israel Yom Kippur war, Crisis #13.73: MIRV missiles, multiple warheads, multiple weapons . U.N. develops sub-seaplanes, submarine-
 Soviets develop first MIRV for their ICBMs . India explodes A-bomb . USSR invades Afghanistan .
 Shah flees Iran, United States embassy seized . Iran again, Crisis # 15.80Iran again, crisis #15.80 .
 This is a time similar to Period 3 of the Cold War . Post-Cold War was a period similar to period 3 .
 Morgan documents in considerable detail each of the 16 nuclear crises . Effective nuclear arms control is needed to avoid repetition of Period 4 with dire results .
 We have been fortunate in getting through all 16 of these crises without actually launching or stumbling into a nuclear war . This is just a taste of the total frightening menu. We have a total of 16 crises in the last 16 .
 1,400 Cuban exiles invaded Cuba at Playa Girón with United States support in 1961 . At issue in the crisis was the right of the U.S. to match Cuba's medium-range nuclear-missile threat .
 Kennedy then approved Operation Mongoose . Cubans defeated the invaders in two days .
 Several attempts to kill Castro, sabotage, arson, crop poisoning, and murder of Cuban civilians have occurred . Castro was shot at the head by Cuban soldiers in the 1950s . Castro's assassination was the first attempt to kill him .
 The target date for Cuban ""revolt" with U.S. military support was October 1962 . October 1962 target date was October 31 .
 To defend Cuba, Khrushchev offered Castro nuclear-armed missiles to be installed secretly . Kennedy gets U-2 photos of Soviet missile bases in Cuba .
 Le May, USAAF Chief of Staff tells Kennedy an attack is essential and that Soviets would not respond . Le May: "An attack on the Soviet Union would be essential" Le May was the first time the U.S. launched an attack on Soviet Union .
 This could have avoided the more dangerous public challenge and demand for a humiliating withdrawal that Kennedy made two days later . Kennedy made the decision to withdraw from the White House two days after .
 The B-52 bomber force was ordered into the air fully loaded with nuclear weapons . It was the first time the bomber force had been ordered to fly with nuclear arms loaded .
 Organization of American States gives U.S. full support . Quarantine goes into effect Wednesday .
 Kennedy orders State Department to prepare a post-invasion government for Cuba . Kennedy: Kennedy ordered State Dept. to prepare State Department for Cuba. Kennedy: "It's a good time for Cuba"
 Joint Chiefs of Staff propose air strike on Monday followed by invasion . Joint chiefs of Staff say air strike would be followed by an invasion of Syria .
 Cuba secured from U.S. covert attacks and invasion . Missiles will be withdrawn from the United States in Cuba .
 At issue in the crisis was United States preparation for first strike capability . The U.S. always held a five to 10 year lead over the Soviet Union .
 In the 1980s a system for a first strike surprise attack on the USSR was nearly ready . The system was almost ready to attack the Soviet Union in a surprise attack .
 The flat trajectory Pershing II missiles were extremely accurate and designed to ""decapitate" the Soviet leadership . They were designed to kill Soviet leaders in order to destroy their enemies .
 It would be possible by the late 80's to knock out all known Soviet missiles on land and at sea with MX and Trident 2 missiles using the new very precise ""Navstar"" guidance system .
 A faulty Soviet radar warning might have led to a world nuclear holocaust . These very threatening plans meant that a world nuke holocaust might result from a faulty radar warning . The plans were very threatening .
 Six minutes gave the Soviets little time for analysis of U.S. intentions . The Soviets understood all of these threats very clearly, the author says .
 These were then transported to the United States Army 56th Field Artillery Brigade base at Mutlangen, Geneva . The U.S. Army sent them to a base in Geneva .
 Four U.S. and four Soviet scientists meeting in Washington issued a statement predicting a nuclear winter that would kill all nuclear war survivors . March 11, 1985, Gorbachev elected General Secretary of the Central Committee by a margin of one vote over Grishin .
 Cold War tensions ease progressively for the next two years . First Strike crisis also ends progressively during this period . Gorbachev and Reagan meet; Cold War tension ease progressively .
 Dec. 1987, Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty signed in Washington by Presidents Gorbachev and Reagan . The treaty was signed in 1987 by President Reagan and President Carter .