 In 1960 Castro asked the Soviet Union for military and economic help, meaning that Cuba was becoming a Communist country . These actions angered the United States which resulted in an U.S. embargo against Cuba .
 U.S. companies banned from doing any business with Cuban Nation . Cuban nation is nation of Cuba . Cuban people are nation of origin in Cuba . Cuba is country of origin .
 At the same time, the United States decided to train the exiles Cuban to overthrow Castro from power . The U.S. kept its role in secret, keeping its role secret .
 This was known as the Bay of Pigs, it was a failure that made the U.S. seen as a weak and dishonest nation in the eyes of the world . The failure made the United States seen as weak and a dishonest nation .
 This lead to one of the events that almost led the U.S. and the Soviet Union to a nuclear war . This led to the United States and Soviet Union almost going to nuclear war.
 President Reagan called for more financial and military aid from the Soviet Union . Reagan called on more financial, military aid .
 The United States learn about the Soviet actions 0n October 14, 1962 when photos of missile bases were taken by an U-2 spy plane . The Soviet Union were gladly to help Castro because for them it was seen as a way to end the disadvantage that they had with the United States
 President Kennedy did not want to be responsible for having started a Nuclear War . President Kennedy wanted to avoid being responsible for starting a nuclear war .
 He ordered a military quarantine -blockadearound Cuba in order to stop the Soviets from sending arsenal . He decided to inform the Americans about and demanded for the removal of those Soviets missiles from Cuba .
 Khrushchev sent a letter to President Kennedy agreeing in the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba, if the United States promised not to invade the island of Cuba . Also ask the military to prepared possible invasion of Cuba, as well the military prepared itself in the Soviet shores with U.
 A second letter was sent to president Kennedy even before he replied the first one . However, the president replied to the second letter .
 Khrushchev asked the U.S. to remove American Missiles from Turkey . Khrushche asked the United States to remove the missiles from Turkey. In the second letter, Khrrushchev ask the . United States should remove the Missiles .
 Kennedy announced publicly that the U.S. accept the first offer and wrote to Khrushchev saying “I would like to say again that the United States is very much interested in reducing and halting the arms race…” However, the second agreement is made confidential from the American
 Radara system uses radio waves to detect objects at long range . Missilerockets that has an atomic warhead .
 Kennedy promises not to use force to overthrow Castro . Cuban exiles, backed by the U.S. invades Cuba at the Bay of pigs .
 U.S. planes look that there is military activity in Cuba . Castro announces that he has invited the Soviet Union to help defend Cuba .
 Khrushchev says he promises to remove the missiles only if the U.S. promise not to invade Cuba . October 27, 1962, Soviet Union shot down a U.K. missile .
 The Soviet Union said they will remove the missiles only if the U.S. removes their to from Turkey . October 28. Kenedy agrees to Khrushchev first proposal to remove missiles .