 The crisis was not so much the product of true Soviet advances towards war as much as it was a series of misinterpretations and miscommunications between the United States and Soviet governments that culminated in excessive aggression by the U.S. The United States .
 These hostilities were fed not only by the Cold War sentiments against the Soviet Union, but also by the rapid deterioration of Cuban relations after the assumption of power by Fidel Castro .
 This aligned Cuba increasingly with the Soviet Union, and created a sort of threatening alliance against the United States . Cuba's relationship with the U.S. has escalated and escalated and already tense situation . This aligns Cuba with the Soviets, creating an alliance that escalated the situation .
 Events such as failed Bay of Pigs Invasion, stationing of American missiles in strategically threatening locations, an American naval blockade of Cuba, and a threat by John F Kennedy to directly invade Cuba are prime importance .
 Any of these actions could have been considered just cause for a Soviet declaration of war . However, the Soviet response to these actions was comparatively mild, and represented no true original aggression .
 The action taken by Nikita Khrushchev and the Soviet administration during the Cuban missile crisis was simply defensive retaliation that was taken in the wrong light by the U.S. administration .
 The first roots of the Cuban missile crisis can be found in the late 19th century, when American victories in the Spanish-American war rendered Cuba a territory of the U.S. The crisis began in the 19th Century .
 Spain renounced all rights to Cuba in the terms of the Treaty of Paris, signed in 1898 . Spain left Cuba under the military control of the United States .
 Gaddis, John L Russia, the Soviet Union, and the United States: an Interpretive History.nd ed. Naval Institute P, 2000. Russia, Soviet Union and the U.S.
 Khrushchev, Nikita S Letter to Bertrand Russell . Kennedy, John F Letters to Premier Nikita Khrushche, and the Soviet Government .
 Khrushchev, Nikita S. S. Letters to the Kennedy Administration.-26 Oct. 1962 .
 In some cases, the president did a good job and other times they made it worse, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Some of the president's actions have been very good, but sometimes they've been very bad"
 The presidents that handled the crisis well are J.F.K. and F.D.R. on numerous occasions . The presidents handled the U.S. crisis well in the past .