 Khrushchev read U.S. weakness in the Bay of Pigs fiasco . He blustered publicly that he might retaliate by driving the United States out of West Berlin . The Soviet leader said he might drive out of the West Berlin area .
 President Kennedy openly boasted that the U.S. possessed many more (and more accurate and deliverable) nuclear missiles and warheads than the United States. President Kennedy, in return, said he would consider striking first with them if it ever found itself at a military disadvantage .
 Kennedy dropped the old story about the ""missile gap" and brandished the U.S.'s nuclear superiority openly against Khrushchev . Once in office, Kennedy dropped an old story .
 Khruschev's response was to secretly build missile bases on Cuban soil to compensate for Soviet inferiority in ICBMs . The bases were built in Cuba in response to the Soviet Union's failure to develop ICBM technology .
 Castro gave permission to the Soviets to build Cuban missile bases in trade for a promise of protection against U.S. invasion and for cancellation of Cuban monetary debts . Castro gave the Soviets permission to build bases in exchange for protection against United States invasion . Castro also gave a promise to cancel Cuban
 Construction of Cuban bases proceeded throughout the summer of 1962 . Construction of the Cuban bases was completed in the summer .
 Kennedy issued warnings to Khrushchev that the United States would not tolerate a major military buildup in Cuba, but would do ""whatever must be done"" to guarantee U.S. security . Kennedy and his advisors believed that . would take these grave warnings seriously .
 The U.S.R. had never yet placed nuclear weapons outside Russian territory . These factors made it seem unlikely that nuclear weapons were part of the Cuban buildup .
 U-2 spy planes were making regular flights over Cuba, observing the military buildup . The U.S. aircraft were flying over Cuba to observe the buildup of the Cuban military .
 Immediate attack on Soviet missiles sites in Cuba, followed by a full invasion of the island using 180,000 U.S. troops . Immediate strike on Soviet missile sites followed by an invasion of Cuba . Immediately attack on the Soviet missiles .
 If the blockade did not work, it was a risky plan, as such a blockade is, by international law, an act of war . The invasion plan would be carried out if the blockade failed, the author says .
 On October 22, 1962, Kennedy addressed the American people by television . Kennedy spoke by television for the first time in October 1962 .
 Several Soviet vessels carrying missiles were turned back by U.S. naval vessels . Over the next four days, ships carrying Russian goods were searched at sea . Several Soviet ships carrying missiles turned back .
 If nuclear war had occurred, it could have caused hundreds of millions of deaths, and significantly destroyed the U.S. and many other nations as functioning societies . The U.N.R. could have destroyed many of the world's most functioning societies, including the United States .
 Khrushchev sent a private message to Kennedy indicating he would remove missiles if the U.S. would promise not to invade Cuba . On October 26, Kennedy said he would be willing to remove the missiles if U.K. promised not to invasion Cuba .
 Historians have viewed Kennedy's handling of the Cuban missile crisis as a masterpiece of statesmanship . Many historians have said Kennedy handled the crisis as statesman .
 Robert Kennedy said that his brother had put events in motion that he could not control . Robert Kennedy's brother said he was not in control of events that he couldn't control . Kennedy said his brother's actions were "a mistake"
 Khrushchev and Kennedy were willing to risk global nuclear war for dubious gains . What is certain is that they were both willing to go on the risk of war for a dubious gain .
 No long-term U.S. interests were at stake in the deployment of Soviet intermediate-range missiles to Cuba . Within a few years, every city in the continental US. would be vulnerable to Soviet ICBMs and submarinelaunched ballistic missiles .
 "showing resolve" (threatening to use military force) was more effective than diplomacy, the U.N. or international law . The U.S. should be more willing to commit conventional military forces in a crisis, in order to keep back from the nuclear abyss, he says