 The world came close to nuclear war during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 . The Cuban crisis was the height of the Cuban crisis .
 Historians may not know how close the close calls actually were — or how many of them there were . But, unless you are a historian of the period, you may not even know how many .
 Nine short-range Luna missiles with nuclear warheads were missing . Each one was only slightly less powerful than the Hiroshima bomb .
 The CIA also greatly underestimated the number of Soviet troops on the island . The actual figure was 40,000, not 4,000 .
 If the U.S. attacked Cuba, the Soviets were fully prepared to defend it with conventional and nuclear munitions . If the United States attacked, the Soviet Union would be prepared to respond with conventional or nuclear weapons .
 The secret strength of the Soviet forces in Cuba made the deliberations of President John F Kennedy and his ExCom even more fraught than they realized . That probably would have led to an all-out nuclear exchange, which might have killed 70 million people in the United States alone .
 The initial consensus in the room was that the United States had to use force to remove the nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. had to be prepared for use force, the initial consensus said .
 The president was torn between ordering a surgical airstrike or authorizing a more general bombing campaign . The president initially was torn initially between ordering an airstrike or ordering a general airstrike . President Barack Obama was initially torn between the two options .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy tried to portray himself as a dove . Eventually cooler heads prevailed, but he later tried to paint himself as the dove .
 President Kennedy decided to institute a naval blockade to prevent the Soviets from sending more missiles to Cuba . President Kennedy called it a “quarantine” because a blockade is an act of war .
 The possibility of a military clash loomed if the Soviets resisted the U.S. Navy’s attempts to inspect their ships . But the possibility of military clash still loomed .
 Soviet troops in Cuba were poised on a knife’s edge, expecting an American attack any minute . The ExCom, moreover, was committed to military action if the quarantine failed .
 The crisis further escalated when a Soviet missile battery shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba . The crisis escalated on Oct. 31, when Soviet missile batteries shot down the plane . The U.2 was shot down by Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 The same day, another U-2 mistakenly wandered into Soviet airspace over the Chukotka Peninsula in Siberia . The U.2 also mistakenly wandered over the same area .
 Two F-102 fighter jets armed with nuclear-tipped missiles were scrambled from Alaska to locate it . Two U.S. fighter jets were scrambled to locate the plane .
 The shoot-down of the U-2 over Cuba is well known, but the near miss over the Bering Strait came as news to me . They only narrowly missed running into two Soviet MiG-17s sent to intercept the spy plane .
 U.S. Navy destroyers surround Soviet submarine that surfaced to recharge its diesel batteries . Soviet attack submarine found itself surrounded by United States destroyers that had been tracking it .
 The two sides were eyeball to eyeball when a Navy P-2 surveillance aircraft flew low over the submarine, dropping flares that detonated . The flares detonated with loud noises and blinding flashes .
 The Soviet captain thought he was under attack and gave orders to make ready to dive and fire at the nearest destroyer, the USS Cony . The captain of the Soviet ship believed he was being attacked by the enemy .
 His weapon of choice was a nuclear torpedo that would have not only destroyed the Cony but also badly damaged all of the other U.S. ships in the vicinity .
 The quick-thinking captain of the Cony sent an apology via a signal lamp, and the Soviet skipper saw it just before his sub was about to dive . Such close calls spurred Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev into intensive diplomacy to defuse the crisis .
 The deal was for the Soviets to withdraw their missiles in return for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The Soviets withdrew their missiles from Cuba in exchange for a United States pledge not .
 Kennedy agreed to withdraw Jupiter missiles from Turkey that could reach Moscow as quickly as Soviet missiles in Cuba could reach Washington . Jupiter missiles could reach Russia within hours of reaching the U.S. President Kennedy withdrew the missiles .
 Khrushchev got the idea of asking for the removal of the Jupiters from an article in The Washington Post by columnist Walter Lippmann .
 In reality both men deserve credit for making concessions to save humanity . Of course, they also deserve blame for putting the world on the brink of disaster .
 If there is one flaw in this deeply researched book, it is that Plokhy does not emphasize how reckless Kennedy was . Kennedy was not only in ordering the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion but also in continuing efforts to overthrow or kill Cuban leader Fidel Castro .
 Cuba was a “low priority” for JFK until the missile crisis, says Plokhy . Cuba was never a priority for JFK, says JFK .
 Robert Kennedy personally oversaw Operation Mongoose to overthrow Castro . Khrushchev’s fateful decision to install nuclear missiles in Cuba was one of the reasons for the decision .
 His other motive was to redress a United States advantage in long-range missiles, he says .
 The Soviet strongman had no clear idea what he would do if the missiles were discovered by Washington, as they soon were . Pakistan, India, China, North Korea and the U.S. are at risk of nuclear standoffs today .
 There is the potential for even greater danger in the future if Iran or other countries acquire nuclear weapons, says CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 The United States does not even have an embassy in Pyongyang or Tehran . At least Kennedy and Khrushchev had open lines of communication, but the U.S. does not .
 The Cuban missile crisis should be seen not as a relic of a long-concluded conflict but as a terrible augury of what could happen in the future if we cannot reduce the risk of nuclear war .
 "Cool heads prevailed. So did Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, even though he later tried to portray himself as a dove."
 "Plokhy writes that the Soviet troops in Cuba were poised on a knife’s edge, expecting an American attack any minute"
 The U-2 only narrowly missed running into two Soviet MiG-17s sent to intercept the spy plane . The plane was shot down over Cuba .
 A Soviet attack submarine surfaced to recharge its diesel batteries, it found itself surrounded by United States Navy destroyers that had been tracking its movements . So did an even more dangerous confrontation that night in the Bermuda Triangle .
 The quick-thinking captain of the Cony sent an apology via a signal lamp, and the Soviet skipper saw it just before his sub was about to dive . Such close calls spurred Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev into diplomacy to defuse the crisis .
 Khrushchev got the idea of asking for the removal of the Jupiters from an article in The Washington Post by columnist Walter Lippmann, who was privy to discussions .
 "Of course, the two leaders also deserve blame for putting the world on the brink of disaster to begin with," the author says .
 Robert Kennedy personally oversaw Operation Mongoose to overthrow Castro — not normally the role of an attorney general . The threat to a "fraternal" regime was one of the reasons for Khrushchev’s fateful decision to install nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 "I could not help but think of the dangers that exist today from nuclear standoffs involving Pakistan, India, China, North Korea and the U.S."
 Boot was a senior foreign policy adviser to John McCain’s presidential campaign in 2007-2008 . Boot has been placed on Army, Air Force, Marine Corps and Navy professional reading lists . Boot won the Marine Corps Heritage Foundation Award from the best nonfiction book pertaining to Marine Corps history
 He served as an adviser to U.S. commanders in Iraq and Afghanistan . He was a key adviser to United States commanders in both countries .
 Boot was named one of America’s ‘Great Immigrants’ by the Carnegie Corporation and one of the 50 most influential Jewish Americans by the Forward newspaper . He has lectured on behalf of the United States State Department and at many military institutions, including the Australian Defense College
 Eric Breindel Award for Excellence in Opinion Journalism given annually to a writer who exhibits his "love of country and its democratic institutions" In 2007, he won the Eric Breinel Award given annually .
 From 1992 to 1994 he was an editor and writer at the Christian Science Monitor . He was editor of the Monitor from 1992 until 1994 .