 Savannah Slate (lolloge Honiecoining Is Nov. 6) SSC Player Dies — Story on Pa.|;e 6 Savannah Slate .
 Emma Sue McCrory will lead the parade of student and alumni for the SSC liomecomlng festivities . Emma Sue will lead a gigantic parade for the students and alumni .
 Miss McCrory is a member of Delta Sigma Theta sorority, the Tiger's Roar Staff, Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges, Camilla Hubert Hall Council, Boar's
 The attendants to ""Miss Savannah State"" are Juanita Quinn and Dorothy Brown . Miss Quinn is a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority .
 Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges? and the College Playhouse. Who's who among students in American universities and Colleges, and the college Playhouse .
 Mis.s Brown is a member of Delta Sigma Theta sorority, Who's Who Among Students In American Universities and Colleges, and the College Marshall Board . Mis. Brown is also on the college Marshall Board and the Who's
 Emma Sue McCrory, "Miss Savannah SUt« College" was crowned Miss Savannah, Savannah, Georgia . Miss Savannah was crowned at the Savannah College of Technology .
 First concept is the trend to a biochemical approach to life, indicating increased emphasis on chemistry's relationships to the science of life .
 Third involves changes in attitudes toward scientific inquiry . Second has to do with the cell as a ""human computer,"" while the third involves changing attitudes toward science inquiry .
 Times for local broadcast of ""The New Biology"" on TV will be announced by local newspapers . Local newspapers will announce the broadcast of the program .
 The study guide, written for the course by Dr Koppelman, is available at bookstores, or direct from the publisher, postpaid $2.50 .
 The fall 1961 conference of the Georgia Committee on Cooperation in Teacher Education convened at Fort Valley State College in Georgia . The conference was held in 1961 .
 Dr. Wilson, head of department of secondary education, Dr. Claude Hall, head, division of technical sciences, and Dr. Walter A Mercer, director of student teaching, are at the centre of the University of Cambridge . Dr. Mercer is the director of the student teaching at the
 Mercer presented a research paper pertaining to the organization and administration of off campus student teaching in relation to professional laboratory experiences in selected institutions of Georgia . Mercer presented the paper .
 Alvln Jones, Shelton Daniels and Benjamin Colbert; advisor — E, J. J. Jackson. Alvln . Jones . Colbert .
 Jerome Smith, Margaret Hayes, Emanuel Austin, Betty Upshur, Betty Williams, Betty Coleman, Jerome Smith and Emanuel Austin are featured in the film .
 Mattle Lattimore, Richard Cogen, Eddie BlvIns and Miss Luella Hawkins are advisors to Miss Hawkins . Hawkins is Miss Hawkins and Eddie Blivins, Eddie Cevallos .
 Committee on Publicity; students — Loretta Miller, Thermoa Thomas and Verdelle Lambert; advisor— Wilton C Scott . Committee on publicity: Students, students, advisor; advisor — Wilton Scott .
 Student Teaching Assignment Made student teachers have been assigned for the fall quarter . The assignment assignments will be based on student teaching assignments from students .
 Mrs. Pera Adkins, elementary education, East Broad Street School, Mrs. Pauline Hagins; Vernetie Moultrie Sims, elementary ed. Sims, Hodge Elementary School, Miss Louise Milton; Dora S Myles, elementary . Myles is elementary education
 Mildred Young, Ernest Robinson, Mrs Mamie Hart and Sol C Johnson are honored for their services . Sol. C Johnson, Sol. M. Hart, Mrs M. Young and Mrs Young are honored with medals .
 Millie C Creagh; Junice C, Wright, Mrs. Creagh and Mrs. Wright were students at Center High School in Waycross, Waycross .
 Each person whose name is listed has attained an average of 2.50 or higher on a full program during the summer quarter 1961. Meyers . Meyers, each person . whose name . is listed, each . person . has attained a . average of . 2 .50 on a
 Each Is accorded a place on the Dean's List for the fall quarter 1961 . Each Is therefore accorded . a place . to a place in the dean's List .
 Savannah, Savannah, graduated from Beach High School; Mamie E Greene, 2.66, senior, English major . Mamie Greene is a senior at the University of Florida .
 Savannah, Savannah, graduated from Beach High School; Juanita Moon, 3,00, senior, music major, graduated . Henrietta Meeks, 2.65, junior, biology major, also graduated from high school .
 Peace Corps are available to citizens of the U.S. years and over, including married couples without children . The Peace Corps is available to those who are over 50 years old .
 Tests and interviews are required by applicants before selections are made for overseas projects . Applicants are required to be selected for overseas work .
 Glennora E Martin, Engish major, and Gloria J Johnson, biology major, graduate of Alfred E Beach High School, Statesboro, Georgia . Gloria J . Johnson, a biology major and a high school senior, also graduated from Statesboro High School in Georgia .
 Savannah; and Sallie F Screen, business major, and graduate of Hutto High School, Bainbridge, Georgia . Savannah, Savannah, Georgia, is a junior at Savannah University .
 Other students are Veronica Owens, sophomore, English major who graduated from Alfred E, Beach High School, Savannah . Louise Lamar, senior, and graduated from Ruth Carter High School,. Talbotton, Georgia; and Zelma Stevenson, South Carolina, graduated from Wilson .
 College newspaper plays an important role in college life . College newspaper is an important part of college life. The college newspaper plays a vital role in student life.
 Students are represented to the outside world by student publications . You may not know It, but colleges are represented by students .
 The College newspaper does not only represent the college In the outside world, but It also serves as an outlet for Informing students of the activities that have taken place on and off campus which concern them .
 The college newspaper is an Instrument of mass communication on campus .
 Students may speak or voice their conceptions through editorials, feature stories, poems, etc. It is a publication by which the students may speak . Students may also voice their ideas through . editorials and feature stories .
 This raises the question of freedom of the student publication versus control . This also raises the issue of freedom versus control of the publication .
 The college newspaper represents the students and gives them a chance to debate and test experimental thoughts, emotions, and beliefs . The newspaper represents students .
 A free college newspaper gives self-expression of the outstanding moments on campus .
 It has many motives of expression and is as multiform as human emotion, says author . "Emotions are multiform," says author. "They have many motives, many motives and many motives"
 The college newspaper does not only have a local campus value but also a professional value also . It is the first time the college newspaper has been featured in a major college newspaper .
 A college newspaper holds the major spotlight of student expression in college life . So from these conceptions, it can be concluded that a college newspaper is responsible for student expression .
 Presidenfs: Every generation of college students faces new and changing conditions . Presidenf: "College students face new and changed conditions. Every generation is facing a new set of challenges."
 Many students appear to be worried about the lack of ability to finance their college education . Students are worried about how they will be able to pay for their education .
 It is no exaggeration to state that today the number and variety of . sources of financial assistance have never been as numerous as many . The number of sources of . financial assistance has never increased in the United States .
 It appears that a number of factors may be responsible for the apparent shortage of supplies . It appears to be a combination of factors that may be behind the shortage .
 In many instances, college students and high school seniors have failed to do specific planning for a college career . High school seniors and college students often fail to plan for college careers . Students and college seniors should have done more planning for college career, experts say .
 Applications for aid have been filed at times when the student would be least likely to receive help . Applications for help are filed when students would be most likely to get help . Students have filed applications for aid at times they would be the least likely recipients .
 Many of the applications, when filed, have been executed in a manner that tended to discourage the accept-nce of the student . Many of these applications have been filed in a way that discourages students from applying for university .
 When applications are filed a month or two before the college opens, most of the funds for that year have been exhausted . Most of the money is spent on applications for the next year .
 If applications are not properly filled, contain omissions, erasures, mistakes in spelling and punctuation, some doubt is raised concerning the validity of the risk . The risk is raised if applications are incomplete or contain errors or omissions in spelling or punctuation .
 Agencies and individuals wish to make certain that students are able and willing to do acceptable and superior grades of college work . Students should be able to make sure they are prepared for college .
 Financial aid is scarce because of the lack of acquaintance with available resources . Another factor which makes it appear that financial aid is not scarce is the lack .
 Almost every student of college caliber could qualify for aid under several agencies . Almost every college student could qualify under various agencies for aid .
 The ability of a student to wade through information and discover which one meets his condition best is one index of his ability to succeed . A third factor which contributes to the apparent scarcity is the lack of initiative and drive .
 Students who are willing to work can find many opportunities to supplement their major source of income . Students can find opportunities to work in a variety of ways to supplement income .
 This willingness must be accompanied by the desire to perform first class service wherever one Is employed . This willingness to be a good person must also be willing to provide the best service .
 This trait and characteristic should be exemplified in every type of job opportunity, as well as in the academic program . This trait is exemplified by the success of a successful student in the classroom .
 Students must have enough drive and initiative to make their needs and desires known to the people who are in position to assist them . Students must also have the courage to speak to people who want to help them. Students must be driven and have the initiative to reach out for help .
 Every year hundreds of college students fall out of college because no one knows that extent of their financial need . No one knows the extent of students' financial need, and no one does .
 Most lending agencies are not interested in mediocre or sub-standard college work . Lenders don't want students to do mediocre college work, they say . Most lenders are interested in student loans .
 The best assurance that can be provided for one who needs help is a good record as an individual and as a college student . A good record should be given to one who is seeking help, says the author .
 Few if any funds are available for the mentally soft or the social outlaw . Few funds available for those who want to be social or mentally soft .
 There are millions available for students who have plans for their development, who show that they can profit by a college education, and who exercise initiative to move forward .
 Congress adjourned with moderate success after a long hectic battle between liberals, radicals, conservatives and congressional neutralists in an endeavor to legislate for their respective constituents .
 Liberals and radicals tried endlessly to push President Kennedy's progressive measures . Kennedy's chief lobbyist, Larry O'Brien, claimed to congressional leaders that such measures were designed to compete with the prevailing chaos .
 President Obama was elected more so on his father's financial influence than by his own capabilities . He had little or nothing to say when questioned about the recent session of Congress .
 It can be stated that he is everything but complacent regarding the matter . But it can plainly be stated .
 Democrats are cheering their success and Republicans are cheering the failures . Nevertheless, Democrats are cheerleaders for their success, Republicans say .
 Kennedy's measures were passed with much facilitation . In such fields as minimum wage, housing and aid for depressed areas, Kennedy's initiatives were passed .
 Kennedy failed to get exactly what he wanted in his arbitrable and remote foreign aid bill . But some of the more liberalized bills passed with much more difficulty .
 He also failed to procure medical care for the aged, and his highly controversial education bill was put off until Congress convenes next year .
 Senator Barry Goldwater and his cults are crying that things are still moving with too much haste . To the satisfaction of southern conservatives his civil rights promises were also sidetracked . In consequence, the past session was moderate .
 Last month President Kennedy sent Vice President Lyndon B Johnson and German hero General Lucius B Clay to West Berlin . Washinfjtoii Should Take Drastic Action Against Kremlin .
 President Obama has assured Berliners that the U.S. government intends to stand firm on its vital interest in the isolated city .
 This symbolic move was also intended to boost the morale of the Berlin people, a people so full with fear of all-out war that they tend to become unconcerned about their own fate and destiny .
 These oppressed people need more than a morale boost, they need evidence of support in time of war . They need evidence that the western world will give them more than lip service, but strong support in war .
 A small boy may not dare defend himself against a fellow larger than himself, but if big brother appears on the scene, the smaller boy will not procrastinate for long .
 This writer is by no means in favor of war, but believes that the U.S. should take effective action against the conspirators . This writer does not believe that the United States should go to war .
 Negotiations with the Russians has proven time and time again to be futile due to each country's failure to concede to the other . The Russians have refused to give up their control of the situation .
 Washington should initiate an economic blockade against the Russians and cease all commercial ties with the Red world . Washington should also cease all economic ties with Russia .
 Academic freedom has become one of the central issues of the times, says William D HAGINS . Commercial wise, the Communists need us more than we need them, he says .
 If we forget the importance of academic freedom in an institution of higher learning, then our learning is in vain, says Simon Tisdall .
 It is not for him to preach a cause or to expect the student to take his mere say-so on any matter concerning which men dispute, he says .
 It is for him to state his reasoned conclusions on matters within the area of his instruction . But it is for the head of the state to say what he thinks about the matter .
 The latter should do so with respect for the teacher's greater experience, but nonetheless with the readiness to follow his own reason wherever It leads .
 The more thoughtful among them, the better students, become uneasily aware that a teacher is not a free man . They lose respect for him and their trust in the honesty of his teaching .
 They become more skeptical, even cynical, and often inclined to believe that the suppressed doctrine must have virtue in it . They become skeptical and cynical, they say .
 The need for good leadership among men has become increasingly obvious in recent years . It is increasingly obvious that good leadership is needed in men's lives .
 The world is in need of qualified people to take their places as leaders, as guides or conductors to steer their people to a safe and profitable destiny . The world needs qualified people who are qualified to be leaders and conductors .
 In considering preparation for leadership, we are to be mindful of the qualities sought in a leader . In considering preparing for leadership we should consider the qualities needed to succeed in leadership .
 The ability to think clearly and logically, the ability to accept criticism, the feeling of security, and a sense of responsibility, are key to success in life .
 A good leader must also have foresight, thoughtfulness, respectfulness, and above all, freedom from bigotry, writes David Frum .
 We must note that an educated person is one who is capable of doing the right thing at the right time . An educated person can be a capable person, says the author of the book .
 The qualities just mentioned are not usually inherited, but are developed over a period of time by special efforts . Special efforts are made to develop these qualities, not inherited, say experts .
 As the leaders of tomorrow, we should be mindful of our responsibilities . We should be aware of our responsibility to lead our country's future .
 The weight of the world is thrust upon our shoulders because we are college men and women . The masses look to us to assume the mantle of leadership. We are college college students and women, and the masses look for leadership, she says .
 These men had the courage and the will power to take the helm in the midst of perilous situations and lead their people to a new destiny . These men were the men who took the helm .
 Democracy is a government by the people either directly or by elected representatives . Democracy is by people directly or directly, or by representatives .
 Democracy is you, living from day to day under a system that recognized the worth and dignity of each human being . It's a hot dog at a baseball game, it's your radio, your neighbor's, and his neighbor's all tuned to a different station .
 Democracy is you inasmuch as it stands guard over you, your family, your home, your schools, and your right to worship when and where you please, as well as to speak your own mind . Put yourself in this picture.
 There's a knock on your door in the night, your family is awakened by the noise, you go to the door trembling in your shoes . There's no easy way to say goodbye to your family in the dark .
 When you finally open the door you see two policemen standing there staring you in the eyes . They quickly push you aside and begin to search through every closet and bureau searching for something of which you haven't any knowledge . The two policemen are soon pushing you aside .
 The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, paper, and effects, shall not be violated, says the U.S. Constitution .
 October, 1961 THE TIGER'S ROAR's News in PICTURE Savannab State's matching banil in ailion, Coluiiilnis Classics paiatle. October, 1981 The Tiger's News in Pictures . October 31 .
 J fliss Savannah Stale and Attendants Ininp eharni and heanty to President Payne address student body . Savannah Stales, Savannah Payne and Attendant Inin Phearni address students . Savannah Payne addresses student body.
 Miss Perry, Miss Fort Valley Slate, and Miss Savannah Stale, Miss Ennna Sue McCrory . Support Your Hompcominfi on Facebook and Twitter .
 Kiirnielta Clark chats iiitb ^liss Savannah State anil Mr Clay at Mr Clay al fresbmell reception .
 October, 1961 Miss CliallahooilKiCla »si. s uiiil Anciiilaiils. Page 4 THE TIGErr.S ROAR .
 Maroon is a lavishing new color between red and maroon . It is worn very well with black, white, and certain shades of gold .
 Magenta is a very favorable color for double-breasted or four-button suits . For the ""Homecoming Game"" or any other special occasion magenta is also a good color .
 For that leather Jacket or long coat that is the talk of the campus, and that coat sweater magenta . Magenta Is a beautiful color and comes in a number of plaids . For that jacket, the sweater sweater is a great color .
 For the rabbit fur sweater, mink collar, and that special racoon fur for suits and coats which can be bought dyed to match any color, for a change try magenta . For a change of color, try a magenta rabbit fur .
 Girls' shoes, bags, hats, gloves and jewelry come in magenta also to match that special white dress for concerts and banquets . Magenta is a popular color for girls' shoes and bags .
 A magenta velvet costume with matching hat and matching hat would be very stunning on any young lady . A matching hat, shoes and matching jacket would also be stunning .
 If you are considering colors, then think of magenta and some matching contrasting colors . Yes, girls, think of matching matching colors .
 The Continental Look is in and it's going strong . It's in and going strong. It's a Continental Look .
 Accentuated with a detachable belt, cuffs on the sleeves, solid colors as well as muted plaids and side vents .
 By the description above I know that you have readily figured what I am speaking of. By the . description above, you have . readily figured out what I . know what I was talking about .
 The latest fashion trends on campus and elsewhere . The latest fashions for Ivy students are on the rise .
 It is the double-breasted continental suit and sportcoat in either the four or six-buttoned model . You're right, it is the Double-breast continental suit .
 The majority of the fellows on campus are jumping clean in either one of these two models . Savannah State College believes in being up-to-date in styling .
 The latest addition to the very popular and colorful sweater line is the Big City Model sweater . This sweater is altogether different and completely new .
 It is accentuated with a knitted belt with a leather buckle which is completely removable if desired if desired . The belt is made of knitted leather and knitted with knitted material .
 This sweater is a cardigan which buttons all the way up to the neck, and completes the button collar with a roll collar .
 You must have the most popular selection of ties, and of course, the majority must reps . Along with this, you must also have a most popular collection of ties .
 As far from shoes, please have some dirty sneaks and cordovans in either plain toe or wing tip .
 Tiger's Roar staff for the 1961-62 school year is operating under the guidance of William D Hagins. editor in chief, senior, social science major, Savannah; and Norman Elmore, co-editor, junior, English major . Other top members are associate editors, James
 Campus editors Dorothy Carter, Carolyn Vinson and Samuel Truell are campus editors . The campus editors are also on campus at Savannah, Madison and Savannah .
 College gess. Redell Walton, senior, health and physical education major, Chicago; Bobby Bur, 18, is senior, Greek editor, Bobby Bur . Fashion editors are Rosemary McBride, senior and elementary education major .
 Savannah, Savannah, and Charlie Phillips, junior, social science major, Savannah. Savannah, Georgia . Charlie Phillips is a junior at Savannah University .
 Savannah society editors, Annette Kennedy. senior, social science major, Savannah, and Emma Sue McCror^, senior, English major. Savannah; society editor, Emma Sue. McCror .
 Edith Albright, Annette Kennedy, William Day and Otis Cox are columnists . They include Otis Mitchell, Samuel Truell and Annette Truell . They also include William Day, Otis Day and William Day .
 Percy Harden is serving as business manager and Wilton C, Scott, director of Public Relations and Alumni Affairs, and director of student publications . Miss Albertha Boston, assistant professor, Business Administration, and Robert Holt are serving as advisers to the students .
 A Tribute to Dag Hammarskjold is published by James T. Deevoe . A tribute to a remarkable man .
 As the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, he was a bridge between East and West . He remained the link between the two sides, in spite of Russia's desire to remove him from his position .
 His years as secretary-general will be labeled as turbulent years by future historians . During his tenure, he dealt with the Palestine question, the U.S. flyers held as prisoners in China, the Suez crisis, the revolt in Hungary, the . problem of Lebanon, the problem
 Dag Hammarskjold had a number of problems to deal with in the Congo . The Congo was one of the most important countries in the world .
 Dag Hammarskjold's difficulties stemmed from the fact that the U.N. was called upon to undertake a task for which the machinery did not exist . The United Nations was asked to undertake tasks for which there was no machinery for .
 The task was to help mold a new nation, and prevent the former colonial power, Belgium, from establishing a puppet state within the province of the new nation . This task was the same time as trying to prevent Belgium from establishing its own puppet state .
 East and West attempted to create spheres of influence, which led to civil strife and the death of one of Africa's brilliant young leaders, Patrice Lumumba . This was to no avail, because of the attempt to create a sphere of influence .
 Someone has called Hammarskjold the Custodian of the Brushfire Peace, It Is true that . mi ^ Induction of Camilla Hubert Hall officers .
 Camilla Hubert Hall Council is an organization made up of all the residents of the hall . The old residents have extended a hearty welcomeand a helping hand to all the new students .
 Ira Snelson was elected to the office of president with Delores Bowen to assist her as vice president . Delore Bowen was also elected to assist Snelson in the election of president .
 Nora Williams, secretary; Annie Banks, assistant secretary; Louise Lamar, treasurer, and Mary Moss, chaplain . Mary Moss is chaplain at the hospital .
 The installation of the newly elected officers was held in an impressive ceremony on Sunday . The installation ceremony was held at the University of Cambridge .
 October 1, 1961. in the lobby of Camilla Hubert Hall, with Mrs, Margret C Robinson administering the oaths of office . October 1. 1961 . in the . lobby of the . Camilla . Hubert . Hall .
 The theme for the occasion was ""The Great Pillows of a Temple"" Miss Margie Lecount presided at the occasion . She presided over the event .
 The council hopes that with cooperation of each resident, this year will be a most enjoyable and prosperous one . The problem of the Congo was crisis diplomacy, and In spite of the secretary-general's administrative ability and diplomatic foresight, he was unable to bring harmony .
 We believed that the United Nations has been right In this action In the Congo, We are sorry that Mr Hammarskjold had to die in this venture . This Inability was not Hammarkjold's fault, but stemmed from the many years of colonialism, oppression and bigotry practiced
 The Freshman Class of Savannah State College has elected its officers for the year of 1961-62 . Freshman class elected officers for 1961- 1962 .
 The officers are as follows; Darnell Dawson, president; Alfonso Brown, vice president; Cassandra Sexton, secretary; Florence Rhaney, assistant secretary; Battle Moore, treasurer; and Alvin Watklns, acting reporter .
 The class has also elected its queen and her attendants, who are Miss Artuetta Doanes, Miss Freshman; Miss Delores Williams, first attendant and Miss Mattle Lattlmore, second attendant . The class also elects its queen .
 I Woirt Tell It by Dan Wilson . Come on. tell me your secret .
 Forgive me for crltclzing, I sometimes talk too much; But that skeleton of yours is awfully lean. Forgive him for crlzing, he sometimes talk .
 Your secret is too darn good to tell; That's why I'm going out and yell it. That's the reason I'm yelling it. Your secret isn't good enough to tell. It's your secret .
 To catch your love, you've got to be strong For at times the case lasts for days, So never give chase on a empty stomach . Never chase on an empty stomach, you'll find that it pays .
 To catch your love, you've got to be sly . And let her have her way at any cost. To catch her love,  you're got to catch her .
 They sparkle and shine with the Illuminance of Keats' ""Bright Star;"" And smile as propitiously as ""Helios"" On earth's Inhabitants from afar .
 Life's advantageous components are Imbued; Enticing the indulgent and ambitious to pursue them . On these coveted days, nothing less than Life's advantages are Imbedued . Life is full of opportunities for the rich and famous .
 Bembrandt's ""Night Watch" is encompassed in many a day . Some days have the melancholy mood of ""The Deserted Village" to supplement your dismay. That ""Helios"" sends every day your way .
 The days that ""Pegasos"" chooses to send will be Forever exempt of suns . The days the "pigasos" choose to send are Forever exempt from suns. The days they choose will be forever exempt from the sun .
 When ""Pegasos"" takes pride in making Every friend a foe, it takes pride to make every foe a foe . Clouds of gloom, remorse, discontent, discontent and woe; When "PegASos" takes pride, he said .
 This edition of Tiger's Roar is being dedicated to Wendell Mcintosh in memory of one of the most loved members of our college family . Mcintosh was a member of the Savannah State College family .
 Wendell was a tackle on our football team and was injured during practice October 5 and because of this injury he passed away Friday October 13. 1981 at 5:30m. 1981 . Wendell died from a brain injury .
 Wendell Wendell was a graduate of Ballard-Hudson High School of Macon Georgia . While attending high school he never participated in football because his parents objected . Wendell never played football because of his parents' objections .
 Mack, as called by most of his friends, joined our family in September of '59 . He immediately began participating in football, and the following spring quarter he played baseball also . Mack also played baseball .
 He was a junior majoring in physical education and was an active member of the Physical Education Club . He was also a junior at the University of Columbia .
 He also was the president of the Lampados Club of Omega Psi Phi fraternity . One of his main goals was to become a member of this fraternity . He was also president of this club .
 "It is really touching to the college family, because he never got the chance to participate in a single game this year," says college family . "It was really touching," says family member .
 Mack was a fellow who was good humored, I can't remember one time that I saw him angry with anyone . Mack was the man who was always happy with anyone, his friend says .
 I think Mack was 'one of the finest fellows in all respects that I have ever met' Mack was one of the 'best fellows' he had ever met, according to his friend .
 A great football player and an equally great member of our family has passed on to the great beyond . To me a dear friend has been lost and to ""Savannah State College"" a great footballer and a great family member .
 When a fellow risks his hfe for the college he loved and loses It, the entire community is at a great loss, for there is no greater love than the love of a man who laid down his life for his friends . The only thing that can be said is that the entire
 Savannah State Tigers lost its first game of the season by being edged by a score of 3-0 as the result of an 18-yard field goal . The Tigers Edged By Waters, 3- 0 .
 SC Tigers' predominately freshman squad played a scoreless first half . SSC Tigers' majority of freshman team played first half of first-half .
 The Tiger starting team sporting six freshmen on their starting team held the Waters team at will as expected by many .
 The Tigers' defensive might proved too much for any sort of running attack . The Waters team, unlike the Tigers, was dependent upon its well experienced senior laden club .
 Moses Herring, freshman quarterback, provided the only offensive thrill of the afternoon by breaking momentarily into the open only to be stopped by a lone Waters defender . Herring is the only freshman quarterback to make an offensive touchdown .
 The lone score of the day came on a field goal by Waters halfback Walter Jackson . Walter Jackson kicked a decisive three-pointer .
 Standouts for the Tigers were guards George Johnson, Willie Simmons, center Calvin Roberts, tackle Bernard Lewis, end Fred Carter, halfback Robert Saxby, who stopped five of Edward Waters aerials .
 Hi-Hat Lanes is located on Atlantic and Park Avenues . The Tigers next game will be next week when they play Fort Valley State College .
 Hi-Hat Lanes consists of thirty-two (32 1 AMF) pin lanes which are equipped with American Machine and Foundry's famous automatic pinspotter . Is a welcomed addition to the Negro recreation facilities .
 The cost of the construction of the new bowling lanes is slightly over one-half million dollars . The establishment is geared to operate on a twenty-four hour a day basis .
 Hi-Hat Lanes provides for its customers a free supervised play room for the children, league meeting room, a customized pro-shop for all bowling accessories, a luxurious snack bar, plus ample concourse area for spectator seating and dining .
 The Hi-Hat Lanes opened on October 13, 1961, under the management of Kharn Collier and Alphonso McLean, manager and assistant manager respectively .
 Savannah State College Tigers put on a strong defensive show and battled the Morris College Hornets to 0-0 . The Tigers' much relied on passing attack was stalled all evening by the high gusts of wind and a hard charging Morris College line .
 The Tigers blocked two punts deep in Morris territory to halt Morris drives . The Tigers could never get started in the first half .
 McArthur Pratt led the Tiger offensive machine with 88 yards rushing . The Tigers penetrated deep into Morris territory but penalties, fumbles and fumbles drove them back .
 Blocked punts by Benjamin Spann and Fred Carter gave the Tigers two chances to score . A total of 80 yards in penalties kept the Tigers bottled up .
 Savannah State College wins second annual Chattahoochee Classic by defeating Fort Valley State College by a score of 14-7 . 5,000 spectators watched the game in Memorial Stadium in Columbus, Georgia .
 Two minutes after the second half got under way Fort Valley marched from their 30 yard line to the 40 yard line of Savannah State . William Hogan went straight up the middle and scored for the first score of the game . Clifford Brown booted the extra point .
 Savannah State took the ball after receiving the kickoff and moved into the Fort Valley end zone . Savannah State moved to the end of the end zone after the kickoff . The game ended in a touchdown for Savannah State .
 Quarterback Moses Herring flipped a 25-yard pass to Thomas ""Sugar"" Williams . The Savannah State quarterback flipped the pass to Williams .
 Herring rolled around end and went to pay dirt from the nine yard line . Herring went for nine yards from the end of the field . The touchdown was Herring's first touchdown of the season .
 The third quarter ended with Fort Valley leading 7 to 6 . After the fourth quarter got under way Fort Valley gave up the ball on downs and punted to Savannah State College .
 Freddie Myers bulled his way across for the winning touchdown . McArthur Pratt connected on a 35-yard pass play to Henry H Saunders who was stopped on the 25-yard line, .
 The basketball team will begin its 1961-62 basketball drill on November 1, The squad will be drilling under the watchful eye of coach Ted Wright, who has had much success in guiding the team .
 Over the last three-year period the team has won 80 games while losing only 12 . The same squad will be put into action this year by Coach Wright .
 Redell Walton is a 21-year-oId lad from Chicago . Walton is one of the main purposes for the success of the team . The fifth prepped in the vicinity of the Big O . Walton has been a member of the Chicago Cubs team .
 Last year he was voted an AllAmerican berth while averaging 25 points per game . As a freshman he averaged 17 points a game, as a sophomore he averaged 22 points .
 Walton is the first basketball All-American In the history of the school . Walton has not by any chance been responsible for the entire success of the team . Walton is not responsible for any of the success of Walton's team .
 Ira Jackson has been very valuable in the running community, says Ira . Ira's four running buddies have each shared in the spotlight, he says .
 He has led the team in rebounding three straight years, and has been the number two scorer . He has also been the team's rebounding leader .
 Captain of the team James Dixon, known as the take charge guy, is a very fine player . Captain Dixon is known for his take charge style of play .
 He is only 5' 4"" but he makes up for it with his speed and ability to handle the ball . He is also known for his ability to make contact with the ball and handle it well .
 Willie Tate, a player who always seems to get better in the clutch, is very dependable . Tate has a history of getting better in clutch situations . Tate is a veteran and has a reputation for being a dependable player .
 He can play the front court or the back court and is just as effective playing either . He can also play in the back or in the middle of the court . He has a reputation for his versatility .
 A lot will be expected from Johnny Mathis (no relation to the famous singer) A sophomore who is now an experienced player and should be ready to step into the collegiate ranks .
 Leon Wright, Paul Thompson, William Day, Raymond Harper, and Harvey Bailey are featured in this week's top 10 news stories . They are featured by William Day and Raymond Harper .
 There was ample seating for the anticipated audience which looked forward to this traditional musical event . The audience was expected to enjoy the traditional musical performance .
 Handel's oratorio The Messiah was the Christmas portion of The Messiah . Handel performed during the Christmas season more often than any other musical composition in existence .
 The sections heard featured several soloists as well as the Choral Society . The sections of the sections were played by soloists and soloists .
 The soprano solists were Margaret Tilson, a freshman music major from Savannah, and Juanita Moon, a senior music major also from this city . The audience was invited to the Savannah Opera House .
 Eudora Moore Allen, a junior music minor from Savannah, was one of the tenor soloists . John Calvin Reed, a sophomore from Sylvania, was heard for the first time as a soloist . Eudor Moore Allen was a junior musician from Savannah .
 Another sophomore from Sylvania, James Weldon Johnson, likewise did a tenor solo solo . Another sophomore, James Johnson, also did a solo solo in Sylvania .
 Joshua Walker, a sophomore from Savannah, and Launey F Roberts Jr., a graduate and now a local public school teacher, were heard in leading bass solos .
 Rose Marie Overstreet, a junior music major from Sylvania, provided a piano accompaniment . James Thompson, Jr., Jr., a member of the Fine Arts faculty, was at the organ .
 Braithwaite conducted augmented group that included members of the college Choral Society, Men's Glee Club, faculty, alumni and community singers .
 Staging for the performances were under the direction of Felix J Alexis, Superiniendent of Buildings and Grounds, the ushers were members of the Marshal Board under the supervision of Miss Althea Williams .
 The Overture, played by Miss Overstreet and Mr Thompson; The Recitative, Comfort Ye, sung by Mr Reed; the tenor Air, Every Valley Shall Be Exalted, by Mr Johnson; the chorus .
 The bass Recitative, Thus Saith The Lord of Hosts, and the Air. And The Glory of The Lord; the Glory of the Lord; . The bass recitative .
 But Who May Abide The Day of His Coming, both sung by Mr Roberts; the chorus . Mr Roberts: "The Day of his Coming"
 And He Shall Purify; the alto Recitative, Behold, A Virgin Shall Conceive Sung by Mrs. Mrs. And He shall Purify . The alto recitative is Recitative of Behold and Behold .
 The Alto Air and Chorus, O Thou That Tellest Good Tidings, and the bass Recitative, For, Behold, Darkness Shall Cover The Earth, and The People That Walked In Darkness, both sung by Mr Walker . For Unto Us A Child Is Born,
 K Payne aiinouiicey tliat Savannah iiccepled as a member of llie Southern President William State College . Savannah has been Association of Colleges, Universities and Secondary Schools accrediting agency .
 The freshman students are to be highly commended for their over-all participation in aiding with keeping the wheels oiled . The sophomores for serving dinners, the juniors for handling baked good sales and take out orders and seniors for waiting .
 Vernita Wright took the leadership for building decoration and music and Anna Cooper as general manager for engineering the success for the entire annual . Anna Cooper was the general manager of the annual event . The event was held in New York City, New York, New Jersey .
 Savannah State College is an official representative for the Christmas Stocking Fund . The money raised will be donated to Savannah State's Christmas Stocks Fund . Savannah State is Savannah State University's largest college .
 The objective of this drive is to provide a channel by which the generous, warm-hearted people on tlie campus may give cheer at Christmas time to those who would otherwise face a destitute .
 The Christmas Stocking Fund has the seal of approval of the Savannah Area Solicitation Review Board with R Nondell Coger as student general chairman and Dr. Dr. Cogers as student .
 Director of Secondary Education at Savannah State College, Dr. Wilson Wilson, as faculty advisor on the campus .
 Most of us, probably celebrated it in the usualy gay manner without giving much thought to its true meaning . We celebrate it in a typical gay manner .
 We have now returned to our classes to complete the last few weeks of required study for the quarter . In jolly anticipation of the approaching Christmas holidays, we have returned to classes .
 Let us not make the same mistake that we made in our celebration of Thanksgiving, too much festivity and not enough reverence . Let’s not make a mistake . Let's hope we don't make the mistake .
 It is a day that we should hold in high esteem above all others in the year . It is one of the most important New Year's Day celebrations in the world .
 We should be thankful, especially at Christmas time, for the birth of our Savior . We should seize the opportunity to thank Him for all the blessings, too numerous to name, that He has bestowed upon us .
 The wise men gave gifts to our Savior because it was a tradition in the ancient days never to approach a king without a gift . It was also a tradition to never approach a King without giving him a gift.
 The wise men knew that Christ was truly a king and the gifts that they gave Christ were given from the depths of their hearts . The gifts were given by the wise men who knew Christ truly was a king .
 Today, we have a different conception of gift giving than that of the wise men . Today's gift giving is a different idea of gift-gifting, says the author of the book .
 Merchants use gift giving at Christmas time as an opportunity to augment their trade . Merchants use it as a way of augmenting their trade.
 Employers use gift giving as a means of showing appreciation to their employees . They also give gifts as an inducement for more work from their employees. Employers also use gifts as a way to show appreciation to employees .
 Many of us simply give gifts because others do it, without the true spirit of giving . Many people give gifts simply because others have done it, or simply because they do it .
 When we exchange gifts, let us try to feel as the wise men must have felt as they gave their gifts to Christ . The wise men are wise men who gave gifts to the Christ .
 The writer of this article is gently trying to remind the read&r of the coming Christmas season and asking that we do not neglect to observe it's true meaning . We must remember also that the greatest gift that we may exchange at Christmas time, or any time, is sincere reverence,
 In making our resolutions, let us not forget to include more study for the next quarter and more cooperation and togetherness with our fellow students so that we may aid in making the student body of Savannah State College truly one to be admired .
 Jllcrrp Cfjristmasi anti a students leaving Assembly and heading for lunch . Students leaving Assembly leaving Assembly .
 Savannah State College is one of the few institutions of higher learning in the southern region with such an abundance of natural beauty . The Verdict Is Yours is your own .
 It seems only natural that we should constantly endeavor to maintain that beauty for which our college is noted. And since the college is home to us. it seems only . it seems . natural that . we should strive to maintain . that beauty . For the first time, we should be proud
 A large number of students leaving chapel traverse the lawn in a mad dash to the dining hall instead of using the walkways provided . The walkways are provided for students leaving the chapel .
 Even more important, however, than the possible damage to the lawn is the indictment upon ourselves as college men and women .
 It seems that we have learned that the shortest distance between two points is a straight line, and that one can reach his destination even faster if he runs . But we ought not to forget the amendities of life, and we ought to forget that .
 Maturity, socially acceptable conduct, and appreciation for the finer things in life are intrinsic, that is embodied in the concept of college men and women . Maturity and social acceptable conduct are intrinsic to college men, women .
 The Tiger's Roar is the world's leading leading news and sportswriter . This week, we feature a special edition of our award-winning blog . Please submit your photos and videos for the next week's featured stories .
 Bobby Burgess is the Society Editor of the Society of Photographers . Photographer Louise Lamar and photographer Robert Mobely are featured in this week's Society Photoshoshoot .
 The TIGER'S ROAR December.61 World News and Politics . Good Leadership Based Upon Faith .
 The first, ""Faith in God"" upon which rest all worthy accomplishments of our civilization. The first . Faith in God . upon which . rest all of our worthy accomplishments, our civilization .
 Leaders who base their beliefs and purposes upon faith in God have survived the efforts of tyrants and dictators . Leaders who believe in God will survive tyrants or dictators, says President Obama .
 They have become successful guiders, have inspired great projects and strengthened the principals of democracy . They have also inspired great people to take part in the democratic process .
 The well known adage ■■As a man thinketh in his heart. so is he."" brings to light the great quality of ambition .
 "If one thinks that he has the ability and potentiality to lead, to organize and control situations, he will prove his worth with all energies and talents," he said .
 He will develop abilities that will take care of life and which will prove essential to the preservation of human rights and personal liberties, says President Obama . He will be able to take care for his life, says Obama .
 Our forefathers possessed ""Faith In their Fellowmen."" when they designed the Constitution . The Constitution was designed by the Founding Fathers to protect the Constitution from tyranny .
 "We must trust one another to do the things that will promote a good life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness," says President Obama . We must trust each other to do what we need to do to promote good life and liberty .
 Good leadership must be founded upon :i belief that there Is a freedom u> maintain. Good leadership is founded upon . There is a freedom to maintain. There is no freedom in politics .
 Leaders must comfort their followers in order to fortify the cause of freedom, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . "Leaders must comfort followers," he writes .
 The one big quality of leadership is that of accepting responsibilities, says President Obama . Obama has been criticized for his lack of leadership in the past .
 Savanunh^s Tennis Courts Are Opened . City-owned tennis courts have been added to a mounting list of desegregated facilities here .
 Several Negroes already have played without incident on the courts at city-owned Daffin Park . When Negroes ask to play in the courts, they will not be turned aside, said Herbert Griffin, Sr., chairman of the City Recreation Board .
 A C, Smith, attendant at the courts, said officials notified him several days ago to start permitting Negroes to play on the previously all-white courts .
 Savannah also has desegregated lunch counters, city buses, the public library and the municipal golf courses . The city also has a public library, public schools and the public golf course .
 This is a question that is pondering in the minds of practical-thinking people everywhere, where freedom of speech, religion, thought, association, and any other type of freedom is so dear to the inhabitants of the non-Communist countries .
 Many wonder why an individual dares to ask such a question, when seemingly democracy is on a rapid upward movement . Many people wonder why a person would dare dare to ask that question, especially in the US .
 These -complacent people are apt to be contented with our so-called democracy and disillusioned by the many advances made in our society in recent years . These people are likely to be satisfied with our democracy .
 In America, which is the undisputed leader of the non-Communist world, we have our first Catholic president, , a Negro cabinet member, and Jewish cabinet member .
 One New Frontiersman even went as far as to predict a Negro to the presidency by the twenty-first century . "I must say that I am not as optimistic. These radical moves are unprecedented in American history," he writes .
 Radical moves like the former and statements as the latter tend to bring about complacency in the best of us . Radical moves such as the former tend to make us complacent, writes Simon Tisdall .
 There are too few Americans who realize that we do not have a democracy, we have a model, and that model is not good enough . "We have a democratic model, not a democracy," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 It is especially not good enough for us to propagandarize our ideologies to the new and underdeveloped countries . It's especially not enough for . us to propagate . ideologies to . the new . and under developed countries .
 In a perfect democracy an individual could and would not be fired, rehired, and then severely reprimanded for taking an active part against the evils of his community and nation . In the perfect democracy, an individual would not have to be fired or re-hired for taking part
 We live in a society where a president reigns, who received less popular votes than his opponent . Yet in our so-called democracy the majority Is supposed to prevail .
 While Mr Kennedy is in office the majority of the people will suffer while he jams his extremely radical measures down our throats . Mr Kennedy will be in office while he is in power .
 In a true democracy a woman black or white, would be able to seek a local civic position without unfair tactics by her opponents to beat her . In a real democracy, a woman is able to run for a local position without using unfair tactics .
 In a democratic society, a general would not be ostracized by his country's legislature for informing his subordinates of the evils of communism . In a true democratic society a general should not be isolated for telling subordinates of communism, he says .
 This year even more than last, tiie vernal style scene promises to be a harmonious blend of tradition and innovation . The shape of things to come will change a bit .
 The new jackets will be longer by a fraction than heretofore, and lapels will be slightly wider . Happily, the natural shoulder hasn't been touched, but the new jackets won't be .
 Waist suppression, gentle but noticeable, will be back . You can expect to find more patch flap pockets on solid-color coats . Patch flap pockets will be added to solid-colored coats .
 Slacks retain slim and clean-lined silhouette, but with a decline in elasticized waistbands . Slacks win retain their slim and . cleanly-lined . silhouette, with a . decline in waistbands, slacks are slim and slim .
 Belt loops will be reappearing and with them, a sumptuous variety of new belts in both leathers and fabrics . The new belts will be available in leathers or fabrics .
 Candy-f lipes, boater stripes, awning .tnpes. ice cream parlor stripes are among the most popular stripes in the world .
 On blazers, sweaters, swim trunks, trunks and walking shorts, belts, dress and sport shirts, they promise to infuse the style season with an atmosphere of carnival gaiety .
 In contemporary society, college students are becoming aware more than ever of syncopated jazz music . Is a consequence of the ingenuity, versatility and improvisation of present day jazzmen .
 Modern jazz is deeply indebted to the pioneers of modern jazz, Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie and the volatile Thelonius Monk . Modern jazz has a long history of jazz improvisations .
 These men were mere noncomplacent during the be-bop era and consequently they rebelled in wrath against the jazz music of the early forties .
 Triumvirate of instruments created a revoi lutlon in music . By way of their instruments this trio created a re-imagined music .
 Many jazz critics believe that Morxk alone initiated the revolt because of his tendency to deviate from the favorite music of the pre-war years . Many of the jazz critics say that MorXk's music deviated from favorite music .
 Many people feel that he is still deviating, due to his absolute and complex style . Dixieland, and many people . feel that many people feel he is deviating from his style .
 I believe Monk, with the exception of Miles Davis, is the most disliked and least understood man in jazz today . I believe that Monk is the . exception to Miles Davis . Miles Davis is the least understood jazzman .
 Monk^s music is more of a composer than a musician, but when one contemplates the idea, one can't help but admire the man for his endeavors . I have no special predilection from Monk ^s music, because I feel that he is more than a composer .
 For to be a deviate or to conform against the prevailing elements of music and still be accepted is something many musicians may never accomplish . For many musicians, this is something they may never be able to accomplish .
 Charlie Parker's death in 1956 was felt throughout the jazz world that no one would ever fill the shoes left vacant by this immortal genius . In 1956 death claimed the ""Bird"" Charlie Parker .
 John Coltrane was given the chance by Miles and Monk respectively to play in their combos . But a few years later a young man by the name of John Col Trane had been given the opportunity to play .
 Coltrane played with so much reverence and vitality that he is now by far the most acclaimed jazzman today . He may never fill Bird's shoes to capacity but he will undoubtedly wear the larger portion for a long time to come .
 John Coltrane has perpetuated his way in a field that is as difficult as Japanese trigonometry, and his is definitely here to stay . The jazz legend has a long-standing reputation in the world .
 The Coed in Literature Chtss features a group of women dressed in pink and white . It is the work of one of the world's most famous female writers .
 A visiting prof was on campus yesterady; Boy, was he handsome, but fair . Boy was a visiting prof at the university .
 His voice was shrill, his smile was warm, And his gait was very smooth . His voice and gait were shrill and his voice was warm .
 Despite the beautiful poem the class is discussing, she is preoccupied . Wonder what is going on in her pretty head, For it is obvious that she is .
 Faculty of Savannah State College voted unanimously to extend commendation to President William K Payne for his leadership in obtaining accreditation .
 For the first time in the history of the College, it has been accepted into the circle of academic institutions on the basis of criteria applicable to all institutions in this region . The College has been admitted to circle of institutions in the region .
 James Thompson, Margaret Tynes, nationally known soprano, in concert at Savannah State College . Tynes is a nationally known singer and nationally known performer .
 Dr Lionel Newson, of the Department of Sociology, at Morehouse College, spoke at Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity"" Founder's Day program . Dr Newson was speaking at the Morehouse college .
 Roland Nash, from Claxton, Ga., is a member of the Savannah State Tigers' fabulous team . Nash is a junior at Savannah State University .
 Alvin Toney, from Columbus, Ga., is expected to see a lot of action with the Tigers . Toney was drafted from the University of Columbia, Georgia, in 2012 .
 December, 1961 THE TIGER'S ROAR Savannah State College 1961-62 . The Tiger's ROAR is the story of the Savannah State State College .
 The squad is under the management of Coach Ted Wright, who has had much success in guiding the same starting five for the past three years . Coach Wright has had success in managing the same team for the last three years.
 Over the last three-year period, the team has won 80 games while losing only 12 . This includes winning nine championships . Over the same period, they have also won nine championships.
 Walton is the first basketball player In the history of the school to berth All-American, Redell is a 21-year-old lad from Chicago . Walton is one of the starting five, Walton is a starting five-man team .
 Captain James Dixon, only 5' 4"" is the little general of the squad . He makes up for his lieight with his fine performances . Captain Dixon is the captain of the side .
 Willie Tate possesses one of the finest jump shots of any college player . Tate is the player who always seems to be the man to shoot the big points when needed .
 Steve Kelly, the ball handier of the team, is undoubtedly i^me of the finest ball handlers in any college . Steve Kelly is one of the best ball handlers of any college college .
 A lot will be expected from Johnny Mathis, Leon Wright, Paul Thompson, Raymond Harper and Harvey Bailey this season .
 With the holiday season approaching, you'll be dresshig formally with increasing frequency . Let's review what's new and correct in campus formal wear so you're at ease .
 The correct and smart silhouette for campus formal wear is the natural .shoidder, single breasted dinner jacket with black satin shaicl collar . Single breasted . dinner jacket is the perfect . shoidder .
 The high fashion peak lapel model is also being worn by some tmderpraduates . Tmder praduates are also wearing high fashion lapels .
 Lightweight formal dress code makes sense in any season . Lightweight full-court makes sense of any season, but it doesn't make sense at all .
 The heavy weight of old fashioned ""tux"" made formal evenings a chore rather than a pleasure . The heavyweight, old fashioned "tux" made formal evening a chore .
 A few hours spent dancing in stuffy, overcrowded, overheated ballrooms was enough to take the starch out of the hardiest college man . Dancing in a ballroom was enough for a college student .
 This season's favored formal fabrics will be dull finish tropical worsteds and dacron/ rayon blends, GO VEST, YOUNG MAN . Just as vests h ive made a comeback in suits, and with sport jackets and shicks, you'll see more ■v
 An elegant vest in matching or fancy fabric is just the added touch to boost your rating along sorority row .
 The Pachanga, Charanga, Cha Cha Cha or trusty Fox Trot, you should keep in .step with black patent leather in either plain tip or slip on .
 Plain black or midnight blue are the correct colors in formal wear hose . Plain black is the correct color in formalwear hose .
 White ivash and wear dinner jacket in blends of rayon and acetate or dacron and rayon is smart and practical . The white ivash . dinner jacket .
 You can also make a colorful vacation splash in plaid cotton or batik dinner jackets . Plaid cotton and batik dinners jackets can be fun to wear .
 Charles ^att. head of the Department of Chemistry at SSC, is pt.Tl'orming one of his many experiments . Charles .
 SSC Places Three On AU-Conferenee Football Team Three of the Tigers ""mighty eleven"" were named All-Conference football players for the 1961 football season . SSC places Three on AU-conferenee football team three of the 'mighty 11'
 Henry Saunders is a big 6' 2"" end who came to us from Tompkins High School, in Savannah, Ga. He is 6'2" tall and 6'3" wide . Saunders is the son of former NFL player and NFL star, Henry Saunders, 6'
 Saunders played a large part in the Tigers attempt to receive respectability In its conference . Saunders was part of the Tigers' attempt to reach respectability in the conference .
 Benjamin Spann made the second team, but is regarded as one of the roughest lineman in the conference . Spann was one of Tigers' top ground gainers, Spann also made the list .
 Spann is considered the most versatile lineman on the Tiger squad . Spann has been named one of the Tigers' most versatile players .
 Poll intended to find out if claims of theater owners that their business would fail off if they were to integrate were valid . Poll conducted by volunteer student group .
 The paper cites the recent practice of offering free showings to fraternity and sorority groups during prime evening hours at the Carolina Theater . The paper also cites as indication that theater seats are 'growing cold under the present segregated arrangement'
 Willie Tate, Ira Jackson, Steve Kelly, James Dixon and Redell Walton led the seasiders' attack . Willie Tate was one of the seven men in the line-up for the match .
 Last season Benedict was one of the few teams that was able to stop Savannah Stale College's thundering offensive attack . Benedict was also one of those teams that stopped Savannah's attack last season .
 Artie Burke scored 27 points for Benedict Benedict . Burke was the high scorer for the Benedict team .
 Savannah State's high men were Willie Tate with 24 points and Ira Jackson with 20 points . Willie Tate was the star of the night for Savannah State .
 Two busy juniors preparing ""take out"" orders at the Bazaar . Norma Hendrix, left, of Savannah, Georgia and Annie Pearl Davis, right, of Waycross, Georgia .
 The secret of the flavor is the famous Marlboro recipe from Richmond, Virginia . The pure white Selectrate filter that goes with it is the secret .
 Savannah State is sponsoring the Southern Regional School Press Institute . President of Savannah State College announced that Savannah State will sponsor the institute .
 Institute will feature two High School Printed Divisions, one catchall Metropolitan Newspaper, one Yearbook Division, and an Elementary Division . The Institute will also feature a yearbook Division and a High School printed Newspaper .
 Jack Leflore, Chief Consultant of the Scliool Press Institute, Sales Manager for the American Yearbook Company and Jonston Jewelry, will serve as Keynote Speaker on Thursday, February 8 . Paul Swensson will be the speaker at the SCLI
 A registration fee of $1.50 will be charged for each participant, and meals for out-of-town participants will be $2,25 per day for three meals . The Luncheon Speaker is Adviser to President John F Kennedy .
 Paul Swensson. executive director of the Wall Street Journal Newspaper Fund, will deliver the main address at the public meeting . The public meeting will be held in Washington, D.C.
 Paul S Swensson is executive director of The Wall Street Journal's Newspaper Fund, Inc. The importance of journalism education and career planning have long been watch words for Paul S. Swenssson .
 Gustavus Adolphus awarded Mr, Swensson a doctor of human letters degree in 18th century . Gustavus Swensman was awarded the title of a doctor in human letters .
 His journalism career began at 15, when he was a correspondent for a Minnesota weekly . He now works for CNN iReport .
 Since that time he has been active in both professional and scholastic journalism . He has also been active on the internet .
 Mr Swensson was managing editor of the Mmneapolis Tribune from 1950 through 1955 . Prior to joining the fund in September of 1961, he had been managing editor .
 He is a past president of the Minnesota Associated Press and a Sigma Delta Chi chapter . He is also a former director of the Associated Press Managing Editors Association .
 Jack LeFlore, sales manager of the American Yearbook Company is the keynote speaker at the opening session at 10:00 A.M., In Meldrim Auditorium . Frank Reeves, former special assistant to President J, F Kennedy, will be the Luncheon Speaker on Friday
 William K Payne, president of Savannah State College is the honorary chairman . Wilton C Scott, Public Relations Director, is the Director; Mrs. Mrs. Scott is the director of the Public Relations Department .
 Luetta C Upshur, Assistant Professor in English, is the program director . Miss Rosemary Singleton, Clerk in Public Relations, is General Secretary . Norman Elmore, Editor of the Student Newspaper, is student chairman . James Devoe, President of the student Council, is co
 It is fitting that institutions such as this one, for the proper training of young journalists, be held in this sovereign state where the freedom of the press is held so dear . The institutions are fitting to be held for young journalists in the UK .
 The challenge is now yours to protect and preserve this right, as it is essential for a democracy of free people and ultimately for a free world . It is now your challenge to protect the right to vote .
 Chancellor Pays Tribute to SSC . Board of Regents wishes to join with Savannah State College in welcoming the members of the Southern Regional School Press Institute to Savannah .
 Alpha Nu Chapter of Alpha Kappa Mu National Society held its January induction ceremonies on Thursday, January 25 . The inductees were presented to the college family during the weekly assembly hour, at which time was delivered a challenging and impressive address .
 Hilliard A, Bowen, Superintendent of Area 1, Atlanta Public School System . Bowen is the superintendent of Atlanta's Area 1 schools . Bowen was the school's first female superintendent .
 Some members of the staff have given interesting reports and discussions . Some of the members on the staff gave interesting reports .
 Norman Elmore, Mamie Greene, James Devoe, Dorothye Carter, Louise Lamer, and Verdelle Lambert were among the stars . They were Norman . Elmore and Mamie . Greene .
 The reports were centered around journalistic reports, student publications, and newspaper magazines . The advisors, Mr Wilton C Scott, Mr Robert Holt, and Miss Albertha E Boston, have also given interesting comments .
 Student Council Sells Candy . It Is hoped that the events this year will over-shadow those presented In former years . Dorothye Carter: It Is gratifying to know that the several Greek-letter organl.zatlons on campus are co-operating .
 Proceeds from this campaign will be used to give additional aid to the National Defense Loan Fund and other worthy causes on campus . Proceeds will be given to help students pay for National Defense Loans Fund .
 Dorothy L Brown, Bernita Koniegay, James J Devoe, Berniece Pinckney, and Mamie E Greene take time out for their induction into Alpha Kappa Slu Honor Society . The group was inducted into the Alpha Kappa Honor Society in June .
 Two Savannah men are being assigned to new bases for training in U.S. Air Force job specialities . Former SSC Student Assigned For Special Training . The two Savannah men completed basic military training .
 Participants and distinguished consultants always find the experiences new and challenging . The participants and distinguished . consultants always . find the challenges new and . challenging .
 Much of our education today and in the future wiU be influenced by those who read and write and use the various media of communication . Much of the world's future will be affected by people who read, write, use various media, communication .
 Savannah State College is glad to welcome all who will participate in the programs . Savannah State will host a variety of events throughout the year .
 "They will be as diverse and varied as the personalities who participate, but they can contribute to our growth and understanding," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: They will contribute to "growth and understanding"
 It is through enlightenment of the many that we can move towards our cherished goals . It's through enlightenment, the many will move towards their cherished goals, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 The entire S2 million is to be devoted exclusively to raising faculty salaries over a two-year period . The endowment will be matched by another $1 million to the university itself .
 Dean Jesse Caskey of Northland College suggested that this potential might be within the student . Caskey: Educators' greatest unexplored resource might be student's ability to learn by himself .
 The freshman's ability to pursue his education under a loose rein varies — generally, from fair to poor . The freshman can pursue his studies under a free rein .
 Unless the student has learned to pursue his education independently by the time of his graduation, college has been for him a miserable failure, he will not be able to succeed .
 The student will develop fully his inherent capacity for self-education only if it is expected of him . The student is expected to be expected of himself, says the author .
 Members of the Journalism Class General Assembly General Assembly Willcox Gymnasium Paul Swensson. Types and Techniques.
 Each delegation is eligible to select one Star Reporter to serve as one of the participants in the Press Conference .
 A citation will be presented to the writer of the best story based on this interview . The writer of this interview will be awarded a citation .
 Lance Kerr, a 12-year-old physics major, began a regular schedule of classes this fall . Kerr is a physics major at the University of California .
 Miss Loveman was widely known and beloved in the publishing world . She was particularly interested in broadening the horizons of young people by introducing them to the universe of books and ideas .
 Sponsors believe that the award offers a realization of this important objective of Miss Loveman . Sponsors say that the sponsors believe that . The sponsors . believe that that the . award offers . an opportunity to realize the . objective of the award .
 Nominations for the award will be made by Chairmen of Campus Library Award Committees . The winner will be selected by a local winner of the award .
 Collections judged on basis of intelligent interest . scope and imagination shown in creating the collection and knowledge of the books .
 Collections of any type are eligible . Whether centered in a subject or avocation, a single author or group of authors, a general collection is eligible . Collections of all types are eligible; whether centered in an subject or an avocation .
 Even if your answers are in the affirmative, you too can resolve to strive toward greater heights . And even if you can't answer the questions, you can strive to do so .
 It is true that there are many past achievements of which we should be quite proud, but let us not consume so much time reminiscing . Let us use all the facilities it has to offer, but not forget the purpose of, and the comfort .
 May one of our greatest ambitions be that of doing something commendable— something that will be remembered long after we have completed our stay at this institution . May one day we will be able to make a significant contribution to our legacy .
 "Let it be something of which we can boast with a gleam in our eyes and joy in our hearts," says President Obama . Let it be "something" of which "we can boast" with a "gladam"
 May we always be mindful that a college is no better than its students and personnel . Let us endeavor to change our C's to B's and A's .
 With each hand in the hand of a brother's, we can form a family circle so strong that the mightiest army would have to admit defeat if ever the attempt to destroy our mighty fortress is tried . With each other's hand in hand, the family circle would be strong enough to
 Without your help, Savannah State is ""nowhere-"" A Stiideutututu's Vieiv of Life by Freida M Brewton .
 We are not to be disturbed by the scores the spectators are keeping, because we must realize that the official score is recorded by our heavenly Umpire . Some of the spectators may be friendly, others are hostile; such is the case in any game .
 Only He can truthfully say how many errors we have made, innings we have had. or how many home runs we have hit. Only He is truthfully saying how many . errors we made or innings we had, or how . many home . runs we've hit. only He
 Each time we stand at bat we must be careful to play the game fairly because the Umpire is watching at all times . In this ball game of life, victory is our ultimate goal, says author .
 If we work diligently at winning this ball game of life and are mindful not to cheat in any way, we can rest assured that some day, in the final analysis, victory will be our reward . If we are mindful of not cheating, we will be able to win the ball game
 This solution keeps his face from getting sore — if he hasn't already cut it . This solutions keeps him from getting a sore face .
 The main purpose for using this solution, however, is the pleasing odor it has . The odor of the solution is a pleasing odor .
 The fellow stops the car, gets out, runs around to the girl's side to open the door, helps the girl out of the car and finds a spot for her to wait while he runs back to the car . The fellow drives it to a parking place and then runs back .
 It is customary that he ask her if she would care for something to eat and if she says yes, the same courtesies at the restaurant as the theater . He asks her to ask if she wants to eat something, if she does, she will have to eat .
 When they get to the door of her home, he takes her key and struggles to open the door for her . He struggled to open her door for the first time .
 Eleven Brothers have entered into the realm of Omegadom by way of Alpha Gamma chapter of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity .
 The initiation of these brothers has made the chapter twenty-five strong . The initiation is the first chapter of the brothers' initiation .
 Willie Adkins of Ludowici, Harvey Bryant of Woodbine, James Coar of Columbus, Alex Habersham of Macon . Alex Haberham ofMacon, Christopher James of Woodinine, Christopher . Christopher James .
 Dolphus Lewis of Columbus, Horace Magwood o( Savannah, Leander Merritt of Ocilla, Jerry Mims of Hinesviile, John C Reed of Sylvania, and Louis Frank Tompkins of Columbus of Columbus . John C. Reed of
 Brothers Norman Elmore, Leander Merritt, and Lester Wilson were honored at the college's annual Honors Convocation on November 16, 1961, for having maintained averages of ""B"" or better for three or more quarters last year . Brothers Ernest Brunson and Norman Elmer
 Atlanta, Georgia, was the guest speaker on our National Achievement Week program held last quarter . Atlanta's mayor was a guest speaker .
 Robert Smith of Griffin, Georgia, did not return to school this quarter . Robert Smith is a junior at Griffin High School .
 Brother Smith's contribution to the chapter will be missed by all of the brothers . Brother Smith will be remembered for his contributions to the community .
 It is our sincere hope that he will return in the near future, if not in our presence, then in the presence of those brothers left behind .
 The brothers of Alpha Gamma are looking forward to the events to be sponsored by the chapter with much enthusiasm . Alpha Gamma is sponsored by a chapter in the U.S. state .
 In the very near future we hope to sponsor an All-College Assembly, our annual Talent Hunt Program and our annual Mardi Gras . In the future, we will also sponsor a Talent Hunt program with Mu Phi chapter in the city .
 We are doing our utmost in the line of preparation in order that these events will be vast improvements over those presented in the past . We are preparing for the first time in a row that we have been able to play in a major tournament .
 Alpha Gamma chapter is proud to announce that we have been represented well by Helen Woods, a soror of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, who is ""Miss SIX— TIGER ROAR Omega,"" and by her very lovely attendants, Dorothye Carter and Carolyn V
 Five young men of the Lampados Club are now looking forward with great anticipation of someday crossing the burning sands into Omegadom .
 Alpha Kappa Alpha Sororitv Observes National FoiiihUm''s Day . The National Founder's Day is the day of the sorority .
 Gamma Sigma Omega and Gamma Upsilon Chapters observed Sunday . Inc. Inc.. Inc.. was observed by Gamma Sigma O. and Gamma . Upsilon chapters . Inc..
 Fountain Crank, South Atlantic Regional Director of the sorority, is South Atlantic regional director . The sorority is based in the South Atlantic region of Florida .
 Mrs, Crank is the executive director of the Phyllis Wheatley Branch of the Young Women's Christian Association . She is also a member of the P. Wheatley branch of the YWCA .
 Delta Nu Chapter, Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc., paid homage to the founders of their organization during the weekly chapel hour on January 18 in Wilcox Gymnasium .
 "This Is Your Life" was an imitation of the television program . Included was a parody of the show .
 The sorors are looking forward to a successful year under the dynamic leadership of Almarie Glover . They extend best wishes for a prosperous and academically successful New Year .
 Crank centered her address on the theme ""Women's Role in Bettering World Relations"" In her speech she adin into professional areas with the best possible training .
 Mrs, Crank closed her address by challenging the women of today to accept the standards of the day and to make the role of the woman felt .
 Other highlights of the program included greetings by Mrs, Leila Braithwaite, selections by the Alpha Kappa Alpha Ensemble and remarks by Dr. Dr. Owens . The event was held in honour of Mrs Owens .
 A reception was held in the Student Union Building immediately after the program . The event was held at the University of Cambridge .
 Gamma Zeta chapter of the Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity makes plans . Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity is a fraternity of men . The Gamma Zet chapter of Phi Beta . Sigma Sigma Sigma is a national fraternity in the United States .
 Savannah State College chapter's annual ""Education Day"" will be observed on March 29 . Savannah State State College will host the event on the campus of Savannah State University .
 The chapter extends words of sincere appreciation to everyone who helped in making the Christmas Stocking Fund Drive a success . The chapter is grateful for the help they received from the public .
 Gamma Upsilon chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority presented its AllCollege Assembly Program . Alpha Kappa Aljtlia Sororilv l*re^«'nl> Chapel Program .
 After the comments on the life of a famous member of the other organizations, the Greek medley was played . The medley is played .
 In addition to this, a member from each Greek letter organization on the campus was an honored platform guest .
 The sorors of Alpha Kappa Alpha formed a semicircle and sang their National Hymn, Alpha Kappa Mu Inducts 5 <UmUH„cd from /V--' "" .
 Savannah, Savannah; Liberty County High, Mcintosh; Lee Street High, Blackshear; Ralph J Bunche High, Woodbine; George Washington Carver High, Richmond Hill; and Springfield Central High, Springfield .
 Clemmons was the setting for the induction ceremonies which were held that evening . Clemmon was the site of the induction ceremony . The induction ceremony was held that night .
 "they" are the painters of the night Who touch up the sordid and' sundry places. But ""they"" are painters . The painters are the . painters who touch up . up the 'sordid' places .
 In the bright light of day, We see Man in a different perspective — He lies beside the Pierian spring like some fallen god . Stripped of the glory that once was. Stripped the glory of the once was .
 Breakfast Is served from 7:30 to 8:00; If you are one minute after that, you'll be late . If you're one minute late, you won't be late for breakfast .
 Dressed In white, Nice and clean . Look healthy, clever, Bright and keen . Dressed in white .
 For the past four basketball seasons, Walton has led his team in scoring and has ranked second In rebounding . Sftvaiinah Staters Wonder Boy .
 Walton averaged 25 points per game during the 1960-61 season . Walton was the NBA's leading scorer in 1961-62 . Walton is one of NBA's most prolific scorers .
 In 1960 he established a one-game record by shooting a total of 39 points against the Benedict College team . In 1960, he shot 39 shots against Benedict College .
 The four-year letterman is deadly from all points on the court, ""Moose"" plays both front court and back court exceptionally well . The four year letterman has a reputation for his versatility .
 For the past three years, he has been selected ^or the Southeastern Athletic Conference's All-Conference team . He has also been selected for the 2012-13 season .
 He was selected the most valuable player in the 1960-61 NAIA District 6 Tourney . Through outstanding feats in tournament play, he was also selected most valuable .
 Last year ""Moose"" captured the Most Valuable Player title in the Pelican State Tourney over NAIA All-American elect, Charles Harnett .
 Redell has no definite future plans as yet; however, he will probably settle for professional basketball or coaching . Redell: "I'm not sure what I want to do with my basketball career"
 Walton does a lot of reading, writing and listening to jazz albums in his spare time . Walton: "I love jazz, and I love jazz. I love it"
 Most of his time is spent with co-ed Gwendolyn Smith, an ardent basketball fan . She spends most of her time with her co-teammate Gwendyolyn Smith . Most of her life is spent playing basketball .
 A pleading letter was carried by the Daily Trojan of Southern California asking coeds to throw a few written lifelines to one depressed serviceman . The Daily Trojan asked for a written lifeline to be thrown out to the serviceman.
 In considering preparation for leadership, we are to be mindful of the qualities sought In a leader . It Is up to us to prepare ourselves to meet such a demand, says Dr. David Cameron .
 These men had the courage and the will power to take the helm in the midst of perilous situations and lead their people to a new destlny. These men took the helm .
 The TIGER'S ROAR February 4, 1961 . William Haglns was a member of The Tiger Club .
 The activities at Savannah State College last year proved that there were many momentous events filled with challenges, opportunities, and success in our midst . Savannah State State College will hold a yearlong celebration of the year .
 Let's take an imaginary stroll down Inventory Lane and recall the glorious past . Let's recall the past and remember the glory of the past .
 Atlanta, Georgia, was the main . speaker at the Tenth Annual Pre.ss Institute held at Savannah State College on February 16 .
 James J Devoe, popular student and ""Man of the Year,"" was elected president of the Student Council by the college electorate . Devoe was elected by the College's electorate .
 Emma Sue McCrory, popular and talented student, won the coveted title of ""Miss Savannah State 1961-62"" over three other contestants . Emma Sue was popular student at Savannah State .
 Miss McCrory's radiant personality captuied the students' hearts and their votes too . She won the hearts and votes of the students too .
 Dorothea Towles headlined the Annual Charm Week Activities sponsored by the young women of our campus . Towles is a world famous model who has appeared on numerous television shows .
 Miss Towles spoke at the All-College Assembly and was the center of attraction at the fabulous fashion extravaganza that culminated the week's activities .
 Verdelle Lambert, highest ranking junior woman, received the ""Mantle of Pallas Athene"" at the Annual Charm Week Assembly from Yvonne McGloikton, highest . ranking senior woman . VerDelle Landiert Receives Mantle of Honor at Charm Week
 Alpha Kappa Mti Inducts Tuo Annette C, Kennu-dy and Norman Elmore were inducted into Alpha Nu chapter of Alpha Kappa Mu National Honor Society on May 17 .
 Over fifty students received coveted awards at the Annual Awards Day Assembly on May 17 . Over Fifty students were given coveted awards .
 On June 5, ninty-one students left the hallowed walls of Savannah State College by way of graduation and ventured on to broader horizons . Four distinguished persons were added to the staff of the college .
 Forty-seven proud seniors marched down the aisles of Meldrim Auditorium to have the B.S. degree conferred on them .
 Savannah State College won the second annual Chatahoochee Classic by defeating Fort Valley State College by a score of H-7 at Columbus .
 Hundreds of alumni flocked to Savannah and to Bacon Park Memorial Stadium to cheer the Tigers on to victory . Alumni from Savannah, Georgia, attended the game .
 Thirty-four Intern Teachers Assigned To Student Teaehing Posts . According to information released by Dr. Deborah, the positions will be assigned to students .
 Savannah State College, thirtyfour student teachers have been assigned to student teaching posts . Savannah State has a total of 44 student teachers at the college . Students will be able to teach in Savannah, Georgia .
 The name of the student also Donnie D Cooper, Eleteacher, major, school assigned mentary Education.
 Moses Jackand supervising teacher respectively are Lee Westley Walker, Industrial Arts . Moses Jack and Lee Westly Walker are supervising teachers at the school .
 Verdelle Lambert, English, Sol C Johnson, Mrs, Dorothy U Adams; Doris Riggs, Maths, Mathematics . Doris Adams, Mrs Adams, Dorothy Riggs and Doris Johnson were winners of the award .
 Eldora Greene; Geraldine Spaulding, Elementary Education, Montieth School. Eldora Greenfield: "I am a woman who is very proud to be a teacher at Montieth" Geraldine Greene: "We are proud to have a history of education in the United States
 Mattie Leaks; Retha Butler, Elementary Education, West Broad Street School, Mrs. Erma Williams. Mattie . Leaks. Butler, elementary Education, Elementary . Butler .
 Ella Mae Cunningham, Health and Physical Education, Liberty County High School. Cunningham is a member of the Liberty County School of Education . Cunningham is the teacher of the students at Liberty County . Cunningham has been in the school for more than two decades . Cunningham: "I am proud to
 Chubby Checker will make well over one million dollars from the sale of articles with his name and picture on them . It has been estimated that he will make over a million dollars .
 Shirts, shoes, trousers, and suits called the ""Twisters" are already on the market .
 Sherbie Best, Laordice Winfrey, Dawn Hollinshead and Lois Carson are pictured with Ira Jackson . The basketball player and ideal gentleman is pictured with them in the group .
 These young ladies are known as the ""Magnificent Four"" and are members of the Ira Jackson Fan Club . They are known for their love of the singer .
 Patridge Wolfe, Grand Basileus of the Sorority, was the featured speaker at a public program . Wolfe was featured speaker of the program .
 Mrs, Ella Fisher is Regional Director of the Southeastern Conference . Fisher is a member of the Savannah State College faculty . She is also the regional director of the NCAA .
 Alpha Kappa iVIn Rc <:ional Ct>n\enlioii tield at SSC Alpha Nu chapter . Alpha Kappa is a national college of social psychologists .
 Norman Elmore of Alpha Nu chapter was elected vice-president of the region . Elmore is a member of the Alpha Nu Chapter of the U.S. National Association of American Indians .
 Verdelle Lambert, president of Alpha Nu chapter, was awarded a certificate of honor at the convention . Lambert's original poem was presented at the meeting .
 Savannah Stale College is Accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Scliools . Savannah is the first college to be accredited by the SCLIols on Thursday .
 Savannah State College has been accepted for full accreditation by the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools . President W K, Payne announced to the faculty and student body that we had been accepted by the accrediting agency .
 Students and faculty of this great institution can do much to make 1962 a banner year . But we as students and faculty can do little to make it happen, he says .
 Art Chd) Being Keorj;anized by Benjamin Colbert . The Art Club is being formally organized again .
 The reorganization is largely due to popular requests, the expanding art program and an increasing community interest . It is the first time the art program has been reorganised .
 The first meeting of the Art Club was held Friday, January 20, in the Fine Arts Building . The Art Club will meet at the end of the month .
 The main purpose of the club will be to sponsor programs and projects of art, including painting techniques and drawing . The club will also participate in art exhibits, both locally and nationally .
 All persons of the campus community are invited to join the Art Club . There will be special exhibits on the campus such as the Fine Arts Festival .
 Bobby Burgess, president, expressed great appreciation for the cooperation of the entire organization in making the year of 1961 a successful one . Bobby Hill announced that the organization will present a Special All-College Assembly program .
 Savannah State College Debating Society presented its first debate on Friday, January 12, in Meldrim Auditorium . Debating society presented first debate at Savannah State University .
 That Labor Organizations should be under the jurisdiction of Anti-Trust Legislation. That Labor organizations should be . under the . jurisdiction of anti-trust legislation. That labor organizations should . be under . the jurisdiction under Anti-trust Legislation. that Labor Organizations . should be on the jurisdiction .
 James Brown and Samuel Williams represented the affirmative side, while Bobby Hill and Elmer Thomas argued the negative point of view . James Brown, Samuel Williams and Bobby Hill argued for the negative side .
 Tlie Committee on Intercollegiate Discussion and Debating of the speech Association of America chose the current topic . All Americans, directly or indirectly, are affected by the relationship of labor and management .
 The primary emphasis of the debate is labor-management relations, particularly union activities and goals, as these affect the public . Samuel Williams Is president of the Debating Society of Savannah State College . Abraham Jones, Abraham Jones and Professor Blanton E, Black, Dr. Blanton Black,
 This Fall's fashion note in campus sportswear is one of bright, fresh approaches to traditional stylings . E SCHOEFFLER, esquires Fashion Director, writes fashion director .
 You'll find smart looking sportswear in a wide range of colors, fabrics and styles suitable for classrooms, campus and for casual dates .
 The natural shoulder brown Donegal t-shirt is the epitome of casual elegance .
 It's an infallibly correct sport coat specked with flecks of green, olive and yellow and buttoned in leather .
 The .tnki„g duo really lights up the campus fashion scene .
 A blazer striped hopsacking wool jacket in three favorite campus colors — blue, tiger, and olive — is worn with a grey long sleeve turtle neck pullover .
 Large glen plaid checked sport coats in heavier weaves will have an elegant but casual ""country gentlemen"" look . Also check lighter weight Harris tweeds in jaunty olive plaids, and olive and black checks, .
 New camel's hair jackets are tailored with natural shoulders, straight-hanging lines, patch chest, lower flap pockets and center vent . New camel’s hair jackets have natural shoulders and straight-looking lines .
 A striking camel's hair cardigan sweater merits your special attention . It's smart and luxurious looking in the natural camel shade with leather buttons and vents .
 A dashing V neck pullover in strong blazer stripes of blue, chianti and olive should be noted . The V-neck pullover is a dashing pullover .
 Models will be seen with cross and vertical stripes and subtle tiger and grape tone accents . Models will also be seen in stripes and stripes with subtle tiger, grape tones .
 'Daikg,eys.-inddaik olive,' says the author . 'All are hard /rearing. SLACKs, SLACKS and more . . . And all are hard .
 Buttons are brightened up by ;a(fvs(i(i)(ic)A,s, in red, black, and yellow; bold checks in fresh combinations of olive and blue tone .
 Batik print button downs are increasingly popular in olive and blue . You'll find them in pullover styles in the increasingly popular color combination of olive and grey .
 They'll be styled with a deep nap, narrow brim and will feature wool cord band and pinched telescoped crown . Will feature wool Cord band and pinned telescoped head .
 Beautiful You and Black Black has just been hailed as the color of the year on the Savannah State College campus . The color is being worn by everyone .
 Black is a very conservative color and can be worn by everyone for any occasion . Black is worn in class, church, banquets, formals, and sportswear .
 For you figure-conscious girls who can't wear certain colors, forget your problems because I have the color of the year for you— Black . Black is black for the first time ever .
 For church, let's try a black two-piece dress or suit with burnt orange or beige accessories . The colour of the dress should be similar to the colour of your outfit .
 The black sheath dress with spaghetti strings across the shoulder is just the attire for the ""Sweetheart's Bail"" or for that all important banquet .
 No one would be without some type of black coat in her wardrobe, such as a black leather jacket . Double-breasted long coat with large collar and pockets is the all popular double-breast long coat .
 For evening wear let's consider a black velveteen lined in white fur . Don't forget the black suede leather leather leather long coat and jacket .
 Let's wear more black and less flash, and you will be very beautiful in black . In black. In black, don't wear more flash. Let's have more black .
 Board of Regents and its staff join with officials and faculty of Savannah State College . SSC Southern Regional iC.
 Savannah State College has obtained noble heights in the area of a school press program to help all schools and community groups . Under the leadership and guidance of President William K Payne, Savannah State . Payne, the college's president, has led the college press program .
 Jt was designed as a program for the college newspaper and yearbook staffs . Now it serves all schools in the southeastern United States . Jt is designed for college newspapers and yearbooks .
 Among the consultants, workshop leaders, and discussants are Paul Swensson, Executive Director, The Newspaper Fund . Paul Swenson is Executive Director of the Newspaper Fund. The event will take place in New York City .
 Willie B Chlsholm. Public Relations Director, Fort Valley State College, Georgia, Willie B. Chlcholm . Willie B is the director of the Public Relations Department at the college .
 Atlanta, Savannah, Atlanta, Atlanta and Savannah, Georgia students are honored . Clarence Lofton is Co-ordinator, Cooperative Training, Tompkins High School, Savannah . Lawrence Bryant is Sales Representative, Josten's Jewelry. Atlanta .
 Savannah; Alphonso S, McLean, Assistant Manager, Hl-Hat Bowling Lanes, Savannah; Mrs. Mrs. McLean. Savannah, Georgia, was also honored with the award .
 Mrs. Estella S Pate, Associate Editor, Savannah, Georgia, is a Savannah resident . Mrs. Pate is an associate editor of the Savannah Herald .
 Around Our Town features Savannah, Georgia, Savannah, and Atlanta, Georgia . This week's episode is featured by Emily Chisholm and Ric Mandes, Public Relations Director, Georgia Southern College .
 The Atlanta Daily World features interviews with Morris Brown College Public Relations Director William Pace and Sports Editor Marlon Jackson . Writers are interviewed by William Pace, William Pace of Morris Brown college, Atlanta, Statesboro .
 Mrs, Lillie Allen Powell, Secretary, Office of Public Relations, Savannah State College, Savannah; Miss Helen Lanier, Promotion Manager, Savannah NewsPress, Savannah. Savannah; . Miss Lanier and Miss Fisher, Associate Professor, English, J Randolph Fisher, . J Randolph
 Julie Cheely, Earnestine Jones, Mamie Greene, Bernice PInkney, Charlie Phillips, Kermetta Clark, James Devoe, Irene Elmore, Eudora Allon, Norman Elmore and Otis Mitchell . Otis . Mitchell, Ot
 The College newspaper docs not only represent the college in the outside world, but it also serves as an outlet for informing students of the activities that have taken place on and off campus which concern them . The college newspaper docs .
 The college newspaper -is an instrument of mass cominunicatio non campus - is an instrument .
 Students may speak or voice their conceptions through editorials, feature stores, poems, etc. It is a publication by wlilch the students .
 The college newspaper represents the students and gives thcni a chance to debate and test experimental thoughts, and beliefs . The newspaper represents students .
 A__collcge newspaper holds the major spotlight of student expression in college life . So from these conceptions, it can be concluded that a__Collcge paper holds the most spotlight of college life.
 Redell Walton of SSC shines in the game against Morehouse College of Atlanta . The game was the first time the two sides had met in Atlanta .
 Fionklo Sliickland was a member of the Royal Family . He died in 1962 at the age of 25 .
 APRIL showers; Louoly Mniga.ul Jeiikini, n juiiioi i-lemmiBiy educolion niajoi liom Savar.itoh b tluiining ai ihc posei lot Ihe pholog
 I Loii Cniion, ehairoing fioihman Engliih major om Winlei Po.k, FloiidH, domonilintoi lome limoly baikcthall .
 MaLlda ii a locial fcicnce major and holds mcmbeiship in Ihe Ivy Leal Club . Vivian Roge.s ij linking ai the i* capluied by the phologiaphei allci a brush with
 Vivian Milledgevilto is a sophomore in the Pyramid Club and the Matching Band . Vivian is a member of the Pyramid club and the matching band . She is a junior at the University of Cambridge .
 She is a senior English ma|oi and holds mcmbeiship in Delta Sigma Thela Soioiity, Ihe Boat's Head Club, and Who'e Who, and Ihc Doimiloty Council .
 Our stall photographer caught lovely Cwondolyn Buchanan in a striking pose on Ihe tennis court .
 Mallie Lattimoio, popular fieshman last Itom Milledgeville, poses lot our pholographer on a hoi Septembei day . Mallie is a popular photographer and photographer in the U.S.
 Freddie Liggini ""Miii Junior IVAIti, "" poi«s lot out ilsll phologiaphei. October 31, 1992, 1992 .
 Freddie 1. an Engliih majoi Itom Savannah and holdj membeiihip In Ihc Boai'i Head Club . Freddie 1 . Freddie is an Englishman who holds a position in Savannah, Georgia . Freddie holds a membership of the Savannah Head Club
 Bessie Samuel ii chaimlng at ihe leb out lo help SanlB on Chtiilmai Eve Eve . Bessy Samuel: "SanlB" is a group of women who live in Sanlb .
 She holdi mumbeithip in Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Ihe S.N.E.A., and Ihe Womnn'g Eniemblo. She is also a member of Alpha Phi Phi Phi Epsilon Kappa Sorority .
 Alpha Nu niece Pinkney claims to be gay, Norman Elmore and Berhcnors . Pinkney also claimed to be a gay, gay, bisexual and bisexual woman .
 Alpha Nu Chapter has received this distinction for the past five years . Highest distinction status goes to those ...■hapters which have promptly I'omplied with the requirements set up by the national office . Alpha Nu chapter has received the distinction for five years.
 This is the first time that this feat has been accomplished by a regional director . The regional director of the region has been in charge of the first regional director to do this .
 The Executive Council is responsible for carrying forward the activities of the society in the interim between conventions . Wilhams serves as co-ordinator for the ten colleges that comprise region V .
 The council outlines the program for the coming year's meeting, makes recommenda'ions for convention speakers . The council then selects speakers .
 It was expounded ipon by the four speakers who -iddressed delegates and later was used as the topic for a student symposium . The topic was later used as a topic for the students' Symposium .
 The topic was carefully analyzed by the nanel and many provocative luestions were posed . The nanel analyzed the topic carefully analyzed .
 There were delegates from 39 colleges and universities throughout the U.S. Delegates from 39 college and university across the country .
 All of the student delegates enjoyed a rich program of activifies that included inspiring addresses, a reception given by FAMU's President . The FAMU President gave an address at the FAMU campus .
 A thrilling performance by the FAMU Choral So'-■iety and Symphonic Band, a ""Bait-a-Date"" Social and a sumptuous banquet were held . The banquet was followed by a ""Night Club Affair sponsored by the Pan-Hellenic Council
 This project, spearheaded by the student council, began after a letter was received from Mrs. Smith . This project began after she received a letter from Mrs Smith .
 Grant wrote that there were thousands of Nigerian youth who were hungry for education, but that there was a great shortage of books in the school's library .
 They are now in the process of knocking on doors in the community . They are trying to further the cause of education in the underdeveloped countries of the world .
 Coach Ted Wright's senior five hit the bucket for a 97-point average . Coach Wright's team shot for the NAIA title for the fourth straight year . The NAIA team finished 26-3 in the season .
 They moved to the second round of the national tournament before being eliminated . They were eliminated from the tournament after reaching the last 16 .
 Savannah State out-scored all other NAIA bail clubs . Savannah State placed eighth on margin-of-victory list . The school placed eighth in margin of victory .
 Redell Walton, 6-2 forward with a deadly jumper from anywhere on the floor, was the ringleader in the powerful Tiger attack . Walton was ninth in the NAIA scoring parade with a brilliant 29 points per game average . Walton is the star of the tournament .
 An evaluation-luncheon meeting is scheduled for 12 o'clock today in Adams Hall . The fourteenth annual Men's Festival at Savannah State College ends today .
 This year's program of activities will be evaluated from all phases by the members of the committees . During the luncheon, this year's luncheon will be judged by the committee .
 The suggestions and criticisms voiced here will be considered in the planning of next year's activities . The suggestions are being considered by the organisers .
 Savannah State Colleg^e Wins Medalist Award . Scott Represents SSC Four Facility Members Selected To ""Who's Who"" Scott Reprepresents SSS Four Facility members Selected To "Who's who"
 Persons listed in ""Who's Who" receive this honor through recommendation . The honor is given through recommendation by a person listed in the list .
 College and university presidents are asked to recommend new members of their faculties . College presidents have been asked to nominate new faculty members in recent years .
 Superintendents of schools in cities of 5,000 population are asked to recommend worthy administrative officers and outstanding teachers . Superintendent's recommendations are based on data from a city of more than five million people .
 People not directly connected to the field of education, such as librarians, are recommended also .
 Savannah State College News received the Medalist rating because of the well-rounded interpretation of college news and pictures . Savannah State University News is a college newspaper that focuses on college news .
 Savannah State won first place in the college alumni bulletin printed publication and for the homecoming bulletin in offset publications . Savannah State also won a homecoming homecoming publication .
 The Tiger's Roar was tied for second place in printed college publications with Indiana State College of Pennsylvania, Western Kentucky State College .
 The Savannah State Alumni quarterly received a third place rating in the general college and university publication session . Savannah State was ranked third place in a national college newspaper survey .
 No other college had a higher rating than Savannah State in this section . Savannah State had the highest rating in the nation's history .
 Savannah State was represented by Wilton C Scott, director of Public Relations and Publicity . Savannah State is represented at the event .
 Mr Scott conducted two workshops and served as chairman of several group discussions . He also served as chair of several groups discussions .
 It featured Leslie Midgley. executive producer of CBS News' Eyewitness television program, as speaker . Rowan.
 The third annual National Library Week Convocation will be held at Savannah State College on Thursday, April 12, at 12 o'clock noon . United States Department of State, will be the featured speaker .
 Before becoming a member of President Kennedy's New Frontier administration, he had distinguished himself as a world renown journalist .
 Carl T Rowan, young Negro journalist, won national honors as a newsman and author for five consecutive years . Reports ranged from race relations in the South and the plight of the American Indian to the political and social turmoil in Asia .
 In 1956, he became the only newspaperman ever to win three successive annual awards from the Sigma Delta Chi journalistic fraternity .
 Mr Rowan is a frequent contributor to the nation's leading periodicals . The PITYFUL AND THE PROUD, GO SOUTH TO SORROW AND WAIT 'TIL NEXT YEAR, go south to South Africa .
 Coming soon — "Phaedra" presented by the College Playhouse . The play will be presented at the College playhouse .
 Charles McMillian, president of Gamma Chi Chapter, will attend the Southeastern Regional Convention of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity .
 MacMillian has been chosen as the speaker for the undergraduate luncheon . He will speak at the luncheon at the University of Cambridge . MacMillan was chosen to speak at University of Manchester .
 Rosemary McBride, senior elementary education major, is now teaching in Statesboro, Georgia . McBride is a junior at Statesboro University .
 Annette Kennedy and Helen Woods are teaching in Warrenton, Georgia . They are major social science and elementary education majors .
 Richard Cooger is president of Gamma Zeta Chapter of Phi Beta Sigma . He attended the recent state convention of that fraternity held at Albany .
 More than a third of the dormitory students trample the lawn in a mad dash for the dining hall instead of using the walkways provided .
 This is a serious indictment upon ourselves as college men and women and it demands our attention . Now this is an indictment upon us as college students and women, it demands attention. It demands attention .
 We can not tell what you would like to see added to or changed from In the Tiger's Roar .
 Without the benefit of supernatural powers, we can not produce a paper which will reflect your interests and talents . This paper will also serve as a functional campus communication medium .
 If you do not care about the fate of your college paper, then continue on your merry way and don't give this editorial a second tliought . If you don't care about this editorial, it's not a good idea .
 If you want a paper which reflects you then you have a job to do . But if you do care, if you want it to reflect you, then you've got to do it .
 Mercer, the local chapter advisor, served as consultant at the meeting . Mercer, a member of the chapter, also served as a consultant .
 The discussions and speeches at the convention were centered around the qualifications of teachers and the need for better teachers . The convention was held in New Hampshire, Massachusetts .
 At the business session, a report on local chapter activities was given . At the end of the session, the chapter was given a report about local activities .
 Honor Roll and Deans List Announced . Each person listed below win an average of 2 5n or higher during the winttr quarter. is accorded a placr on the Dean's List.
 E J Josey, college librarian and associate professor announced recently that the library had purchased a photocopying machine . Other persons who have attained an average of 2.00-2 49 are accorded a place on the Honor Roll, TluHonor Roll .
 The machme is primarily used to make copies of magazine articles and excerpts from books . It is also used to produce copies of books and magazines .
 Since the machine has been obtained for the use of the students, Mr Josey feels that the student body should make use of this worth-while addition .
 This machine is another step in the library's program of providing the latest library equipment available .
 It is hoped that this machine will be instrumental in stopping students from destroying valuable library materials .
 Tfinn 2-26 Jones, Shirley D 2.00 Kornegay, Bernlta 3.00 Lamar, Louise 2.68 Lamar, Lucile 2.23 Lambert, Verdelle 3 00 Lewis. Lewis. Tf
 Glennera E 2.37 Matliis, Margurlte 2,38 McCrory, Emma Sue 2.33 McMillian, Charles 2.31 Meeks, Henrietta 3.00 Merritt 2.00 Miller .
 Ruby A, 2.00 Moon, Juanita 2.33 Moran, Eliza M 2.37 . Moss, Mary 2.68 Moxley 2.36 .
 With Easter vacation already flashing the ""•Walk"" sign, why not decide before you go home on your number one suit and the rest of your wardrobe .
 The clothes you wear, plus the way that you wear them, make the pivotal first impression for a summer job or permanent one if you're a senior .
 This Spring in fashion is the season's first big fashion week . You want it to be right at first sight, so, let's take a run-down on what you might well select .
 The new lighterthan-ever flannels and polyester/wool blends are lighter than ever flannels .
 Color-wise, consider the more definite blues, the neiv lighter greys . See the classic Glen Urquhart or 'glen' plaids .
 Its fine diagonal twill weave and surface sheen make it an excellent choice for your Number One Suit .
 Today's gabardines also come in lighter weight wools and new polyester/wool blends . New polyester and wool blends are also being developed .
 The Natural shoulder threebiittuii, .■^trait'ht-hjiiigint' jacket with center vent and flap pockets . STILL the FAVORED SILHOUETTE the Natural shoulder 3biittiii, 3.5 inches wide .
 Campus Look, coast to coast, remains devotedly Three-Button with slim, pleatless trousers ivitli cuffs . The First Executive Look, epitomized by President Kennedy, may be Two-Eutton .
 Regimental Stripes are the traditional colors of the historic British regiments . The resurgence noted by ESQUIRE ast fall is gaining momentum .
 The Grenadier Guards, the Royal Fusiliers and the Inskilling Dragoons are among the most striking silk repps in the world . With scores of famous regiments, there's quite a roll-call of striking color combinations .
 Button Down Oxfords are very much de rigeur and there are variations in narrow tape stripes of blue, grey, olive, olive and white .
 You 'can't go wrong' with a white broadcloth tab collar dress shirt . Also, why not dress up with the newest pale tones of blue, olive or cream?
 With suits in Blue or Grey, wear BLACK SHOES or the very darkest BROWNS . Wear black or grey, or very dark browns .
 Your DRESS BELT is LEATHER with an important harness-type buckle in polished metal . Your dress will be made of LEATHER .
 At the summit-your HAT, the summit is the narrow snap-brim felt in brown or olive— weit edge or grosgrain-bound . AT the summit, the Summit-YOUR HAT is the epithet of the summit .
 The buttonfront coat-sweater is tops in campus popularity . Tops in favor are the lofty Shetland and the open-knit Alpaca wool .
 Sportswear is the most popular sportswear in the U.S. market, according to a recent survey .
 TIGER is the bold, tawny color that's getting the roar of approval from campus men everywhere . Here you'll see a lot of TIGERS -- a bold, brown color .
 Find it in sharp, solid tones or mixed . Sportcoat checked in Black and Tirer .
 Nothing irks the hard-pressed college student more than shaking out an envelope from home and finding nothing in it but news and love . The envelope is home to a college student, but it's not all about love and news .
 The professor who comes in 15 minutes late is rare — in fact, he's in a class by himself . The professor is in class with himself .
 The college basketball coaches are all interested in higher education . The closer they come to seven feet, the better they like it, they say .
 1960 graduate of Tompkins High School, now enrolled at Savannah State College, assigned by Savannah Morning News to cover campus events .
 Elmer Thomas writes ""College By the Sea" which appears in the Sunday edition of the paper . Thomas writes about college by the sea .
 The column has been handled by the Office of Public Relations since March 4 .
 He recently qualified for a position of Student-Trainee in a US Civil Service Examination . The exam gives college students summer work in governmental agencies in the same field they are majoring in college .
 Thomas Thomas is a sophomore math major, and he qualified for a job in statistics . Thomas is also a junior at the University of Alabama .
 When asked if she had a philosophy of life, Emma answered, 'Yes, but I don't think it works so well all the time' She added, however, that in spite of this, she still believes in it .
 Emma simply suggests ""better human relationships,"" As far as her own life is concerned, she expressed the desire to become a speech therapist . Emma said she would like especially to work with children .
 I guess what I'm trying to say is that she should have a pleasing personality. She should have been pleasing, she said .
 Rushing is a type of politiking which has become standard practice on most campi, and in certain cases, the organizations vie with each other for particular students .
 Pledgees fill the vacancies made by withdrawals and transfers, inactivity and graduation . More important, however, pledgees help to keep the organizations ""alive,""
 This year the rush parties or programs, as the case may be, were most impressive . This year's rush parties were the most impressive, with some of the best .
 Delta Sigma Theta geared its program to travel ""Around the World, With a cry of ""ship Ahoy,"" the sail was set for London, Paris, and points East . The sail set to sail to London and Paris .
 The college, without a doubt. always profits from high-quality programs such as these, it says . The college profits from such programs, it has said .
 At home — Quickly get everybody out of the house . At home: Quickly move everybody out . Quickly evacuate the house.
 Dinner is served from 12 to 1:00 If it's 12:55 you'd better run Prom 5:00 to 5:30 supper is served .
 Under the new system, a student wishing to drop a course must initiate the drop himself by first contacting his dean and then filling out a form in the registrar's office .
 Dropping students for nonattendance IS inconsistant with the adoption in 1959 of the voluntary roll taking . The roll taking began in 1959 .
 Since the student has paid his tuition he should be permitted to exercise his right to attend or not attend classes . Students should be allowed to exercise their right to choose whether to attend class or not to attend .
 If the student feels that he can pass a course without attending classes, he should be permitted to do so, he says . If he wants to pass a class without attending it should be allowed to happen, he must attend classes .
 Grades in a particular course should not be based upon the physical presence of a student . Grades should be based on a student's physical presence, rather than his physical presence .
 A student may still be dropped from a course by the instructor as a disciplinary action . This new rule is intended to cover only excessive absences from class .
 The Coed iu Literature Class by ""Gem""
 Despite the beautiful poem the class is discussing, the teacher is preoccupied . For it Is obvious that she is . preoccupied Despite the . beautiful poem, the class was discussing .
 Vivian Rogers is captured by the photographer after a brush with the March Wind . She is captured in a series of striking photographs .
 Vivian is a sophomore business major from Milledgeville, Georgia . The TIGERS ROAR March. March is the month of March Madness .
 The Department of Chemistry, headed by Dr. Dr. Frcida M, Brewton, led the research on Cotton Seed . The University of Brewton has a Cotton Seed Research Unit .
 Gossypol, one pigment found in cotton seed, is responsible, at least in part, for the color of the oil . The pigment is found in the seeds of cotton seed .
 The first Chemistry Seminar, which Is an outgrowth of this project, was held March 29, in the Technical Science Building .
 The purposes of these seminars are to acquaint other majors in the Department with what each student <who is employed as a researcher) Is trying to do, and to increase their knowledge of chemistry .
 Each senior must pass an oral comprehensive on each phase of chemistry that he has taken, and that each senior must do a . do a project which will add to the present stockpile of knowledge and be of a quality publishable in a journal .
 Some individual senior projects underway now involve a study of sugars extracted from natural sources such as pine needles and Spanish moss .
 Several useful Instruments have been added to the department which have been helpful in the study of cotton seed .
 The college newspaper is a ln.strument of mass communication on campus .
 A free college newspaper gives selfexpressions of the outstanding moments on campus . The Collegiate Student Union offers the best college newspaper .
 The college newspaper does not only have a local campus value, but a professional value also . For many colleges are judged by their student publications, the paper is a professional publication .
 Always Finish If a task is once begun never leave it till it's done, Be the labor great or small . Always finish If you are doing a task once you have done it, you will never forget it .
 Repercussions are being felt over a wide area and particularly in the South . This declaration, stated in both the affirmative and the negative, has become a virtual political basketball .
 Savannah State College Debating Team has chosen this as the topic for its next debate . Because of its significance to us as voters affected by the county unit system, and its controversial nature, the debate will focus on the controversial issue .
 Both sides are determind to make it a fight to the bitter end . Being fought on home grounds and before fellow students, both sides will make it to a fight .
 The passing of the 1961-62 basketball season will mark the end of college basketball careers for eight seniors . Eight seniors have won the hearts and respect of all basketball fans in and out of college .
 The Tigers have built up a record on the hardwood that will stand for some years i;o come . The Tigers, a well rounded group of athletes and gentlemen, have built a record that will be remembered .
 The District 6A NAIA playoff Dodsers Favored since its beginnmg. They won their conference visitations and tournament crowns four consecutive times . The team has won the district 6A playoffs four straight times .
 We need not stop here in remembering the outstanding feacs of the team . The team won the Pelican State Tournament last year in New Orleans . They have advanced to the NAIA national tournament for three consecutive years .
 Coach Ted Wright's Tigers hold wins over some of the nation's finest basketball teams . Coach Wright's team is ranked No. 1 in the country's basketball history .
 In the NAIA tournament competition, tliey have stopped Willamette, and more . Patterson vs.Willamette is the first time the two teams have stopped each other in the competition .
 Redell Walton drafted by Cleveland Pipers of the American Basketball League in their annual winter draft of top collegiate basketball talent . Walton Drafted By Pipers . Next edition of tinTIGERS KOAR Coming Soon .
 Bill Sharman was drafted by the Pipers at the start of the season . He was drafted to play for the Toronto Pipers . Sharman spoke to discuss matters concerning his draft status with the team . The Pipers are currently in the midst of a disappointing season .
 The Tiger's Roar and the entire student body wish for Redell Walton much success in his future professional basketball career . Coach Sharman sent a congratulatory letter to Walton here at the college on April 2 .
 The Los Angeles Dodgers are favored to win the National League pennant this season . The Dodgers are expected to be a National League winner in the coming season .
 Manager Walt Alston should finally come up with the right combination to get the best results out of the much talented Dodger organization . The Dodgers have a long list of talented players .
 The Dodgers, like the Yanks, have power and speed along with a stroHGPitching staff . It seemed that the juggling of the line-up the past season did not give players time to get adjusted to their new positions .
 The San Francisco Giants should give the Dodgers a good fight for the pennant . Cincinatti and Milwaukee are fighting it out for third and fourth place .
 The Cardinals and Cubs should place fifth and sixth respectively . The rest of the league fights It out for the second division . The Cubs and Cardinals should be in the second place .
 Thomas Redell Walton was selected to the all-tournament team in Kansas City, Missouri in the recent NAIA tournament . The Savannah State College student was selected for all-American basketball .
 He received a gold watch as a naward for being selected to the all-tournament 2nd team . He was selected to be selected for the all tournament 2nd .
 Floyd Patterson has signed to meet Sonny Liston . Patterson is the heavyweight champion of the world . Liston is the number one challenger to Patterson .
 This fight is expected to be one of the all-time great fistic contests ever presented . The two fighters have similar backgrounds . The fight will take place on Saturday night at Madison Square Square .
 Liston was the less fortunate, running into difficulty with the law time and time again . Liston ran into trouble many times, including in the 1970s .
 He just recently convinced the Pennsylvania Boxing Commission that he was worthy to fight for the crown . The fight will take place in the state of Pennsylvania .
 Liston is tlie heavier of the two fighters and can throw the knock-out punch easily with either hand . Liston will be the toughest of the night as he is heavier than Liston .
 Liston has been trying to get a bout with Patterson for a long time . Patterson's punches are fast and dangerous too too . Liston and Patterson will go head-to-head on Saturday night .
 Patterson is the champ and the favorite but one slip-up can cost him his title to the hardhitting Liston . Liston is the hard-hitting boxer who has a reputation for knocking Patterson out of the ring .
 Willie Tate, Ira Jackson, Redell Walton, Stephen Kelly and Stephen Kelly are among the stars of the day . Willie Tate was one of the first African-American presidents to hold a presidential nomination .
 Redell Walton has averaged around 28 points per game for the Tigers in four seasons . Walton is a muscular 6 ft. 1in. 1 in. in. forward who has averaged 28 points during his entire four years as a regular player .
 He has won a berth on almost every tournament team in which the Tigers have participated . He has been a member of almost every team he has played for .
 The Tigers have a deadly one-two-court duo: Walton and Walton . The Tigers also had a deadly combination of center-to-center center and defensive strength .
 Ira Jackson is a shy fellow who usually commards the backboard for the Tigers . Jackson is one of the best players in the basketball world to play for the team .
 Willie Tate, James Dixon, Stephen Kelly and Stephen Kelly have also contributed immensely to the Tigers' success story . Willie Tate has averaged 20 points or more as a regular player .
 Raymond Harper and Paul Thompson were two outstanding hustlers all season long . Raymond Harper was one of the best hustlers in the sport . Paul Thompson and Raymond Harper were outstanding in the field .
 They formed the nucleus of the Tigers' bench strength . Roland Nash, who did not get in the picture as often as the others, can also stand up and be counted .
 Alfredo Morange, Anthony Sheffield, Billy Day and Harvey Bailey are among those slated to come in next year by way of Chicago, South Carolina . Billy Day, Billy Bailey and Billy Day are among the freshmen who will be freshmen at the University of Chicago .
 Mathis and Bailey will probably be the two key men in the Tigers' attack next year . Mathis is all over the 6 ft. mark and Bailey is expected to be a key player for the Tigers .
 With the additional players slated to come, the Tigers should be as strong as before . The Tigers are looking to add some more players to their ranks .
 Write a Letter to the~ifr<litor Anyway Honor Roil and Dean"* (Contimoul from Page 2.2.5)
 Geraldine Stepherson, Jimmy Stewart, Louise Strange, Doris M Terry, Shirley J Thomas, Shirley T. Thomas, Elmer Truell. Geraldine stepherson was Jimmy Stewart .
 Marian Werner, Edward C West, Inez Whipple, Gracie Mae White, Lucy Wilkes, Thomas A, Williams, James W Wilhams, Marian Werner and Edward C. West .
 MelSludents Select Council Officers by Beineice Pinkney . Race to determine who will head Student Council for the school year 1962-63 .
 Verdelle LaVerne Lainber Is the highest tanking candidate and Juanita Moon is the next highest . Savannah State College, seventy-seven persons are listed as candidates for graduation on June 5 .
 Miss Lambert is associate editor of tilt' Tiger's Roar; president of Alpha Kappa Mu; secretary of Delta Sigma Theta sorority; member of College Playliouse; English tutor; and on the Cotnmlttee on General Education .
 She Is also listed in Who's Who Among Students In American Universities and Colleges . Candidates from the DIVISION OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION — General Business Administration are . Evelyn Bell, Sylvania; David Bodison, Savannah; James DeVoe, Savannah . Abraham
 Dorothy Brown, Richard Mondell Coger and Mary Cantrell are featured in this week's Photo of the Day of Remembrance . The students are asked to share their knowledge of their experiences in the arts and nature .
 Perhaps the most decisive factor 'distnigui&hlng great educational ' ceiileri. hum not considered so great is Us siudciit body .
 Col leges that select ""better"" students enjoy a pl&ce of promlnnence . SSO students can discuss the InatUution .
 Elderly gentleman who teaches cnuises in social studies has probably been In contact with mure students than anyoiiu un the present staff . During the thirty years he has been employed at the cuUege .
 When Mr, Griffin came to Georgia State he luund students far less able to undertake college work than lecent years . In parallelism with the post War trend, the student population has more than doubled .
 Buitaings and facilities have also been improved and expanded to suit the needs of the institution . The institution's facilities have been expanded and improved .
 A room In Meldrim Hall that now serves as an office was formally a library housing wliat few books and periodicals they had Tlie hbiaiy now m use is well equipped and has a reasoiiably large collection .
 In addition to this, vast new improvements in the curriculum have been made . Several other buildings have also been added to the school .
 The administration realizes that in order to provide better educational opIjortunities for its students, a more qualified faculty must be secured and maintained .
 Almost all heads of departments hold a doctorate degree . Many on the staff liave done graduate work beyond the Master's degree at major institutions of higher learning .
 In order to keep pace witli future needs, to continue at the present rate would not be enough . These efforts must be hilenslfied and accelerated, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Grants iCuntmiu-d Irom P‘ge I) with problems which may be suitable for graduate work . Help students develop a method of organizing acquired knowledge .
 To become eligible for both grants the student must be a chemistry major with an average of ""B"" or higher . The student must have recommendation from the Chemistry Staff and must be junior or senior .
 Since taking the oath of office last January the volatile potentate of these United States has proven himself to be a man of vigor, vitality, tenderness, temperance and most recently — extremely powerful . Mr Kennedy's power was exemplied when he forced the strong steel bosses to yield
 Roosevelt's 'big stick' policy was hailed by some as dictatorship, but to others it was a panacea for arbitrous price-fixing . This use of force almost forgotten since the days of Roosevelt's ""big stick"" policy .
 In defense of his actions, the President so emphatically told the United States Chamber of Commerce. "In defense of himself, I'm not sure what I'm doing," he said .
 The President has voiced such a blunt opinion many people are wondering why doesn't the President use this force on Congress of the United States to stamp out the evils prevalent in our society .
 Kennedy is planning to push hard for his controversial medical aid to the aged, foreign aid, and educational bills . If necessary he will travel to Capitol Hill to meet this end . It's widely known that Kennedy is pushing hard for the health care reform .
 It is equally known that the promises he made to Negroes with regards to their civil rights failed to materialize . It is also known that many of his promises to African-Americans were not materialized .
 This reporter is cognizant of the precedents set by this neophyte in naming Negroes to heretofore untold positions, but I must say that these posts are infinitesimal when one views the promises made by this novice President during his vigorous campaign .
 President will carry the new civil rights bill and his "Big Stick" to Capitol Hill when Congress convenes its next session, or will he procrastinate .
 Mr Kennedy may invoke serious damage to himself if he continues to abscond from Martin Luther King's second Emancipation Proclamation . The King's Proclamation asks for the abolition of segregation and discrimination .
 In a discussion of Racil Climate one must be aware of the primary factors which are unavoidable . Impact of Changing Racial Climate on Policies and Practices of Y.M.C.A/s .
 One is not reporting on events of the past nor the present, but rather on the factors by which the major problems of racial relationships exist . One of the factors is that racial relationships in America still have racial problems, he says .
 "Freedom is one of the main reasons that we ithe Negroes i are striving to make integration successful," says N.J. Johnson .
 Freedom has no definite meaning; it is rather an individual concept that we are striving to obtain . Freedom is not a definite meaning, but it is a personal concept that people strive to obtain. Freedom is an individual idea that we strive for ourselves to obtain, he says .
 Progress implies change and growth and the need to submit to processes of adjustment . Patrick Henry once said, ""give me liberty or give me death,"" and the action that the Negro has facilitated toward integration indicates the same .
 Director of Public Relations, Elmer Thomas, who writes the ""College by the Sea"" column for the Savannah Morning News, has been appointed Editor-in-Chief of the Tiger's Roar for 1&62-63 .
 The remaining positions will be filled in September . Security in this sense refers to assurance of acceptance in American society .
 It is also related to one of the basic human needs, the need for economic security, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's a good idea that people need economic security. It's also a good example of the need to be more secure"
 Peace in this sense refers to the interrelationship and negotiation between races . Peace is peace . Peace refers to interrelationships between races and negotiation .
 Before integration can be fully realized the American society must be matured, morally, intellectually, emotionally, emotionally and most, socially, socially . When one is socially mature he is able to live easily, comfortably, and harmoniously with other people .
 The socially mature are free from the neurotic necessity t"" dominate and control others . They will accept one as he is, with respect . The mature will accept others with respect and accept them as they are .
 The racial climate has changed in the Y.M.M,C-A's and is favorable to change in other aspects of society, says the group's leader .
 Dr. Johnson (Conlinued Irom fage l> Gospel,"" a dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. Johnson . Johnson .
 He is a member of Kappa Alphi Psi Fraternity, and International Society of Theta Phi, a scholastic honor society .
 Edna Marie Harden, Yvonne Harris and Margaret Hayes are featured in this week's CNN iReporters' top 10 .
 LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE: Louise Lamar, Talbotton; Verdelle LaVerne Lambert. Albert King, Waynesboro .
 DIVISION OF NATURAL SCIENCES — BIOLOGY: Jeff Dunbar, Savannah, Almarie Glover, Savannah; and Raff Simmons . Olivet Wyche, Dublin, is a member of the National Geographic Society of Nature .
 Dorothy Carter and Bessie Samuels were chosen as attendants . Dorothy Carter was chosen as her attendants . She was quiet and charming .
 Was recently elected to Who's Who in American Colleges and Universities . Was elected to the U.S. Board's Head Club and elected to American Colleges & Universities .
 On campus, she is active in the women's ensemble, Y.W.CA,. and the S,N,E,A, In quiet moments, Bessie likes to read or crochet . She is also a member of the Y.CA. and S.N,
 The Fine Arts Department had on display during the fine arts festival, a selection of paintings and sculptures done by art students of Savannah State College .
 The purpose of the fine arts festival is to stimulate a greater interest and appreciation of the arts .
 The display was housed in the seminar room of the college library . Subjects of the paintings ranged from Carl Moore's graphic description of the hustle and bustle of Times Square after a thunderstorm .
 Bertrand explained that her painting represents an experimental effort In oil searcihing for form and textural relationships rather than being of any particular meaning Itself .
 The Oconee High School Chorus of Dublin, Georgia was featured in concert on Thursday's assembly program . The Chorus is featured in the program .
 The group is directed by an outstanding graduate of Savannah State, Timothy Ryais . The group also features an outstanding student from Savannah State .
 This is an article written to the students, faculty, and the entire college family . This is the first article written by the students and faculty of the college family.
 A student who wants to succeed does not need competition, it is the student who just wants to pass that needs it, 7.5.7.7 . Students who just want to succeed do not need competitions, says 7.9 .
 Some students strive to obtain an ""A"" or ""B"" without actually learning the subject matter, but merely giving an impression . Over-exertion (causes headaches ) 4 The Dean's List and Honor Roil may be harmful .
 We have given you a general outlook of what the students are thinking about in our class . We are happy to provide an overview of the students' thoughts .
 Defensive whiz Ira Jackson recently became the second member of Savannah State's fabulous ""Chicago Five"" to be drafted by a professional basketball team .
 Jackson was considered to be the engine for the highpowered and high-scoring Tiger quintet . A former All-City player from Chicago, Jackson played for the Chicago Bulls .
 Playing with the shadow of NAIA All-America Redell Walton, he was the most underrated player on the squad .
 In the twenty six games played by the Tigers this season, Jackson grabbed an average of 17 rebounds per game . Jackson also tossed in over 19 points per contest . The modest and somewhat shy Jackson grabbed 17 rebounds a game .
 The big center teamed up with scoring ace Redell Walton to lead the Tigers to four consecutive and division crowns . The Tigers won three District 6-A NAIA titles and four consecutive Division 6 titles .
 The ladles had just been telling lies. Because they winked their eyes; While the fellows thought they had a good friend . While they thought they . had a . good friend, the ladles were just telling lies .
 Charm is a beauty A beauty that is true It makes her do the things that she should do . Charm is the most beautiful thing you can do. Charm is not a thing that you can't ignore .
 Her personality Sweet as spring air; When you're in her midst You will be aware . When you've been in your midst You'll be aware of her presence . She's a great writer.
 She is as pretty As pretty As a queen's smile Warm, pure, lovable She is worthwhile . She is worth a lot of effort .
 The participants convened for two days and attended a variety of sessions in journalism . The participants attended a range of journalism sessions in a bid to learn about journalism .
 He has received the highest acclaims from Dr. Dr. John Sutter . He has been listed in Who's Who in Public Relations and American Education in American Education .
 The Michigan Interscholastic Press Association is now in its thirty-fifth year . It featured some of the top journalists in the United States .
 Raymond Harper, Fred Carter, and Anthony Sheffield throw great throws for Savannah State . Savannah State's showing was due to the great throwing of the throwers .
 Hershel Robinson Jr., Jr., won second and third place respectively picking up eight points for Savannah State's Tigers . Sheerhel Robinson, Jr., picked up the other eight points .
 Robert P Daniel, president of Virginia State College, was the speaker for the college vesper service on April 29, presented by Beta Phi Lambda and Delta Eta chapters of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc., .
 Highlights of his address were centered around the importance of education in gaining true citizenship in the space age and the Negro as a part of the new frontier .
 The first award for outstanding work in the fraternity and community during the year 1961 was given to Prince Jackson . The second award went to Mr Prince Jackson, who was awarded the second award .
 Aberdeen A Allen, Luther Mack Brown, Thomas Alexander Wilkes, Otis Mitchell and Samuel MTruell. Aberdeen A. Wilkes died at the age of 92 .
 Percy Harden, Otis Mitchell, Reginald Rhodrlquez, Alvin Jones and Alvin Jones were the Sphinx's financial secretary . Samuel Truell, sargeant at arms, Samuel M Truell; chaplin Willie Shinhoster, Willie Shin hoster; editor to the
 Savannah State College Debating Society is busy formulating plans for the 1962-63 season . Debators plan for next season .
 The success enjoyed by the team recently has prompted Its members to commence study and research for future competition .
 The televising of national intercollegiate debates locally has created a growing interest in debating . The television coverage of national debates has created an interest in debate .
 On Wednesday evening, May 8, the organization elected officers for the forthcoming season .
 Bobby Hill was elected president, Verlyn Bell, vice-president, James Brown, secretary, Mannie Roberts, treasurer and Manni Roberts . Samuel M, Truel. reporter.
 The outgoing president, Samuel Williams, was commended for his participation during the time he was affiliated with the group . Samuel Williams was the outgoing president .
 The little road to happiness is not hard to find; It might not lead to wealth and fame But to contentment and peace of mind .
 Savannah State students are falling out in trousers, suits and sports coats made of dacron and cotton poplin materials . N'uw th.it ihr lifat is on .
 The trousers come in various shades of olive, brown, tan, and stone mist, the most popular colors for men this spring .
 He is wearing a black poplin coat with tan poplin trousers, a blue and white striped snaptab shirt, a red muted tie and of course, the ever popular dirty sneakers . He is also wearing a blue striped shirt and a red tie .
 Students at Savannah State talk about "bishops,"" ""rooks,"" or knockouts . Chess Club r<;anized Chess Club .
 The above mentioned words are terms used in the faclnatlng game of chess . Chess is a form of chess where chess is used to play .
 Several months ago, several persons affiliated with Savannah State College met with the Intention of organizing a systematic approach to mastering the fundamentals of the game . The Intention was organized by several people affiliated with the college .
 Meetings are held twice weekly to discuss the members' playing efficiency . George Grlmsley, sophomore business major and acting president of the club, says he is the acting president .
 Beginning with the elementary principles, history and special points about the game they move on to the more complicated movements and techniques . Starting with the basic principles and history of the game, they begin with the basics .
 Chess is regarded as one of the most demanding games in the world so far as thinking power is concerned . Chess is a demanding game of thinking power . Chess chess is considered one of most demanding chess games of all time .
 It Is very popular In Russia, especially among scholars and Intellectuals, it is very popular in Russia .
 In the curricula of our three military academies, chess courses are found in chess courses . Chess is a part of the curriculum at the three academies in the British military .
 It is felt that this game is one of the most practical applications of military strategy . The game is a practical application of military strategies .
 George Grlmsley and several graduates of Savannah State comprise the chess club . The chess club is based at Savannah's Chess Museum .
 The TIGER's ROAR May-Jane.62 NINE HONORED FOR SERVICE W Verfiil Winters err>y .
 This is the first time such an extensive tour has been taken by the group . This is first time the group has taken such a tour of the country .
 The twenty-six member glee club sang in concert at churches and high schools in seven states and twelve cities .
 Mr Thompson says another tour will be scheduled for next year .
 Mr Thompson also expressed the desire to increase the size of the glee club from twenty-six to approximately thirty or thirtyfive members by next year .
 Many letters and telegrams, praising the recent tour, have been received by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter says he has received many of the letters from people around the world .
 William Hagins, Lawrence Hutchins, Rowland Jackson, Frank James, Linwood Jones, Marvin Kirkland, Albert Lewis . William Hagin, Lawrence . Hutchins . Jackson, Jackson, James, Kirkland .
 Miss Rose Overstreet, pianist, and Miss Althea Morton, chaperon, accompanied the group . James T Williams, Joseph Williams, Thomas Williams, Lawrence Wilson, Roosevelt Winfrey and Northern Moore, accompanied them .
 I >rni7 If inters Is Chairman SavmiiKih Stalf Local St'lutlarsliip Membership Appeal SSC Graduate Promolt'd Dr. Dr. SavmIIKih is a graduate of the SSC and a graduate member of the St
 George S Kent, associate professor in English, has been promoted to a full professorship in the English Department .
 He instructed English at and became dean of Delaware State College . He taught at Samford and Samford before joining Quinniplac College faculty .
 Dr. Kent is advisor to the monthly and yearly student publications at Quinnipiac . He is a member of the National Council of English Teachers and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People .
 Kent lives with his wife and two children, Edward., and Sherald, 6, at 14 Ives Street, Handen . Kent lives in Handen with his family .
 The 1962 Savannah Negro College Fund Drive will get underway May 17 . Professor of Math-Pyhsics at Savannah State College and Chairman of the Drive, spearheading the movement .
 Other key figures in the drive are Frankie Ellis, Frankie Ellis and Miss Lola Dison .
 UNCP Board of Directors: "In fact, its identity as a 'Negro College' while never a cause for shame, was an Identity that was imposed, deriving from the most easily observable aspect of the college — its Negro student body" "rather than growing out of the
 Today, the 71 private institutions of higher learning for Negroes have an enrollment of 28,380 . Approximately 33 percent of the Negro students attending predominantly Negro institutions .
 With the help of thoughtful Savannahians, the UNCF will be able to help hundreds of Georgia students further their education and help our private institutions acquire new structures .
 The appeal of the Savannah State College Annual Alumni Scholarship and the Savannah Alumni Chapter began Sunday . The appeal will end the second Sunday in June .
 Alumni contest will qualify Savannah State College for more national defense loans . Savannah State will receive national defense loan money from the Alumni Contest .
 Nine faculty members who have given twenty-five or more years of service to Savannah State College . William B Nelson Faculty Honorees At Presidents Anniversary .
 William B Nelson, Professor of Industrial Education, will reflect upon past years from a different point of view . He will discuss the events of the past and present in his new book .
 Savannah State College has been home to the Savannah campus for 17 years . He retires in June after 17 years at Savannah State .
 Vergil Winters, Professor of Physical Sciences, came to Savannah State College in 1927 . Winters was a Physical Sciences Professor at the Savannah College of Technology .
 Dr, Joan L, Gordon was a librarian when she joined the staff in 1929 . Leroy WBrown Joined the staff a year later . He is now assistant Professor of Auto Technology at the University of Cambridge .
 Mrs, Varnetta K, Frazier, Frazier and William E Griffin, Assistant Professor of Social Sciences, came in 1930 .
 Mr, Griffin helped to organize the first basketball tournament held at Savannah State College .
 Hubert Hubert is currently employed as secretary and Assistant to the Co-ordinator of General Education, and Mr, Clay is Associate Professor of Chemistry . Hubert and Clay are Associate Professors of Chemistry and History .
 All institutions of higher education must seek new financial resources to buttress their work . This year's holiday season is a great time for higher education students .
 Chapter president says, "An Alumnus will always be identified by the reputation his or her Alma Mater has attained" Chapter president said, ""An alumnus . always will always have a reputation for his Alma . Mater's reputation will be defined by its reputation .
 The TIGER'S ROAR Pase 5 Pilot Project to Begin here . It was recently announced ticipating high schools will be educational experiment . May-June .
 Beginning on June 25th and running through July 20th. twenty students selected from Tompkins, Beach, were selected for the program .
 Swainsboro High and Industrial and Ballard Hudson will begin their rigorous academic training . Ballard Hudson High School will be the first school to begin its rigorous training program .
 The specific contents of instruction will finally be determined in accordance with the results of the test and the objectives of the project . Contents will be determined .
 Evidence from high school and freshman tests points conclusively to a program that primarily emphasizes reading and communication in words and number .
 Announcements of the John Lewis and Clara Moffatt Brumm Scholarship for 1962 and Awards for Reporting were made . Awards for reporting were also announced .
 Participants will have an opportunity to remove any educational deficiencies that might otherwise retard their academic progress . In addition to this, participants will also be able to remove deficiencies that may otherwise retard student progress .
 This will certainly provide for greater achievement on the collegiate level . The move will provide greater achievement for the college football team .
 Miss Merion Dixon, a senior in the division of business administration, will serve as student judge . Miss Dorothy B, Wilson, senior, business law; and Miss Geneva Seigler, junior, shorthand, will be student judges . Miss Geneva Seiglers, senior shorthand,
 Charm Week Celebration at Savannah State College began Sunday, May 13 . Miss Marcelle E Rhodriquez, an instructor in the division of business administration, will serve as coordinator of judges .
 Savannah State College's Charm Week started Sunday evening at 6 o'clock in Meldrim Auditorium . Associate Professor of Health and Physical Education opened the Charm Week activities as Vesper speaker .
 She hold the B.S. and M.S . degrees in Health, Physical Education and Recreation .
 May I4th-I7th seminars were conducted by various female organizations on campus . The seminars were held in the Audio-Visual Aids Center in May .
 Savannah -Chatham County Board of Education and staff announcer at WSOK Radio, was the speaker for the allcollege assembly held on Thursday .
 Verdelle Lambert, senior, passed the mantle of Athena to Bernita Kornegay, highest ranking junior woman, in the annual passing of the mantle ceremony . Bernita is the highest ranked junior woman in the university .
 Charm Week is the 17th annual Charm Week Celebration . A talent and Fashion Show on Thursday night concluded the event . Charm Week celebrates Charm Week 2014 .
 Alpha Nu Chapter of Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society rounded out its year's program with a number of interesting activities . AK Mil Sponsors Many Activities Many Activities AK Mil sponsors Many Activities .
 At this affair, which has become an annual event, recognition was given to those who had achieved scholastic honors during the year .
 Some of our faculty members will be in school this summer . Purdue Prince Jackson C Vernon Clay Facnlty Members to Atlencl School .
 Four of our faculty members have been awarded grants for summer study . It has been announced that four of them have been given grants .
 Luetta C Upshur, Assistant Professor of English, will study at Peabody College . Upshur is an assistant professor at the college .
 Nashville, Tennessee, under a program of assistance from the Southern Education Foundation . The program is being funded by Nashville-area students .
 Mr Purdue was among twentyfive other business educators from a fifteen state area . He was joined by twenty-five others .
 Mr Purdue is an accounting and General Business Instructor . He is a graduate of Morehouse College, Atlanta .
 The credits earned during the year will be counted toward his Ph.D. degree . The credits will also be counted as part of the year's work .
 Upshur described the artist as a philosopher, a creator, and a clairvoyant . Upshur describes Upshur as an artist, philosopher, creator and a creator . He described Upshur's work as a 'philosophy, creator'
 After the address, graduate members of Alpha Kappa Mu, tutors and aspirants were presented . The address was presented at the end of the address .
 On May 21. a colloquy was held in the reading room of the college library . The college is home to students from around the world .
 This event is the third in a series of events presented by Alpha Kappa Mu . This event began at 4 o'clock a.m.
 Transparencies projects onto a 10' X 10' movie screen color transparencies. drawings, written material, overlays, and non-objective designs that, not only command the attention of the students, but vividly portray proper sentence construction .
 Professor Peterson analyzes great works of literature and his own students' compositions a paragraph at a time by flashing them on the screen from his ""magic lantern" in reality a small projection machine . In this way, the class benefits as a whole from the visual lecture .
 SSC Alumni Play Important Role in Life of Savannah . The community can look with pride on the work of the graduates and former students .
 John McGlockton is the former president of the Hub and member of numerous other organizations . He is also a member of the board of directors of the Carver Savings Bank, he states .
 The majority of public school teachers In Georgia as welt as other states are former students of Savannah State College .
 In Savannah in particular, some 90% of the teachers are products of State . That is true of principals also. In looking at Savannah, it appears that 90% are State products .
 Seventy per cent of the Negro policemen in Savannah either graduated or attended Savannah State College . The majority of the policemen were African Americans .
 The same is true of civil service workers, agricultural extension workers, proprietors, and government employees . It is obvious that these very prosperous graduates will respond readily to their Alma Maters giving freely ranging from $10 up .
 Dr William K Payne, President of Savannah State, comments, "Savannah State College places much of Us hope and faith for continued growth and development in the Alumni"
 Their achievements and influence in their respective locations continue to create a large circle of Interested and dedicated friends .
 In his office in the Early American Room, which achieves the personal, down-to-earth touch with Its open hearth fireplace, low beamed ceiling, and planked table and benches .
 Pape 6 THE Tir.F.R.R'S ROAH May-June, 1962 . Some who served U.S. WELL nOKOIHV HKOWN .
 Miss SSC EMMA SUE MiCRORY is the reigning champion of the Misses SSC . VERDEELE LAMBERT is the youngest Miss S. SSC to be crowned .
 The freshmen come and bring a little learning with them with them and the seniors leave without talcing any away . The freshmen and seniors leave with a little bit of learning .
 "We would like to think of this as being just a play on words and not a true definition, at least not on our campus," the university says .
 On June 5. between 70 and 80 seniors will leave SSC and will take away some ""learning"" and a lot more besides . The seniors will be able to leave the college on June 5 .
 Some of the campus's most outstanding students will graduate this year . A kaleidoscopic view of the graduating class will bear out this statement .
 The campus will certainly miss the radiant beauty of Miss SSC, Emma Sue McCrory and her attendants . The campus is saddened by the loss .
 Juanita Quinn and Dorothy Brown represented SSC on so many occasions . SSC was founded in the 1920s .
 Student Council President James DeVoe and Vice President Berneice Pinkney are among those leaving the campus after serving as heads of the student government .
 Senior representatives Joy Heywood and Louise Stewart Wllkerson will also graduate . The pair will be the first representatives to graduate from the U.S. Senate .
 SSC collegians will long remember Annette Kennedy and Carolyn Vinson for their roles in Cameo Sketches and ""Medea "" To prove that more than just a little learning will accompany the seniors, look at the membership of Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society .
 The Tiger's Roar will lose Editors Berneice Pinkney, Verdell Lambert, Mamie Green and James DeVoe . It will also lose Editors Verdeell Lambert and Mamie Greene .
 The student body was asked to name their choices of the five most outstanding seniors in the June graduating class . In a surprise move, the student body voted for the top five seniors in June .
 There were no criteria given as a basis for selection other than being known for performing some function for the college, nor was there a list of candidates . Selection criteria was not given, but was not a list .
 James DeVoe, Charles Frazier and Verdell Lambert all selected . DeVoe is the first to be selected . Frazier is second and Lambert is third . Lambert and DeVoe are the only players selected .
 Emma Sue McCrory was selected for fourth place and Bobby Burgesses fifth . Bobby Burgess was also selected for fifth place in the state .
 The senior class advisor is one of the senior class advisors at the University of Washington .
 Lest our heads be swelled so that they exceed previous measurements, a small reminder . Lest we should be reminded of the size of our heads .
 Deltas celebrated National May Week at Savannah State College Sunday, May 20, at Vespers Service .
 The National President of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority was the guest speaker . The national sorority president was the national president .
 She was formerly Guidance Counselor and Director of Freshman Orientation at the City College . She is also Director of Orientation and Guidance counselor .
 Oklahoma and Research Assistant in the Program of Guidance and School Counseling, Board of Higher Education .
 The Negro Woman's College EducaSpri by Lois Carson . Spring is the time That thrills most of us. Spring is a time for women's education .
 Everything is pretty; Everything is gay This is the time When most lovers say, ""I love you darling"" In their own special way .
 Noble has contributed several articles in professional journals in her academic field . Noble has published numerous articles in her professional journals .
 Margaret Fisher entitled College Educatio nas Personnel Development was published in 1960 . It was published by Margaret Fisher . Fisher published a book entitled College Education and Personnel Development . Fisher also published a biography of the author .
 She is a member of The National Board of the Girl Scouts of the U.S.A. and serves as Chairman of the Study-Grant Committee for this organization . She has just completed a three year term on the Commission on the College Student .
 Noble serves a three year term to the Defense Advisory Committee on Women in the Services (better known by its short title— DACOWITS) Noble serves as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on Education .
 The National Teacher Examinations will be administered at Savannah State College, July 28 . The exams will be held in Savannah, Georgia .
 The finals of the 550,000 Tournament of Champions will be bowled at the AMF-equipped Play Bowi Lanes in Indianapolis, Indiana . The ABC-TV network will broadcast the finals on Sunday, May 20 from 5:00m until 6:30m .
 The tournament, the first of its kind, will be made up of a field of 25 bowlers . The tournament will take place at 7:30 a.m. Eastern Daylight Time . The first of the kind of tournament will be held in New Jersey .
 Every one of them is a champion in his own right, having won either a Professional Bowlers Association tourney or one of the top national titles .
 Dick Weber, current ""Bowler of the V'Mi"" who is the All-Star champinii, has won more P.B.A. tt.uirneys than any other bowler . Don Carter, Fred Lening; Harry Smith; Glen Allison;
 Each bowler will bowl the man who immediately precedes him in the scoring . Second-place bowler bowls the first-place man, fourth against third, sixth against fifth and so on through the list .
 The bowler is credited with one point for each game he wins and one for every 30 pins he knocks down . In this round, as in the 24 preceding games, the bowler receives one point per game for each victory .
 The three top scorers meet on TV and the winner is determined by total plnfall for two games . The winner of the game is decided by the winner of two games each .
 AMF will coproduce the ""500"" Festival Tournament of Champions . AMF has produced many bowling spectaculars of the past . The tournament will be held in London .
 I would rather have De Ann's love than pride than pride. Open your heart and let me inside, I said . Open your eyes and open your heart, let me in, I would love you in love .
 Please make my life begin and not end. I've tried so many, many ways, so many days . Please make your life begin, not end, please please make it begin and end .
 What is the place in which we dwell Whether it be a heaven, a paradise, or hell? It's ours, so lets hope for only the best. What is a hell?
 The breeze may rupture the waves in the sea, But deep in your heart I hope it will always be me . The song was written by John Lennon, who died at the age of 16 .
 Wherever I go. and whatever I do I'll always worry, wait, love, and dream of you . I'll also always worry and wait, and love, for whatever I may do .
 "Our summit, our goals, are forever to be reached, Although the road may sometime get steep" "Our little river of our life too deep"
 Players Presentt'd ""A Dislaiil Holl"" By Charles A Phillips "" Distant Bell,"" was the pathetic narrative of a mother who has been misunderstood and has been treated as one who was insane .
 It all began when her husband, James, had her committed to a rest home early in her married life . She was committed to the rest home at the request of her husband .
 The mother was not lacking in wisdom and understanding . Although, at times her actions were a bit irregular, she was . not lacking In wisdom and . understanding .
 Burton Greer was played by Charles A Phillips, a Junior, majoring In Social Science, a prominent character in ""Dark Victory"" and a third year member of the Yayers, who felt that she should be committed . Burton Greers, a character in the film, was played
 He did succeed in having committed her iavorite daughter Waverly, which was played by Mrs. Mrs. Waverly . However he did succeed by committing her daughter to him .
 Sally M, Marlon, a graduate of Morgan State College where she participated in drama, is a third year member of the Y Players . Sally M Marlon is a graduate from Morgan State . She is a member of Y Players. Sally M is also a graduate .
 The story became complicated when as a young man John Greighton, a leading part, played by Daniel Washington, a teacher of English, came to work in their town and found himself interested in two of the daughters, one the serious type, the other the gay type .
 Rose Baker is a senior at Savannah State College, a college Playhouse member, majoring in Social Science and is active in many campus organizations . Flagg is played by Rose Baker .
 The third daughter, played by Flora Braxton, is a senior majoring in Business Administration, a member of the College Playhouse, and many campus organizations, the quiet type . The quiet type of Barrett builds up her bitterness for her mother and blows up .
 The technical science club has just finished its most recent activity which was a fund raising boatride to Dafuski Island . The funds will be used to defray the operational expenses of the club .
 One of the purposes of the club is to . acquaint the students with the many areas encompassed in the technical sciences .
 Membership in the technical science club is both a challenge and an honor . The club is a club of technical science enthusiasts . Membership is a "challenge and honor"
 The challenge is to keep pace with the ever changing industrial and scientific growth of the space age, says NASA . The challenge will be to keep up with the growing industrial growth of space age .
 Ernest Brunson was recently elected vice-president of the Student Council . The honor is granted to those who successfully meet the challenge . Brunson is president of the technical science club .
 iNortheast Louisiana State College athlets are the only double leaders in the latest NAIA track statistics . iNAIA track leader: Two Northeast Louisiana State college athletes are only double-athletes .
 Fred Norrls, 40-year-old sophomore at McNeese State, has the best two-mile time . Norlls is a sophomore at the school . He has the fastest two mile time .
 Robert Hayes equalled the accepted 100yard dash world record of :09.2 . Hayes is the sensational sophomore from Florida A & M. He has equalled it with the accepted world record .
 NAIA records are only set at the final meet, this year at Sioux Falls, S D,, on June 1-2 . NAIA finals are held at the end of the season .
 Hans Albertsson has the best high jump, 6-lOVj. Pacific Lutheran's star basketball center has the most high jump .
 Edward Waiters College of Jacksonville piled up a total of 40 points to win the annual Southeastern Athletic Conference track meet held at Savannah State .
 Waters Waters team captured several first and second places in the competition . Waters team won several first, second and third places .
 The Ploridlans showed superior strength over the other teams in the runs and relays . The team won the relay relay relay and runs .
 Savannah State mustered a total of 31.3 points to place third in the conference . Savannah State is the usual conference track rulers .
 Robert Patrick and Herschel Robinson won 2nd and 3rd place in the two-mile run . Robert Patrick was the first runner to reach the top of the race .
 Versatile Fred Carter staged a terrific duel with Albany's Art Gamble in the pole vault . Art Gamble was the runner-up .
 Although he was a favorite to win tht low hurdles, pole vault and t^ ; discus throw, he was also a favorite for low hurdles and pole vault .
 Carter lost uf narrowly In ail these events . The Tiger's roar was the result of the events in May 1962 .
 H — Alhiiny Slale Biiiul nl llie opening of ihe Fine Arls Festival . H — The SneUons view the Bu<^ineF,s Dept/s exhihil. H — Sc4.'iie from ihe rreative
 Savannah State Stndents Hold Interesting Jol>s Bernard Kent, Jr.. junior. Bernard Kent Jr. junior. Savannah State is a junior at Savannah State University .
 Camp Henry for boys is only one of these services established to meet the need of our society . Camp Henry is a one of the services that meet the needs of many young people in the U.S.
 Abraham L Jones, a graduating senior, worked in this same position for two summers . He worked in the same position two summers as a student .
 Health, Physical Education and Recreation major, has been appointed to the position of Director of the Sophronia Tompkins Recreation Center . He assumed the position in June this year .
 The City Recreation Commission, through the Savannah Civil Service System, hired the student on basis of recommendations from teachers, persons with whom he had previously been employed, and courses in his major that he has completed .
 He has general supervision of the building and its facilities, the personnel employed at the gym . and its entire operation .
 One of his duties is to develop programs of group and individual participation . He is also responsible for developing programs of community participation .
 There are several activities open to adults and children such as arts and crafts and folk dancing . These may or may not be athletic, they are open to both adults and kids .
 Thomas graduated from Tompkins High School in 1960 and entered Savannah State the following fall . Thomas was a member of the Savannah University football team .
 He has had five years experience as a football player, four as a regular starter at Tompkins and one as a player on the Savannah State team during his freshman year .
 The group of outstanding high school graduates participated in the Pilot Study Project at Savannah State . No cause for alarm, though, the students are not students .
 The Pilot Training Program sponsored by the Southern Education Foundation and Savannah State College, began on June 20 and ended July 20 .
 The students were tested during the early stages of the program to determine their mental abilities and scholastic achievement . Students were tested to determine mental abilities .
 At the end of the program they will be tested again to examine the effectivenes.s of the four weeks of intensified training in reading, mathematics and science .
 Ruby Dean Clarke, Dorothy Brown and Sarah Nell Sinnell Sinions, William James High School; Jean Stewart, Barbara Jean Pray and Nathaniel Fuller. The winners of the award-winning ceremony will be honored at the William James high School in Washington, DC .
 Liberty County High, Essie Grant and Elizabeth Miller from Tompkins High School, Romona Marks, Jeffrey James, Ethel Mae Robinson and Betty Jean Simmons . Tompkin High School students from Liberty County, Liberty County and Tompins High School .
 Robert Williams and Eugene Whitehead are students at Waynesboro High and Industrial Training School . Robert Williams is a former teacher at the school . Eugene Williams and Robert Whitehead were students at the high school .
 Co-ordinator of General Education, Ms Williams, is director of the project . The project is based in London and is based at General Education London .
 Willie G Tucker has been appointed to the chemistry staff . Tucker Addod J\> CIkiiiislry Stall has been added to the Chemistry Department . Tucker is a graduate in chemistry at the University of Cambridge .
 Tucker studied at Tuskegee Institute . Tucker received his B.S. and M. S. degrees . Tucker was a member of the National Guard .
 As a graduate student at Oklahoma, Tucker worked on the preparation of Two-Chloropyrudin compound . Tucker also worked on a compound made of two-chloropyrudes .
 He holds membership in the Society of Xi, a national scientific honor society, and the American Chemical Society . He is also a member of the society of Xi and the Society for Xi .
 The department will be able to offer better training to the majors as well as to majors in other areas, such as biology, who must have strong backgrounds in chemistry .
 This will be accomplished, at least in part, by providing well trained staff members . This is the first step in the long-term success of the city's mayor .
 A further attempt will be made to increase speciliazation — that is to have on the faculty a Ph.D. in each of the five major areas of chemistry—physical, analytical, inorganic, bio, bio-and organic .
 Tucker's area of specialization was organic chemistry and instrumental analysis . Tucker was an organic chemist and instrumental analyst .
 Pratt envissioned the possibility of Savannah State offering graduate courses and/or advanced degrees in chemistry .
 Bertrand is returning to the Virgin Islands to accept a position of Deputy Commissioner of Health . Bertrand will be the new deputy commissioner of health in the Virgin Virgin Islands . He will be in charge of the health department in the Caribbean .
 Mr Bertrand has returned to his native land after spending 25 years in the U.S. He has spent 25 years In the United States .
 He was later appointed to chief accountant, assistant comptroller and comptroller . He was also appointed chief accountant and chief accountant . He has been in charge of the state's finances since 1995 .
 Mr Bertrand won the admiration of countless numbers of people in which he has come in contact . Savannah State's loss is the Virgin Island's gain, he says .
 The wife of Savannah State Comptroller Emanuel Bertrand has left a collection of original paintings to the college . She hopes the gifts will touch-off action that will result in the erection of a permanent art gallery on campus .
 Hampton Hampton is an accomplished student artist . Hampton spent five years training in painting . Hampton is a former student of five years . Hampton was born in New York .
 The Supreme Court outlawed the formalation and the enforcing of . OFFICIAL prayers in public schools . The U.S. Constitution, the Supreme Court .
 To those who remained it was a religious exercise, the court said . ""An official religious exercise is unconstitutional,"" the court ruled .
 Today, more and more people are joining the ranks of the Goldwaters and/or Talmadges in saying that the Supreme Court is too powerful . The Supreme Court should not be given too much power .
 Some of the power of the Supreme Court should be curtailed . These ""rightists,"" as they call themselves. declare that some of the . power should be . curtailed. These "rightists" call themselves 'rightists'
 These ""right-wingers"" claim that all of the Court's rulings since 1954 have been unconstitutional . The "Right-Wingers" claim that the Court has been unconstitutional since 1954 .
 They say nothing about the Dred Scott decision or the upholding of the ""separate-butequal doctrine"" a few decades ago . They say .
 We should accept the rulings of the court whether we go along with them or not, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 If we reject court, we reject the constitution, we refute the foundation upon which this nation was laid, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "If we reject our constitution, it will be a failure to the foundation of this nation"
 Federal District Court to recognize the present county unit system in Georgia is the best thing that happened here since Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s death .
 Under the old system the city voters' strength was unequal to the power held by the rural voters, therefore, the lawmakers in Atlanta did not hesitate to jump when the country folk cracked the whip . The country folk were not afraid to jump .
 The people in larger metropolitan areas paid the bulk of the taxes while the people in the rural areas benefitted from their political advantage .
 The party decreed that the 1962 gubernatorial race and other state offices will be decided by the popular vote . The 1962 election will be the first state election to be held in the state since 1968 .
 The candidate or candidates carrying a particular county received that particular county's unit votes . The candidate was carrying the candidate or candidate carrying a specific county .
 Tlie Tiger''s Roar Editor-in-Chief Co-Editor* Paulyne M White News Editor Samuel M, Veronica Owens Feature Editor Veronica Owens Exchange Editor Patricia Quarterman Reporter Kermetta C Clark
 Supreme Court's decision making it unconstitutional for the use of official state prayers In public schools is overturned . The decision was overturned in the U.S. Supreme Court decision .
 The affirmative consensus was centered around the belief that the court's function is to interpret the constitution . All religious education and training should emanate from church schools and homes, the consensus said .
 Those students rejecting the decision contend igenerally that this decision is abetting the cause of communism . Those students reject the decision .
 Canada's newsprint producers have just finished the first phase of the job of making paper for next year's newspapers . Canada provides more than 70 percent of the American supply .
 This is the annual spring drive, in which millions of pulpwood logs are floated downriver to the mills . Millions of pulp wood logs were cut in the backwoods last fall and winter are floated to mills . This is a spring drive for pulpwood mills .
 Most of the paper made from these logs will reach U.S. newspapers during 1963 . Most of these papers will reach the United States newspapers during that year .
 Newsprint Information Committee is a representative group of Canadian mills . Details of the drive are explained by the Newsprint information committee .
 Tossing one log in the river to float downstream is simple and costs nothing . The log is a simple and easy way to get out of the river .
 The latter eventuality would present certain problems for the pluming . These problems have their counterparts in the comiJlex river drive .
 The thaw builds up the head of water in the lakes and rivers, the logs are enclosed in booms which are towed into position behind the dams .
 For this job and kindred work, the inventory includes 20 power boats, 10 outboard motors, two derricks mounted on scows, and four houseboats .
 Llmer Thomas: Many people who normally perform the duties of the classroom teacher during the academic year return to college to participate in workshops and other activities .
 Whether it is their will or not, these persons have returned to improve their skills as conveyors of knowledge . Instigators of intellectual curiosity and moldei's of citizens of this state and nation .
 At no time in history has such a high premium has been placed on formal education, says President Obama . "At no time this has been more important than formal education," says Obama .
 Scientists and engineers have perfected machines that perform certain tasks many times faster and with much more accuracy than the human brain . Aircraft that transport their multi-ton cargo at unbelievable speeds over thousands of miles are among the machines that do so much faster than human brains .
 Medical science has increased the span of life for the average person born in 1960 to 69-7 years as compared to 60 in 1950 . The average life span is now 69 years, compared to 69 years for people born in 1950s .
 Out of every thousand babies born in 1951, '29,1 died before they reached their first birthday . Out of the thousand born in '51 '29 '29' died before the birth of a baby .
 Vast improvements in the standard of living and intellectual status of people all over the world have been made . The world has made vast improvements in standard living, intellectual status and standard of life .
 Along with these changes for a more ""livable"" world, there are many other changes taking place . Alongside these changes, the world is becoming more "livable"
 "If not dealt with properly, they threaten the security and well-being of all mankind," says President Obama . If not dealt properly, these threats could threaten the world, says Obama .
 Enslaved men all over the world are quickly throwing off the bonds of colonialism and oppression . A powerful economicalpolitical system already has under its control millions of people and is growing more powerful .
 The population boom in several countries of the world means the amount of food available per individual is decreasing rapidly . Food available per person is also decreasing rapidly due to population boom .
 Men of one color are sending men of another color, often illiterate, unskilled, misfortunate, to other parts of their country in soothe of an urge that makes them hate, in satisfaction of prejudiced beliefs and opinions .
 The story of the fourth grade youngsters reply to his teacher's geography question is quite famous . The story is the world's most famous answer to a teacher's question .
 The storms of war, poverty and ignorance have taken their toll on the world . The storm of war and ignorance has taken a toll on humanity .
 The flood waters have risen to a critical state, but we still have time to pump out some of these waters . Flood waters threaten the erosion of man's culture and civilization, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There must be a greater degree of understanding between nation and nation, black and white, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 As members of the minority group, we must refute the false contention held by the white supremlsts that Negroes belond on the back seat . We must refute that .
 "Our people must be competent, Our teachers must be of the highest quality, lest we find ourselves within an endless circle of low-quality teachers . We must, however, be able to measure-up,"" Our people must also be competent .
 "We can not take yesterday's tools, do a good job today, and expect to be in business tomorrow," says CEO . We can't be taken to task today, he says. We need to be able to get back to business tomorrow, he adds .
 So teachers and potential teachers, we must take our business more seriously, we need to take our job more seriously . We need to be more serious about our business, we say .
 Jesus Christ, Socrates and Aristotle, three of the greatest beings who ever lived, were teachers . Jesus Christ and Socrates were teachers, Socrates, Aristotle and Aristotle .
 Teachers of facts, mendors of ideals, molders of men — just as you are . "Teachers of facts" and "menders of ideals" are teachers of facts .
 We should, therefore, work more diligently so that we may become better teachers of facts, menders of ideals, molders of men . We should also be better teachers, mender of ideals and molders, says President Obama .
 This is the charge of 20th century education, Savannah State College says . Savannah State has been in the forefront of the Savannah College of Education for 20 years .
 The Tiger's Roar is in need of individuals who are willing to devote a little of their spare time to the production of this newspaper . We are looking for people to help in the development of our newspaper .
 Campus paper presents an excellent opportunity for students to develop desirable skills in expression and communication . Campus paper offers students an opportunity to learn desirable skills of expression .
 All organizations with which you may be associated will submit all news releases to the editor welt in advance to the deadline tor each issue . It is our intention to produce for you the best publication possible .
 Meetings are held periodically at the Tiger's Roar Office, Room 208, Hill Hall, . Watch the bulletin boards for time and dates .
 The NATIONAL TEACHER EXAMINATION WILL BE HELD on July 28, 1962 . June -July, 1962 THE TIGER'S ROAR I'aignni^^ FASHION MEWS ""A LA MODES""
 This season's accompanist, this season's ultrachic fashions, will be this year's most striking, say fashion experts .
 At the park, you see captivating styles by Miss Pat, Macshore Classics, Petti, and Mr Mort . Miss Pat is one of the most popular styles of the day .
 The sleek, sophisticated stylings of the fashion artist are featured in this week's Fashion Week .
 Any young lady would be set for a summer of fun and excitement with such combinations. Yes. Yes, any young lady .
 Rose Marie Reid's swlmsuit is a striking statement statement swimwear . You're sure to have fun and excitement when you head for the beach .
 Each year the beachwear becomes just a little bit snazzier . In the event, you haven't noticed, each year the event's beachwear has become more stylish .
 This year the versatile Rose Marie Reid styles are accentuated by daring, low-cut backs . This year, the versatile and versatile styles will be accentuated with daring back designs .
 The alluring styles come i nlatex knit, and the latest material lycra fibers . The allure styles come from the popular Lycra material .
 The famous RMR swim suits may be gotten in every color of the rainbow . And here's another bonus, the famous swim suits can be purchased in all colors .
 They are adorable three-quarter length cotton knit shirts that create oceans of interest on the beach .
 T-shirt may be worn as a cover-up garmet over bathing suits or shorts .
 Some of these unique shirts may even be bought with hoods if you crave a worldly air . Some of the unique shirts are even sold with hood hoods .
 Vision Conservation Institute of Penna., Inc. warns . Vision Care Helps You Drive Safely . The difference between life and death lies in your eyes .
 For the sake of yourself and your car, keep your vision functioning at the highest level of efficiency . Optometrists can help you do this .
 In most cases they are able to correct any visual errors that exist very satisfactorily . "In most cases, they were able to . correct any . visual errors, they said .
 Even if you have faults which may not be corrected, you'll find it helps to know what they are . And even if you're not being corrected, it's important to know who you are .
 A frequent eye examination is a definite step in the right direction of safety, says author . A regular eye exam is a good step in right direction .
 The normal person can see almost 90 degrees to each side of each side while fixing his vision on a point straight ahead . A person can also see 90 degrees in the direction of a person standing straight ahead of them .
 If your field is less than 75 degress to each side, there is a danger you may fail to see a car or a pedestrian approaching from Now, to leave the outside scene for a while. If you can't see a vehicle approaching from your field, leave it for a longer
 The lovely dress styles shown this season have bodices that have shoestring, single strap, and strapless bodices . The lovely styles shown are shoestrings, strapless, and single straps .
 This summer's dreamy, after-five fashions come in durable materials like petit point pique, batiste and organdy .
 The sku-ts to the season's newest dresses are billowy, floaty, and bouffant .
 A driver should also have efficient depth perception, to judge how far away the neighboring cars are and to estimate their speedy . A driver also needs to be able to judge the distance of neighboring cars .
 Less than 1% of all those with faulty color vision are unable to distinguish red traffic lights from green . Color vision rarely presents a serious problem to motorists .
 Missed opportunity is the price of total reliance on comfortable security, says Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 Success is not so much a matter of talent as of concentration and perseverance, says Mark Twain . Education and education are not as sudden as a massacre, but they are more deadly in the long run .
 Methods Workshop Summer is Jiere and many teachers throughout America are busying themselves in further pursuits of learning in the various colleges and universities . Summer is summer and teachers throughout the U.S. are busy .
 1962 Workshop in Materials and Methods for Elementary and Secondary Schools . Workshop held at Sol Johnson High School in Savannah, Georgia .
 Teachers from Ballard-Hudson High School, Macon, Georgia, and Sol C Johnson High School give their talents to instructing voluntary children as part of the over-all Workshop programs .
 Josepii Brown, Minnie Gordon Brown, Hagan Bryant, Vernon Butler and Vernon Butler are featured in this week's Savannah, Georgia, 2014 edition .
 Savannah, Georgia, Georgia; Otta Flagg, Macon; Willie C, Hamilton, Savannah; Mary J Lester, Harmon, Byronville; A Eugene Hagans.
 Two exciting parties and the opportunity to meet many interesting people has made residing in Camilla Hubert Hall both informative and enjoyable so far this summer . Kermettu Clark: "Two exciting parties" has made living at the hall both enjoyable and enjoyable .
 Among the varied personalities living in the dorm are Pilot Study students, in-service teachers and Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter is among the students and teachers who live there .
 Ighodaro was on tour in the United States and Puerto Rico to study the living conditions In America . In order to get acquolnted socially, everyone In the dormitory along with the young men of Wright Hall were invited to a party in the College Center .
 There are a number of activities on the agenda for the summer in Camilla Hubert Hall, and I shall keep you posted as to the happenings . There are also activities planned to take place this summer .
 Elmer Thomas examined briefly the gadget on Barbara's desk in the Processing Room of the College Library, but immediately he could not determine what it was or what it did .
 Because of its size and shape, I could ""readily see"" that it was an electric razor . Because of the size of the razor, I was able to see it as a razor . The razor was found in a plastic bag in the bag .
 She moved the twirling pivot of the machine across the word she had written . She moved her word across a word she'd written .
 It is our civic duty to guard and rise in defense of our own and our neighbor's rights . It is the civic duty of our citizens to protect their rights, says the author .
 We must answer with outspoken criticism every attempt by a local or federal government to infringe upon our rights . —Page 56 of the Quiet Betrayal the COMPTON QUIZ .
 Three Texas scientists report induction of highly malignant lung cancers in laboratory animals with the use of a virus knows to cause a variety of common human respiratory disorders . Hiiiiiaii Virus in Cancer is known to cause respiratory disorders in humans .
 Education Television Services—State Department of Education, was special consultant for the Elementary Secondary Workshop at the Sol C, Johnson High School, June 28, 1962 .
 Mr, Crudup was also the main speaker at the general assembly on the campus Thursday, June 28 .
 Every major geographical and political area of the world showed an increase in the number of its students and scholars here . African again had the greatest proportionate increase .
 As last year, the largest number of foreign nationals in the U.S. for the academic year 1961-62 were from the Far East; 26.522 or 37.522 of the total . As last . year, last year .
 For the first 15 days of the month of June it has rained every single day . The records show that for 22 days of of 30 In June, rain fell . The record-breaking epreclplpltatlon began on May 30 .
 The record rainfall for June, according to statistics available from Travis Field, is 18.6 inches . The record for June was 18.4 inches .
 Coger was among the first 3 to take examinations for the Peace Corps in Savannah area . The Peace Corps is based in Savannah, Georgia .
 The examinations were administered for the first time in Savannah last year . They were administered in Savannah, Georgia .
 A June '62 graduate, Coger received the B.S. degree in Industrial Arts . While in attendance here, he was active in the political, social, and cultural activities of the campus community .
 College Playhouse, and Debating Team, was also a candidate for ""Man of the Year,"" and a . candidate for Student Council President .
 According to the U, S Coast and Geodetic Survey, some days are longer than others . Some Savannah Staters said ""This sure has been a long day.""
 Of course the difference is .so minute that it could not be realized by the human mind. Of course, the difference . is . so minute . of course .
 The rotation of the earth on its axis has been said to be slightly variable and hence the sideral day, and also that of the mean solar day derived from It. are not strictly uniform .
 The present length of the day is closely equal to the period of free oscillation of the atmosphere, whose amplitude Is therefore increased by a reasonable effect .
 The phase of the atmospheric tide Is such that it tends to accelerate the rotation of the earth . Energy being drawn from the sun by a heat engine effect .
 It is probable that tidal friction has slowed the earth down until the length of the day has gradually approximated to the period of the atmospheric oscillation . The atmospheric accelerating maintains tlie rate of rotation statistically uniform .
 There is some evidence that changes within the earth's magnetic field may effect the rate of rotation . There is also evidence that the Earth may have changed its magnetic field .
 Seasonal variation is a result of a change in the angular momentmii of the seasonal winds, which must be compensated by o corresponding variation in tlie opposite sense of the angular momentum of the earth . Emotional depression disturbs the normal balance of sugar metabolism .
 The overeating is not caused by an increase in hunger drive but by a failure of the brain's signal mechanism to indicate when hunger has been satisfied, says Dr Albert Stunkind .
 Mental attitudes and reactions play an important role in accelerating or retarding a person's inclination to become excessively overweight . Studies Indicate that mental attitudes and . reactions play a role in acceleration or retardation of an inclination to be excessively overweight.
 Individual bones of the hand and wrist differ enough from one person to another . If no other marks are available, such as fingerprints or dental work, the person can be identified .
 A study of hand X-rays of the same individual from early chiidiiood over many years shows that tlie skeletal features useful for identification usually are fixed during late adolescece and remain relatively unclanged until well into the thirties .
 There is enough slmitarity between one person's right and left hand to permit successful pairing . There is also enough slitarity between the two hands .
 Griffith, examine instrument used for deir onstralions during Science Workshop session . Griffith: "It's a very exciting time for the world," says Griffith . Griffith. Griffith .
 Dr Wilson, Head of the Department of Secondary Education, Dr, B, T, Griffieth. Wilson, head of the department of secondary education, Dr. B. T, T . Wilson . Wilson is also the head of a Department of Education in Australia .
 Chairman or Division of Natural Sciences and head of the Department of Biology . Head of the Biology Department .
 Wilhemina Fraizer, and Ervin Gardner, all of Savannah, Georgia, are among the winners . Rosa Davis, Sandersville, Georgia is also a winner of the contest .
 Agnes P Herring, Sylvania, Georgia; Annie M Huggins, Vidalia, Georgia . Delia Johnson, Martha F. Johnson. Martha F Johnson. Agnes A Herring .
 Harriett Thornton, Dorothy B. Vaughn, Delores J, Washington, Emma H, Wortham, and Edna Young. Edna .
 Smokers paid enough in cagarette taxes last year to pay for the U.S. space agency's fiscal 1963 program . Funds left to buy 40 Atlas missiles .
 Cigarett*^ taxes last year brought in about $31 billion to all levels of government in the U.S. Tobacco News, published by The Tobacco Institute, Inc., said cigarett*.^ taxes .
 1963 budget of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is S2,% billion . 1963 budget was $2,000 billion .
 State, the Federal Aviation Agency and the General Services Administration are involved . Tobacco News.com reports that the FAA and GSA are involved in the investigation .
 Adherence to important rules should make Summer Vacations safer, more enjoyable . Limit your driving to 10 hours per day and limit your sleep time to avoid driving accidents .
 Buick test drivers compiled a record of 3,000,000 miles without an accident at the General Motors Proving Grounds, Milford, Michigan .
 Good habits include plenty of sleep and rest, and a good frame of mind with no worries while driving . Good living habits are important for driving .
 Break up monotony — stop for coffee or gas at regular intervals, get out and walk around . Get out and get out of the car for regular intervals . Get coffee and gas .
 Car maintenance — it's a must to keep your car in top mechanical condition . Car maintenance is a must for your car to keep it in top condition .
 Keep the inside of your car neat and tidy . Everything packed in convenient places where loose items can't slide around . Clean up your car .
 Packages piled on the rear window ledge become missiles in case of a collision . Packages also block the view of the driver behind you from the road .
 The signs are placed along the roadway ior your help, and they have a good reason for being there . The signs will be placed along a roadway in the hope of saving your life .
 On the average, taxes account for half the price of every pack of cigarettes sold, says the publication . Strict adherence to them is the best insurance we know against accidents."
 The last U S, boost, to 8 cents a package, was the Korean War, but it has been in effect ever since . The last boost was in effect during that war .
 Lilirai'j' Science Sliideiils presented a Symposium on "Achieving Excellence In Teaching Through the School Library" at Savannah State College .
 This topic was selected for discussion in order to dramatize the library as a teaching materials center . The discussion will dramatify the library's role in teaching materials .
 Far too long have teachers in the public schools ignored the library in their teaching. Far too many have teachers ignored the libraries in their classrooms.
 Educators are now calling for the abandonment of the one-text-book approach . They are now insisting on the use of a wide assortment of books and materials which will enrich and reinforce the learning process .
 Teachers of English, Social Studies and Science are the major users of the library . Teachers of Business Education, Industrial Arts, and Mathematics are minor users .
 Teachers of art, foreign language, household arts, music, health and physical education are potential users . Many of them find the school hbraries' collections in .
 Dixon, our most abled teachers, have done their utmost to make this one of the most deUghtful study periods ever enjoyed . Dixon: 'This is one of our most deGlorious study period ever enjoyed. Dixon'
 We work very hard but the rewards are truly greater than the effort. The rewards of the effort are greater than ever the effort, says Mark Hughes .
 The objectives of this course will enlighten you as to what our activities consist of; adequate for their subject fields . This course will provide an overview of the course's activities .
 Symposium depicted ways and means of improving instruction in six fields of study by utilizing the school library . Members of the Symposium depict ways and ways to improve instruction by utilizing library .
 Vivian Singleton Howard of Savannah officiated as Chairman of the Steering Committee . Howard of Georgia officiated at the Savannah ceremony .
 Can a college professor objectively discuss the pains and pleasures of college teaching? How does he react to its frustrations and rewards? Panel of college professors on the final show of the 1962 season on "Meet The Professor"
 Radio adaptions of ""Meet The Professor" with Milton Cross as host commentator are heard every Tuesday evening at 9:30m., EDT, nthe ABC radio network .
 Each student in this course will strive to go back to her community and make her library more than a house for books but a ""BeeHive of Activities"" that engulf every phase of education and pleasure .
 "developing a strongly functioning library as an integral part of the total school program is essential,"" Mrs. Smith said .
 The purpose of this meeting, designed especially for the classroom teacher, was the development of techniques of evaluation and evaluation devices appropriate for use in clothing and textile college classes .
 She is a member of the National Society for the Study of Education, Omlcron Nu and Phi Kappa Phi .
 Conference staff included Dr, Hildegrade Johnson, Dr, Pauline Keeny, Miss Louise Lowe and Mrs. Louise Lowe . Conference staff consisted of Dr. Pauline Keny, Dr. Hilda Johnson, Mrs. Paulina Keeny and Mrs . Louise Lowe.
 The Woman's College School of Home Economics faculty . Helen Staley. all of the home economics faculty at the school . The school is home to students at the college .
 The course offers two semester hours graduate credit . Among the fifteen registering for the course is Mrs. Mrs. Smith . The course will also offer graduate credit for the semester .
 The Savannah, Georgia, area residents are featured in this week's featured photos . They include Annie Stevens, Annie Stewart, Irene Derry Thomas, Udell Thomas and Udell Washington .
 This represents a 10% increase over last year, continuing the steady climb of each successive year since 1952 . This represents the 10% rise over the last year .
 Of these students, 21,568 came from the Far East.,915 from Latin America, 8,277 from the Near and Middle East, 6,833 from Europe, and 6.639 from North America . Of all the students in the U.S. came from Asia,
 Only college or university library to receive a top-rated public relations program in this year's John Cotton Dana Publicity Award Contest . Savannah State College Library was the only college to receive an award .
 One hundred scrapbooks from many kinds of libraries were submitted to officials in contention for the honors . The scrapbooks were submitted from all over the country to be honored .
 Josey, librarian at Savannah State College attended the conference of the American Library Association in Miami . He received the award on behalf of the College Library . Josey is a member of the Savannah State Library .
 The contest honors a great pioneer and promoter of llbrarianship . The contest is sponsored jointly by the Wilson Library Bulletin and ALA'S Public Relations Section .
 Savannah State College Library Librarian Josey Josey accepted the John Cotton Dana Award . Josey is Savannah's first librarian to receive the award . The award was presented at Savannah's College of Education .
 Cleveland O Christophe, Piofessoi and Head of Ihe Department oi Economics at Savannah Slate has made ""American Men of Science" lor 1962-63 . Cleveland O. Christophe was made "American Men Of Science" in 1962-1963 .
 At the Oil Chemist Society meeting held in Toronto, Canada from October 1-4, Dr. Dr. John Sutter spoke at the meeting . Dr. Sutter was invited to speak at the Toronto meeting .
 Charles Piatt presented a paper on research being carried on at Savannah Slate . He presented the paper on a project being carried out by Savannah Slate researchers .
 Pratt commended Miss Idella Glover lot working diligently on the project . Pratt said that her efforts in laboratory research entitled her to alt the credit for the paper being presented .
 SSC Graduate Rereives Proniiueiit Position Robert A Robbins has been appointed to the position of Cartographer with the USAF-Aeronautical Chart and Information Center .
 Phillip J Hampton, Assistant Professor of Fine Arts at Savannah State, has made ""Who's Who In Art"" lor 1962-63 . Art Iiistnu-lor Makes ""Who’s Who""
 The 1962 homecoming theme of ""World of Wonders"" was the theme of the 1962 celebration . This year's homecoming will be one to be long remembered .
 The crowning of ""Miss Savannah State"" will take place at the Coronation Ball which wil be held in Wilcox Gymnasium on November 8 at 9 o'clock .
 Following a parade in Savannah, the football team will clash with the Clark College Panthers of Atlanta . The game will be followed by a parade .
 The fall conference of the Georgia Committee on Cooperation in Teacher Education met at SSC on Thursday and Friday, October 11 and 12 .
 Savannah State College Student National Education Association members were in charge of registration and served as hosts and hostesses to the meeting . Savannah State State College members served as hostesses for the event .
 From 2 to 4:30m. this group held a general session during which time the keynote address was delivered by Dr. Dr. David Perry . Dr. Perry delivered a keynote address at the end of the session .
 Don Davles, Executive Secretary of the National Commission on Teacher Education and Professional Standards, Washington. Davles: "Teacher education is an important part of the American Dream" Davles is a former Washington state superintendent of schools .
 This body was divided into four small study groups and met on Thursday evening from 7 to 9. This body of study groups met in four small groups .
 Group reports were made, institutional research projects were summarized . Representatives from the State Department and the Georgia Teachers and Education Association were presented .
 Mr Shearouse commended the group on its accomplishments during the meeting and gave challenging directions for future action .
 The visiting Clark College band and Savannah State College Marching Band will render a half-time show wellworth watching . Clark College will play host to Savannah State in Saturday night's game .
 In addition to these two bands, high school bands from Savannah and other areas will be on hand for the parade . High school bands will also be attending .
 The homecoming committee is headed by Mr Tharpe, chairman, and Mr Bivens. vicechairman .
 Mr, Bivens is directing the activities due to the illness of Mr Tharpe, the chairman of the board . Mr Biven directs the activities .
 Subcommittees are working on various phases of the homecoming celebration . There are several subcommittees working on particular phases of celebration .
 A total of 1160 students are enrolled at Savannah State during the 1962 Fall quarter according to figures released from the Office of the Registrar .
 More late afternoon and evening classes will be offered to those not able to attend regular sessions . Students will be able to receive an education at the University of Tulsa .
 The total length of the college day has been increased with the addition of what was formerly the lunch hour as a regular class period . The lunch hour has been added to the college's schedule .
 In June of 1963, the college will have ended its first full year as a fully accredited member of the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools . The college will end its first year as fully accredited .
 The college has embarked upon a progiam of building and campus improvement . The ""4 point system"" will replace the ""3 point system" used here in past years .
 On the third floor are three music practice rooms, music study lounge, four offices, large rooms for music rehearsals and a music-art classroom . On the second floor, there are three practice rooms and four offices .
 There is also an art study room, a classroom tor ceramics and sculpture, rooms for kiln and art supplies in addition to a large room for paintings .
 Payne spoke to the college family on new challenges to be met by college students today and in the years to come . Payne also spoke about the challenges faced by students at the college .
 Georgia Committee on Co-operation in Teacher Education meets at Savannah State . Georgia committee on cooperation in teacher education meets in Savannah, Georgia . Committee on co-operation meeting held at Savannah University .
 The author of the book is a graduate of the Department of Education at Morris Brown College and graduate of Savannah State . The author is also a graduate from Savannah State and a teacher from Morris Brown University .
 Professor Dies by Ann Henderson . Student Ctmitril Prex V A tldressing Freshnum Class NORMAN B ELMORE ij» h3 . ij » h3» ^^m Professor dies .
 Florence F. Harrington passed unexpectedly at her home in Thunderbolt on October 9, 1962 . Harrington was a music instructor at Savannah State who up until the time of her death was an instructor .
 Harrington had served in the capacity of Director of the Female Ensemble at the college in addition to teaching courses in music . Harrington had also taught at the College of Music at the time .
 She began working in the church at an early age where she served as a teacher and organist of the Sunday School and president of the Young Peoples' Club .
 When candidates for public office will no longer abusively in.sult a segment of the population and at the same time advocate complete disregard for the welfare of these same people. When our people would come to realize that . In order for us to elevate our status from the lowest run
 Small confectlonerys. barber shops and gas stations siiouldn't be the limits of our business activities . Small businesses should not be the limit of their business activities, says the author .
 We would like to see the day when the vision of the United States of America as a truly democratic nation would be more of a reality than a dream, we say .
 The Impending crisis in the state of Mississippi is one of the gravest chapters in the lives of our citizens since the War Between the States .
 Perhaps Harnett should be charged with the murder of the two victims . Had the governor not been so loud and abusive with . advocations of defiance, the situation would never have become such an ugly mess .
 Governor responds to his constituents' pleas for direction by sending them up a dark alley . Gov. Chris Christie's office says the governor's actions are "unacceptable"
 Barnett set himself up as registrar of Ole Miss and rejected Meredith's application for admission to the lily-white institution . On three different occasions Barnett journeyed from Jackson to Oxford to Oxford .
 Mr Barnett repeatedly quoted the tenth amendment to the constitution of the U.S. Mr Barnett also quoted the 10th amendment .
 Barnett refused to take notice of the fourteenth amendment to the same constitution . Barnett was elected to the House of Representatives in 2008 . Barnett is a Republican who has been in office for 18 years .
 This out-of-date governor has exemplified a personal disregard for federal authority, says Gov. Rick Perry . Perry: Gov. Perry "exemplified his disregard" of federal authority .
 Federal supremacy won out over state's rights on a bleak day in 1865 when General Lee sang to General Grant . If he does he will learn or be reminded of the day in which Grant sang to Grant, Lee did .
 "Because of the actions of a stubborn few, this great nation must hang its head in shame," says President Obama .
 Newspapers around the world tchoed the Mississippi crisis with all its ugly details . Newspapers all over the world covered the crisis in Mississippi .
 This distorted picture of this country will remain in the minds of many for a long time to come, says CNN.com's John Defterios . This distorted image of the country will stay in the mind of many, he says .
 The President MUST, whenever the need presents itself, use haste in sending federal troops to protect the citizens of Mississippi or any other state in the Union .
 The prompt and determined action of the federal government to enforce federal laws should be a warning to South Carolina and Alabama, the two states remaining who have complete segregation . South Carolina is the only state remaining with complete segregation.
 History has shown us that the doctrine of Interposition is a direct repudiation of the constitution . History shows us that Interposition . History has also shown that Interpositions are a repudiation .
 Southern leadei's and citizens must realize that some degree of integration is inevitable all over the South . In the South In the foreseeable future, integration will be inevitable .
 The immediate response of the U.S. to the military build-up in Cuba by the Soviet Union has won the support of a large majority of the free world leaders . The moral of the Mississippi Saga: You just CAN'T BUCK UNCLE SAM .
 The big question now is whether the Soviets will try to force their way through the blockade . It is not clear whether the blockade will continue .
 It is very possible that Cuban puppet Fidel Castro could start World War III . Perhaps it need not be numbered since it may be the last one . Fidel Castro may start the next one .
 Kennedy and most observers agree that the President had no alternative in the situation . Kennedy was president of the United States when he died .
 To back down from our commitments to defend this hemisphere from Communistic aggression would result in a tremendous loss of prestige by the U.S. throughout the world, says President Obama .
 Russian bases on the island would put this country and the West at a great military disadvantage . Russian bases would put the West and the U.S. at a military disadvantage, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The Russians have repeatedly declared that they will spread their system of government throughout the world . They would stop short of nothing to accomplish this. The Russian government has declared that it will spread its system of . government .
 Without a single missile in Cuba, the Russians could hit almost any target on the U.S. mainland from launching pads in the Soviet Union . The U S. mainland could be hit from anywhere in Cuba .
 The story is told that a fourfooted animal, probably an ape or gorilla, was roaming through the woods thousands of years before the appearance of Neanderthal man . GIVE and GIVE GENEROUSLY support the UNITED COMMUNITY APPEAL ScCcia%ial .
 The sight of a glossy apple dangling from overhead motivated the creature's impulse to secure the fruit for himself . The image was captured by a small camera attached to the camera .
 Fable is a fable of a monkey who mastered a skill practiced by none of his jungle colleagues— the ability to stand erect . The fable would have different meanings to different people .
 The fruit could be reached if the animal would put forth the necessary effort . In this case it was the fact that the fruit could not be reached .
 Of course there are numerous types of ""fruits" to serve as incentives or motivators in the process, but the basic operational principles are the same . Of course, there are various types of "fruit" to be used to motivate people .
 "Our people have long been characterized as being lazy and non-enterprising," says President Obama . "We are proud to be proud of our people," he says .
 One military officer said Negroes under his command were poor soldiers in combat . One officer said that Negroes he commanded were poor in combat. Another officer said they were a poor soldier .
 This is the secret of inner health and happiness which millions have found in the most rapidly spreading Faith in religious history . Millions have found it in the fastest growing religious movement .
 The Baha'l World Faith is a new, independent universal religion, whose goal is to revitalize mankind . It is a practical spiritual religion with the mission of uniting the world in one common faith and order .
 The word ""BahaT' comes from the Founder of the Faith— Baha'u'llah iln Arabic, the Light or Glory of God . The word "Baha" means "There Is one God and therefore only one religion" The word 'Baha' comes
 The unfoldment of religion from age to age is called ""progressive revelation"" — Baha'u'llah being the Messenger of God in our time . The unfoldments of religion are known as "progressive revelations"
 An international police force as an arm of world government . International police force to be arm of global government . Elimination of all forms of prejudice. An end to prejudice.
 Universal obligatory education is the essential harmony of science and religion . Universal mandatory education is a form of education that is essential to science education .
 The common foundation of all religions, and the progressive character of religious revelation, is the foundation for all religions .
 These unique communities encompass all racial, religious, and cultural backgrounds . The unique communities are diverse and diverse .
 They invite you to investigate this Faith and share this spiritual adventure of white employees . The group invites you to join them in their faith .
 High school and college students of color seem less enthusiastic about their work than white students, study finds . Students of color appear to be less enthusiastic than those of color, study says .
 Negro soldiers were subjugated to harsh treatment overseas and here in the U.S. The treatment of Negro soldiers overseas and in the United States.
 "Very often they were deprived of those rights and privileges which they so bravely fought to safeguard," says the British Prime Minister .
 In this poem, Witter Brynner describes such a situation . The poem is titled ""Defeat,"" and is titled "Defeat"
 On a train in Texas German prisoners eat With white American soldiers seat by seat . While black American soldiers sit apart, the back men heart.
 Historian records show that Negro soldiers were continuously humiliated . Mark well the token of the separate seat — It is again ourselves that we defeat .
 Ira, Miss SSC 1962-63, is currently a senior majoring in Business Education . Ira is a senior at the University of Cambridge .
 Ira says that she enjoys the company of an open-minded person with a sense of humor . Ira enjoys company of a person with an open mind, she says .
 Ira spends her liesure time reading and listening to music and she hke to draw and paint Lovely Bessie Samuels hails from Philadelphia .
 She is a graduate of Alfred E, Beach High School of Savannah . Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, is a native of Savannah, Savannah, Georgia . She is also a graduate from Alfred E .
 Miss Ann Clarke gave professional advice to students of Savannah State College interested in some of the great opportunities in Civil Service jobs . She is president of the Women's Glee Club .
 Miss Clarke indicated that any student who has been an American Citizen for nine years, and who is at least 21 years of age, can qualify for the Civil Service written and oval examination .
 The field is now open for secretaries, typists, clerks, communication specialists, administrative and technical personnel . The field now is open for those seeking the job .
 Miss Clarke, a former woricer in Washington, D, C, is now a member of the recruit in Atlanta, Georgia .
 Dorothy Carter is a native of Manchester, Georgia, and a graduate of Manchester County Training School . She is a proud member of the cast of classic TV series "Diana Carter"
 The three young ladies featured in this issue of the Tiger's Roar can best be described by the four C's . After graduation, one of the girls plans to join the Peace Corps .
 Every time the doctor had a chance he lectured his receptionist on health matters . Every time he had chance to talk to the receptionist, he would talk to her about her health .
 Instructor Bill Emerson of the San Dlcgo City College is instructor Bill Emerson . Instructor Emerson is a member of the faculty at the college in San Diego, California .
 The instructor okayed a term paper on ""Birth Control"" for one of his evening students only to approve a drop-out slip the following week for the same student because of her announced pregnancy .
 Henry Miller was elected to membership in the American Institute of Arts and Letters . In the interim between the book's appearaiice in France and its publication in America he gained a sizeable underground fan-club .
 Henry Miller is compared in stature by critics with Melville and Whitman, a recognition which must certainly please him . Despite a delay of 27 years, during which the book had been labeled ""obscenrr,"" filthy, ""lewd,"" by the appointed censors of this
 It's doubtful whether or not the 63-year-old Mr Miller is overwhelmed, having been celebrated as a great author for years by the French .
 We are told that the book contains an unusual amount of obscene language . After reading ""Cancer"" we must admit candidly, that it does .
 The author does not give us the impression of excessive preoccupation with sex that so many other current writers repell us with in their books . Yet despite the repetitious gutter-slang employed throughout the book, the author doesn't give us an impression that sex is too much
 Anyone who buys ""Tropic of Cancer" to be titillated by the ""sexy"" scenes is wasting his money . Anyone who bought the film to titillate himself is wasting money .
 This book is exactly what many critics have claimed it to be a modern classic . This book was exactly what critics have said it was to be .
 Many people call Wliat many people call obscene in the book is actually funny . It's also a hilarious comedy . It is also a comedy .
 Mr, Miller can use four-letter words in such a way that they lose their ""nasty"" or ""smutty"" connotations . Mr Miller can also use words such as 'nasty' and 'smut' instead of 'sick'
 This is a prolonged insult, a gob of spit in the face of Arts, a kick in the pants to God. No, this is a protracted insult . No, it is a lengthy insult . It is a kick-in-the-pants to God, a 'kick in
 Tropic of Cancer is about Miller's life in Paris, a life he pursued after being unable to find himself in America . Miller: "Destiny, Time, Love, Beauty . . . , . what you will,"" Tropic Of Cancer .
 He found himself so completely in Prance that everything that had been hold back erupted wildly in this his real book . "Everything that had to be held back erupts wildly," he said .
 The author escaped from the country he escaped from in order to write it . His book has a quality of uninhibited wildness that gives it an alien sound to the uninitiated reader .
 The wildness is also what makes it great and exciting once Miller's contagious exuberance of words begin to intoxicate the reader . Miller's infectious exuberant words intoxicate readers .
 Ths books are recommended in many colleges as classics to students . Many students have chosen the subject of their theses as the subject for their thesis . The Tropics are considered classics by many colleges .
 Hi Hat Lanes on Radio Broadcast has been added to the activity calendar . A new promotional feature has been introduced to the bowling activity calendar of Hi Hat .
 McLean directs the show, assisted by Herbert Williams who Is In charge of advertising . McLean directed the show .
 The program is being sponsored by local business firms in 10, 15. 30 and 60 minute segments . We play the latest hit tunes and records, highlight the football activities of the local high schools and Savannah State College .
 Bowling Instructional classes will also be conducted between the hours of broadcast (4 to fl p,m,m) I by Gordon Hall and Adrene Sparks, Certified Instructors at Hi Hat Lanes . Bowling instruction classes will be held at the end of broadcast .
 The Pilot preeminent of moon's illuminent companion, One most exalted in Delphians' paeans . Son of Zeus, who art . art .
 Those sunlit days o'er which you rule That give perpetual glee, all powerful One, give perpetual joy . All powerful One Inculcate them into my life that I may know Earth's vicissitudes never more .
 "I know nothing but days Lilting, lovely, lulling, leisurely, lively, lanquid. But, rather, know nothing more than days"
 Miss Savannah State Cullege and her attendants in Columbus, Ga,. (luring Chattahoochee Classic) WZiwtT. WZwiwt .
 Wi-itine a column on campus spnrtswcfir is always a pleasure for me. because of the natural affinity of young men and new ideas . E SCHOEFFLER, ESQUIRE'S Fashion Director Wi, is a fashion editor for Esquire .
 College men are ready to experiment with their wardrobes, and often produce fashion trends that the whole country eventually follows . College men often experiment with fashion trends and produce trends that follow them .
 The correct ""when and where"" of any leisurewear depends on the degree of formality on your campus, so no hard-and-fast general rules apply . The correct "when and when and where" should be considered .
 Wb plaid paerns vie with soft plaid muted tones in the season's newest sport jackets . Bright bright jackets are big fashion news for every campus .
 Ihcy are either big and brassy or quiet and subdued-but they're all woven with multi-colored markings in the plaids .
 Brown lends the way as the fashion first color for Fall . The traditional olive to bronze and the basic gray to tan-gray .
 They'll be seen in the natural shoulder, 3-button models, with either center or side vents . The models will be available in either the center or center vents .
 Shetland tweeds in heather tones, and Harristype tweeds are on the scene this year . Harristypes tweeds, particularly in brown and other solid colors, are available .
 Both the soft-napped Shetlands and the wiry Harris roughsurfaced tweeds will naturally be seen in natural shoulder models . The Shetland and Harris tweeds are naturally natural shoulder styles .
 Some men prefer these ruggedlooking jackets with protective and decorative leather patches at the elbows . The jackets are often worn by men who wear leather .
 The blazer is still most popular and most correct indark blue flannel . And don't discount the blazer, the perennial campus favorite, the blue shirt .
 The corduroy coat is styled this Fall with a heavy set wale (the ridging of the cord fabric) in natural tan and brown shades . Another 'odd jacket' with a great following is the corduroys coat .
 The slim line of tapered, pleatless and beltless styles is definitely in this year's slacks . Tapered and pleat-less styles are definitely in .
 Flannels in dark shades of gray, olive and brown will coordinate with the new jackets . Corduroys and flannels will be available in dark colors .
 Tan twills remain a big favorite, in both lightweight cotton twill and the dressier diagonal weave wool of Cavalry twill .
 Solid color bright flannel vests will enrich any wardrobe . Plaids, figures and madder prints brighten any jacket and slacks combination .
 A smart bet is the reversible vest, with a big plaid on one side to match your jacket . A solid color flannel that matches your slacks on the other is also a smart bet .
 Look for luxurious batiks and cotton prints that are soft, dark, and muted in tone . Fall versions of the rieb-looking India madras plaids .
 Solid color flannels in wool or blends of wool and polyesters are a definite contribution to colorful campus wear . The flannels are available in wool, polyester and polyester blends .
 The season's bright new prints are bold Tartan plaids that can be worn with solid color slacks and blazers . Also in flannel, and cotton as well, the prints are also in cotton and flannel as well .
 Soft, medium weight Shetland wool is soft and medium weight medium weight wool .
 Pullovers in heavier, bulkier ski styling, in solids and the traditional ski patterns, will also be on the snowbound scene . Pullovers are heavier and heavier than traditional ski styling .
 Authentic Regimental colors, in bright, wide knitwear stripes, are the pattern news in sweaters this Fall . You'll see these Regimental sweaters in both pullover and wool-blend Cardigans .
 The "HAT" is the happiest headgear to come along in a long time . It's the most memorable headgear you've ever seen .
 This go-anj-where leisure hat is simpiv a flat cone of ultra-soft felt felt .
 You can shape or dent this epitome of casualness to suit your mood, whim, or manic urge . Then shove it right around into something else, perhaps holding a ski club or fraternity pin .
 IHt Hlbn-KIStR RISES ... in popularitv every vear. IIHt.com .
 Next month we'll take up the question of outerwear for Fall and Winter of 'G2-'G3' and the big issue of keeping warm and well-dressed .
 Autumn, with all of its obscure somberness, has brought with its entrance some of the seasons mo.st provocative and colorful syltcs .
 This Fall's fashions are making their debut in an array of hues . Fall's fashion trends are being made its debut in a variety of colors .
 Simply this, plaid woolen cloth originated in the Scottish Highlands .
 This season, however, it migrated to the Western shores and has become quite a hit . This season it has been a hit for the first time .
 Blouses, skirts, coats and hats are vailable at all of the fine stores in the tartan plaids .
 Ultrachic material blends harmoniously with solids for those persons that like a contrast . This ultrachy material blends . blend harmoniously . for those that like contrast .
 Any coed would really be a smart ""Lassie"" to Include the tartan, one of Fall's recent imports .
 The tartan is not the only imported style to visit our shores this season . Oddly enough, the tartan has also been imported to the UK .
 America's fashion experts have proven to be most susceptible to the foreign flair for styles this year . America's style experts have been most prone to the fashion trends of the past year .
 All of the madras plaid Fall cottons are durable, and versatile little dresses that are jus t the garments .
 Even the most feminine of ""femme fatales" have fallen head over . heels in love with the boys . Look, that is . that is. that is the look of the boys in the movie .
 This season's co-eds can get away with wearing boyish bermudas, knickerbockers, hipster pants . Because of the popular ""little boy look," this season's Co-eds are able to get away .
 In all phases of civilian and military life, Negroes have always been discriminated against . They are being mistreated now, and it appears that this will continue in the future, though .
 A Negro competing for a position must be far superior to his white opponent, or opponents, if he is to occupy such a position . A black person must be superior to a white person to be in a position, he says .
 American fashion experts landed in England and sent the jaunty, British male look to the fashion game American co-eds . American women's fashion experts were sent to England to show off their fashion expertise .
 Mademoiselle Modes include the merest hint of feminity in their Fall stylings . Esquire checks and herringbone tweed materials lose their look of total masculinity .
 The boyish boyish styles in Fall wardrobe include some of the boyish looks you need to wear .
 CoUarless Coats Dominate Men^s Fashions by C, A Phillips . It's definitely in, it's way out, and it's crazy but it's swinging .
 It comes in many shades, such as navy, olive, black, and beige which is the newer color for fall . Beige is the newest color for the season .
 Desert tone shades include green-leather, blue-and-yellow leather, sand or sand . Desert tones include leather and sand, leather, gray and grayloden .
 This coat has natural shoulders and it's accentuated with white pearl buttons . White pearl buttons and lap seam in the back .
 This coat is very reasonable as far as the price is concerned . Trousers are tapered more so than ever this year .
 The shirt is still that button down ivy collar, in solids as well as stripes, India madras, you know, the shirt that bleeds, is spreading like wildfire over the fashion lights .
 You know, make like twins, I know your wardrobe's got a pair of tennis cordivans . You know that your wardrobe has a set of tennis cords .
 Next issue we are coming out COLD, in other words, BIG HEAVY COATS and seeking self-improvement through education .
 If such a vision is non-existent or nearly so, it is not surprising that they may be lacking in zeal and industriousness . The vision is so necessary in achievement that it may not be possible for them to succeed .
 This is not sufficient reason for one of us to fail to do our best to reach our potential, he says . Though this is true, this is not enough reason for failing to reach his potential .
 Jockie Robinson, Ralph Bunche and George Washington Carver went to bat with the odds against them . Robinson, Bunche, Carver fought poverty and a racially intolerant society . Carver and Bunche went to fight poverty and racism .
 "I will not let prejudice or any of its attendent humilities and injustices bear me down to spiritual defeat," she says . She says she won't let prejudice "bear me down"
 Most of us who come to study here at Savannah State received inferior high school training, which, for the most part, can be attributed to existing social and economic conditions . "Most of us ... received inferior training," says Savannah State grads .
 In spite of these disadvantages, we must have an awareness of our responsibilities . We must have a awareness of their responsibilities, says the author .
 "We must be prepared to contribute significantly in all areas of endeavor," says President Obama . "We need to be prepared for significant contributions," says Obama .
 The only way that we will gain for ourselves those materials, rights and privileges taken for granted by most Americans is for us to run night and day and move on irrespressibly toward those goals which we have set .
 We must be mindful of the fact that our group must develop a greater amount of economic vitality if we are to progress In the future . We must also be mindful that we must develop greater economic vitality .
 All of the home games of the Savannah State football and basketball teams will be played on the campus this year .
 Last year the team played in the city's ultra-modern Bacon Park Memorial Stadium . SSC played at the same venue last year . Last year they played at Bacon Park .
 It would be kind of ridiculous to play the games out at Bacon Park and only a handful of students and supporters sliow up to root for the Tigers . Of course, it would be sort of ridiculous if the games were played out in front of a crowd .
 If Savannaii State would field a team of the Southern U.S. Grambiing . Most of the spectators aren't students, either .
 FAMU or A&T College calibre football could become a money-making proposition for the school . Football could be a lucrative proposition for FAMU footballers .
 Some people say that they'd rather watch a game on TV than one of the Tiger's grid contests . Tiger Woods' grid contest is one of Tiger's most popular events ever .
 You can bet your bottom dollar that the bothersome sand gnats won't complain about the games being played on campus . The games will be held on campus at the University of Maryland .
 If any game should be played at Bacon Park then the homecoming game should, it should be held there . The game was played in Bacon Park in the 1980s .
 The halftime activities, the fact that we will have many distinguished guests and alumni present and the large contingent of Clark fans wiio will follow their team, warrant the use of the city's facilities rather than the SSC athletic field .
 If we use ""Tiger's Field"" then the large homecoming crowd might not be as large next year at homecoming time . The stadium is called Tiger's Field . The field will be used for the homecoming at the University of Columbia .
 Bobby Mitchell has put new life into the Washington Redskins football team . The Cleveland Brown cast-away half back has been given a new lease of life to the Redskins . Mitchell is a former Cleveland Brown half-back .
 Redskins sit top of NFL's Eastern Division with a respectable 4-1-2 record . Mitchell's superb ball-carrying has helped the 'Skins' to the top of the division .
 One of the wins came at the expense of his former team, the Cleveland Browns . One of these wins came against the former Browns .
 Savannah State has been missing out on local football talent for several years . Savannah State is looking to recruit local talent for the upcoming season .
 The three local high schools have produced two state champs in years past and also some top football players . The three high schools in the area have produced some of the best players .
 Players like Solomon Brannen, James German, James Palmer and Eddie Fennell played at Tompkins and now playing at Morris Brown in Atlanta . Henry Kelley graduated from Beach and played at Johnson C Smith Univ. Henry Kelley who graduated from Beardson .
 All of the above players expressed a desire to attend Savannah State at one time or another . But for some unknown reason, they all got away . The players expressed interest in attending Savannah State .
 The 1962-63 Tigers basketball team has already started preseason drills . SSC Cagers Begin Pre-Seasou Drills .
 The locals are expected to hold their position atop their conference and other basketball circles in this area . The Tigers lost five lettermen from last year's team .
 Gone are the nationally known five ""sizzling seniors,"" The quintet, composed of Redell Walton, is now a quintet .
 Theodore Wright has decided to watch from the stands after 27 years of coaching . The former coach will be absent from the field for the first time in his 27 years .
 In what was described as a ""spectacular play,"" he lunged at a bail carrier and tagged him . "Spectacular play" described by police .
 William Day told friends he heard his stomach 'pop' after the play . William Day has been in action for the past couple of years .
 Tommy Davis and Aaron Johnson could fit well into the basketball picture . Tommy Davis, Aaron Johnson and Tommy Davis are new NBA stars who could fit into the NBA's basketball team .
 Frazier is a graduate of Tuskegee Institute . Frazier is highly respected for his coaching abilities . Frazier has coached the U.S. basketball team since 1988 .
 Mr Frazier has served as baseball coach and currently, he is backfield coach for the football team . James Carthon , and Calvin Roberts arc key men in the Savannali State offensive and defensive attack .
 One would have to look twice or possibly three times to see whether or not these were the same Tigers who represented Savannah State in prior grid action .
 Benedict took the lead in the second quarter when Charles Benson went over from seven yards out to give the Carolinians a 6 point advantage . Charles Benson's seven-yard touchdown gave the Benedictians the lead .
 Robert Saxby tackled Henry Chandler behind the Benedict goal line for a safety . Henry Chandler was tackled by Saxby behind the end line for the safety .
 Quarterback McArthur Pratt completed an aerial to Robert Saxby . The Tigers came back in the third quarter and saw pay dirt .
 In the last quarter Pratt connected with Herschel Robinson for State's second TD . Fred Meyers caught one of Pratt's passes to give the locals a 20-6 lead in the contest .
 Morris College lost the game 9-6 to Savannah Slate in Savannah, Savannah Slate . Listou Takes Crown I rank in game ag Ih^ , freshman quarterbaik from >mI ( .lolui^)
 Floyd Mayweather's smashing punching demoted Floyd from the rank of a lightlytaken heavyweight champ to that of a former heavyweight titleholder . Floyd Mayweather Jr. was the world's first ever heavyweight champ . Mayweather beat Floyd Mayweather by a unanimous decision decision .
 Floyd was knocked out by Ingemar Johannsen in his first bout with the Swede . When Floyd was beaten by Johannsen, there was the question of Floyd underrating his opponent . Floyd has never lost a fight since his first loss to Johannsen .
 Sportswriters predicted the champ would probably retain his crown . Odds-makers picked Liston as the best bet for the title . Liston won't be the first boxer to defend his title .
 Patterson did not take this bout as just another prize-fight — he trained for it . Patterson trained for the fight . Patterson: "I'm not going to let it go, I'm going to do it"
 If you listen closely enough you may hear someone say that Floyd was too tense and that he will be the first man to win it back twice . Floyd Mayweather Jr. is the first boxer to win the title back from a losing defeat in the ring .
 The two fighters somewhat resembled David and Goliath, only the giant throwing the sock that felled Floyd like a rock . Floyd Mayweather Jr. was knocked out of the ring at the end of the fight by a sock .
 The Tigers beat the Browns in the first game of the 2014 NFL season . Tiger Woods is the reigning champion of the year .
 The 1962-63 officers of Camilla Hubert Hall Dormitory were Installed Sunday evening, September 30 .
 Miss Carolyn Roseberry, Vice President, is a junior majoring in business education from Covington . Miss Roseberry is also a junior at school .
 Miss Rosemary Fatten, Secretary, is a sophomore majoring in physical education from Cartesvllle, Georgia . Miss Preda Hunter is a junior at the school .
 Fitzgerald Fitzgerald is a sophomore majoring In elementary education from Fitzgerald . Assistant Secretary, is a junior majoring in elementary education .
 Miss Mary Smith, Treasurer, is a sophomore majoring in biology from Cartesvllle, Georgia . She is a junior at the University of Georgia .
 Joan Mainor, Chaplain, is a sophomore majoring In English from Woodbine, Georgia, and Miss Lucy White . Joan is the Chaplain of the University of Georgia . She is majoring in English at the university and Chaplain's office .
 Reporter, is a junior majoring In business education from MllledgevlUe. She is majoring in business education .
 Misses Sherard Allgood, a sophomore majoring in dressmaking and tailoring from Trlum, Georgia; Alma Favors, a freshman in physical education from Greenville, Georgia . Hazel Phillips, a sopromore majoring  in English from Hogansvll
 Beauty Poole, a senior majoring in Mathematics from Sandersvillc, Georgia, is one of the top three seniors in Georgia . Annette Randolph, an elementary education student from Fitzgerald, is a senior in elementary education from Fitzgerald .
 AJbertha Roberts is a sophomore majoring in business education from Rlceboro, Georgia . She is also a junior at the University of Georgia . Georgia .
 Florida was voted ""Miss Camilla Hubert Hail,"" and her attendants are Misses Martha Smith, a freshman from Waynesboro, Maryland . Martha Smith is the attendant to Florida .
 P Ed, and Recreation to present to the college a Certificate of Recognition for the role played so far in the project . P Ed and Recreation will present the college with a Certificate .
 AAHP & R is a division of the National Education Association . AAHP and R is an AAHP/R division of a national education group .
 The twenty students have begun the test and upon completion they will serve as instructors and assist in administering the test to other college students . Upon completion, the students will be instructors and administer the test .
 The testing program has been officially adopted and recommended by President Kennedy's Council on Youth Fitness . It is especially usable for the screening of individual weaknesses and evaluation of program quality .
 The performance is graded and scored according to the national norms for college men and women . The performance of the students at the school is graded according to national norms .
 Tests measure arm strength, abdominal strength, speed and agility, leg power, arm power and endurance . These tests are designed to measure arm and abdominal strength and speed .
 The data secured may be used to counsel students concerning health, nutrition, and exercise programs . The data may also be used as a guide to the selection of physical education courses .
 She elaborated on four facets of fitness — physical, mental, social, social and moral . To help each person evaluate his fitness quotient, she explained how to do it .
 She admonished the audience that each facet must be considered in order to assess accurately his total fitness .
 The Savannah State College Debating Society moves into the 1962-63 school year with high hopes and plans of an even higher nature . The society hopes to raise awareness of debate culture .
 Plans are also being instigated to bring the entire Savannah State student body to critical thinking on this year's topic . Savannah State students will be invited to think about the topic .
 Competition for the 1,000 firstyear graduate study awards offered by the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation for 1963-64 is under way now . That The Non-Communist Nations of the World Should Establish an Economic Community."" has far reaching implications .
 Faculty members have until October 31 to nominate candidates for the awards . Faculty members will be able to vote for the award winners .
 Wiggins in 219, Hill Hall. well be influenced by the careful analysis offered by debating societies throughout the country. well . well .
 Such issues of local, national and international importance are more often decided after careful process of argumentation . Such matters of local or international importance can be resolved after careful argumentation. Such issues often come to an end after careful debate.
 Members of the Savannah State College Debating Society, namely Verlyn Bell, are pictured at the event .
 The Savannah State College ""Marching Tigers"" under the direction of Mr Samuel Gill are making tremendous strides toward becoming the greatest musical aggregation in the school history .
 At football games, out of town engagements, and parade, there is no doubt that the band will be at its best . The band will perform at football games and out-of-town engagements .
 Twenty-five freshman band members are very talented and enthusiastic . The band is comprised of sixty-six members . Students are enthusiastic and talented .
 The wearers of the blue and orange uniforms are proud of their organization and have created much interest in the band throughout the community and state .
 State Scholarships Aivarded Stndents Nelson R Freeman, Director of Student Personnel, and Dean of Men at Savannah State College, announces that several students have received notification that they have been approved by the Board of Regents to receive Regents' State Scholarship .
 Shirley A Conner, freshman, Savannah; Glennera E Martin, sophomore, Savannah . Shirley A. Conner is a freshman at Savannah College of Technology . Glen Martin is a sophomore at Savannah University .
 Savannah State College offers limited funds for student financial aid . The demands on the limited funds are necessarily heavy . Savannah State is a large college with more than 100,000 students .
 Financial aid can be granted only to those students of sound moral character who are doing highly creditable work in high school or in tlie college . Financial aid is only granted to those who cannot continue their education without financial aid .
 A recipient may re-apply in succeeding years provided he remains academically qualified, has continuing need, and the program continues to be adequately financed . The program is funded by the University of Maryland .
 LAST RITES FOR COLLEGE MINISTER W ITAESSED BY I\Ien are born every dav. Last RITes for college minister born every day . Last rites for the college minister are "last rites for college students"
 When a man passes who has contributed significantly and unselfishlvlv . toward the (hinguals in which he is most interested, men will pause and take notice . But when a man . passes who . has contributed significant and unwisely, men . will pause, take
 Savannah Slate College Minister and Assistant Protessor of Social Sciences at Savannah State College who died on No. 8. 8 died on Tuesday .
 Last rites were held on Tuesday, November 13, in Meldrim Auditorium, Savannah State College, with Reverend Blanton E Black delivering the Eulogy .
 The funeral was attended bv huridreds of students and teachers along with many other individuals from Savannah and other communities .
 Reverend Peacock was college minister at Savannah State from 1940 until 1952, and again from 1959 to the time of his death . He died at the age of 85 .
 Savannah State College developed a well balanced educational program of spiritual and moral values . Savannah State has a history of moral and spiritual values . The college is located in Savannah, Georgia .
 Ihis. devoted his leisure time to fraternal, civic, and general community welfare . He devoted his time to the community welfare of his life .
 He was vice president of the Omar Temple of (he Mystic Shrine) with jurisdiction over 20,000 persons . He was also vice president .
 Giblmiis, Dislri. ill Alis.ms. said lll;llMiiM U \i.is Ihc most pupiihir lr;ilcrnal leader in southeast Georgia .
 Reverend Peacock visited the sick daily in hospitals and was always willing to give a helping hand . He was also willing to help the sick in hospitals .
 For several years, he directed the college Campus Chest Program which annually gives several thousand dollars to charity . He directed the program for several years .
 Twelve Savannah State College Students Nominated To Who's Who . Dr. Numbei ""^ Twelve Savannah St. College students Nominated to Who- Who .
 Savannah State College students nominate twelve students to Who's Who in American Universities and Colleges . Students were nominated for the prestigious list of American universities and colleges . Savannah State is a member of the Savannah College of Science and Technology .
 Freida M Brewton, Chemistry major, Claxton; Ernest B Brunson, Building Construction Technology Technology major, Savannah: Annie Helen Cruse, Social Science major, is a major at Savannah College of Technology . Annie Cruse is a social science major at Claxton .
 Business Administration major, Milledgevllle; and Mary Moss, Mathematics major, Fitzgerald . Mary Moss is a mathematics major at Fitzgerald, a business major at Milledgesle .
 The criteria to be met by students to be eligible for nomination are 1.1.2.3.4.5.5 . The criteria is 1.5 to meet the criteria .
 Must have been in College at Savannah State a year prior to being nominated, 4.4.5 . Must be in college a year before being nominated for a college degree . Must also have a year of college experience .
 Cases of unusual contributions and outstanding contributions will be considered and studied by the Administrative Council .
 Students are nominated by all student organizations in good standing and by the departments of the College . Students are first nominated by students' organizations and departments of college .
 The names are cleared through the Business Office, Registrar's Office, Personnel Office and Dean of Faculty's Office . Thirdly, those names cleared through all four offices, go to the Administrative Council and the President of the College for final clearance or substitution .
 Edward C Werner was recently commissioned Second Lieutenant in the United States Air Force . Werner is a graduate of Savannah State College .
 Lt, Werner attended the Officer Training School at Lackland Air Force Base, San Antonio . He was selected by the Air Force after successfully competing in a screening program .
 Two Savannah State College Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society students attended the Fourth Annual Regional meeting of the organization on November 16, 1962, at Benedict College, Columbia. Texas, and finished the iCorilinUi-il on Piigc 41 Honor Society .
 Colleges from both Georgia and South Carolina were represented at the meeting . South Carolina, Georgia colleges were represented .
 The students attending were Miss Bernita Kornegay and Mr Norman B, Elmore . The students attended were students from Elmore High School .
 Mr Elmore is a senior English major from Savannah. Georgia . He is president of the Savannah State College Chapter of the Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society .
 The purpose of the meeting was to provide for creative endeavors and improve the quality of activities of local chapters . The meeting was held in honor of the members of the local chapter .
 Newtonian Society of Savannah State College held Its weekly meeting Friday, November I6th .
 This was the 7th meeting of the group which alternates between lectures and general business . The group alternates from lectures to general business.
 Newtonian Society is to have outstanding persons in the fields of Science to lecture and discuss new methods and concepts of our modern scientific world .
 Head of the Department of Industrial Technology at Savannah State College, initiated lectures to be given to the group .
 Mr. Clemmons, chairman of the Mathematics Department, as the advisor, has planned many Informative activities for the school year .
 All College Assembly Program to be held January 31 . The all College Assembly program will be held on January 31.
 VMCA, Mid Physical tdutaficn major from Atlanta, Georgia, presents :VIary Greyer . VMCA is a mid-physical major major .
 "Miss Spencer High School" Willie Anderson, and Margie Cannon, were guest speakers . Willie Anderson was a guest speaker at the school . Willi Anderson was the guest speaker for Spencer High .
 The exhibition is on loan to Savannah State College Library from the Student Artist Division ol the National Conference of Artists . It is on display at the Savannah State Library .
 Mrs, Virginia J Kiah, a local artist, is a consultant to this organization .
 The public is invited to view the exhibition during regular library hours . The exhibition will be open at the library during regular hours .
 The annua] Christmas Ball at Savannah Stale College will be held on Friday evening, December 7, 1962 .
 In past years, most city students have not attended the Christmas Ball . Music will be provided by an orchestra, and decorations will be in keeping with the Christmas spirit .
 The semi-formal affair promises to be enjoyable and students should make preparations to attend . Students should prepare to attend and make preparations for the event .
 Gordon applied for the position during his senior year at Savannah State . Gordon began work in August of this year and began work at the university .
 Performances of our basketball team this season may not be as brilliant as in past years . Performances may be less brilliant than in previous years. Performances are more muted than in past seasons .
 It seems also that the attitude and interest of students in other phases of student life is far from being desirable .
 To cite particular instances where this is noticeable, we would not have to go beyond the confines of this publication's newsroom . To cite specific instances of this type of behavior, we'd need to go to the newsroom to find out .
 Students and organizations are usually concerned with getting news releases published, but not to the extent that they will submit information before each deadline . Students and student organizations are often concerned about getting the news out .
 Although an organization may be last to release news items to this newspaper, that same organization is usually first to criticize this paper for not Including its articles in the publication .
 More regards should be given to OUR COLLEGE LIBRARY and OUR library materials, says the author of the book .
 Under no circumstances should a student destroy or steal library material, library officials say . Library officials urge students not to destroy library material .
 We should remember that a copying service is available in the library at a low cost . A copy service is also available at the library in the UK .
 Every dollar spent to replace books is a dollar that could have been spent on new books . Every dollar is spent replacing books with new ones .
 In some cases administrators and faculty members are guilty of possessing an indifferent attitude toward students and what they may be attempting to do . Administrators, faculty members should be aware of what they are trying to do to students, students say .
 The attitudes of students and teachers are resultant or partially resultant of each other, but even so, we should take the necessary steps to remedy this situation within and among ourselves . Perhaps the attitudes of teachers and students are resultant .
 If this happens, the work of both student and professor would become more profitable and enjoyable . If this happened, both students and professors would be able to continue their studies .
 Attorney Leroy R Johnson, of Atlanta, will be the first Negro to sit in the Georgia Senate since reconstruction days .
 Johnson won the Democratic nomination of the 38th District when he defeated four white candidates who opposed him . Johnson is a Democrat who has been elected to Congress in 2008 .
 In the General Election of November 6. another Negro, T M, Alexander, also from Atlanta, opposed Johnson unsuccessfully . Johnson was assured a seat in the 54-member Senate .
 Johnson as a member of the Georgia Senate will not change the course of politics in this state . But at least his election might be the starting point of an era of greater representation by Negroes on school boards, city council .
 Without the bloc vote, neither Johnson nor Alexander would have been in the race . The bloc-vote is scandalized and criticized by those who fear the potential political might of Negroes .
 An example of bloc-voting in reverse is the flocking of white voters to the polls in August of 1961 to defeat a Negro candidate for the position of Clerk of Superior Court of Chatham County, Georgia . Any student at Savannah State College who is not registered to vote in his
 Athens has what could be a very powerful publication ordinance . It prohibits anyone from having or selling any literature which is obscene . Athens has a powerful publishing ordinance which could be very powerful . Athens could use it to make it easier to sell obscene literature .
 The ordinance went into effect in March . The only time it has been enforced was to keep ""Tropic of Cancer"" off the newsstands a year ago .
 A review of author Henry Miller's ""Tropic of Cancer" appeared in the October edition of the Tiger's Roar .
 There are many obscene paperbacks being sold on at least two newsstands in Athens . No attempt has been made by the police to ban these books, says Athens-based group .
 This, in effect, means that the police are acting as censors whenever they feel something is obscene . This is the case of the police being censors when they feel it's obscene . The police are not only censors but also censors themselves .
 Police Captain Joseph McBride is now in the position to judge whether a book is literature or obscenity . McBride has been in charge of the police department since 2003 .
 Police could keep obscene books off the newsstands by simply calling them obscene . This also means that police could keep ""For Whom the Bell Tolls,"" ""To Kill A Mockingboard"" or any other piece of literature off the pressstands .
 Ordinance 1532 could easily become a tool for the Athens police to use at will . The Athens police could easily use it as a tool to control the city .
 Athens should enforce the law all the time or remove it as an ordinance . Either Athens should stop enforcing the law, or stop enforcing it as a law of law .
 Many persons have questioned the POST'S right to call any literature obscene . Also questioned the Post's right to say any literature is obscene .
 Apparently tliese persons have never read the contents of the paperbacks we listed . The book titles we listed are available for sale on Amazon.com .
 I do not recall his name, was crossing a street on the campus, when I noticed, because of the cane that he carried, that he could not see . I noticed that because of his cane, he couldn't see. He was crossing the street on a street .
 "From time to time I saw him crossing the campus on his way to classes or in the dining room of the dormitory," he says . "I saw him cross the campus and in his dining room"
 He was enrolled at the university to improve himself and so that he might become a more resourceful and better citizen, he says . He says he wants to be a better citizen .
 The man was up against tremendous odds, because to succeed as a student at the university was and is no trifling matter for persons without handicaps . The sightless person had to study the same information and materials as other students .
 Somehow the student had acquired a great deal of courage . He could be found, more often than not, in a gay and cheerful mood .
 Character is much easier kept than recovered, says Thomas Paine . He saw something that he wanted, but more than Character is more important than Character .
 CtorilJi. ua Pi-ecocious writers are rare; precocity in the arts is usually found in musicians . To write intelligently one must have had some experience with life, he says .
 The feeling for music is a more direct and primitive perception than the feeling for words, which usually comes only after some maturity, when one is sophisticated enough to relate living experience to one's particuar language . Music is a direct, primitive perception, rather than words .
 In the last decade or so, it seems the young writer who is both published and talented is becoming more prevalent .
 Reasons for this can perhaps be found in the great emphasis our culture places on youth and the early initiation of young people into the ways of adult life . Reasons for the emphasis on youth are perhaps found in .
 iGood Morning.com features a young French girl, barely eighteen, who has written a book, Bonjour Triestesse . The book was written by a girl who was barely eighteen and published in France in 2007 .
 Sagan to write a slightly bigger and better book to consolidate her position as an important literary figure . Sagan's new book is expected to be published by the end of the year .
 A Certain Smile was not a bigger or better book, but still it wasn't a disappointment . "A Certain Smile" is not a better book but still a disappointment, says author .
 Cecile became Dominique, the heroine of A Certain Smile, with little change in character or charm except for a slight increase of cynicism . Mile Mile. Cecile, became the hero of the novel, but Mile.
 Sagan succeeded in giving what might have seemed puerile adventures depth and humour . Sagan succeeded at giving the book's adventures depth, humour .
 It seemed her forte lay just in the limitations that she had imposed upon herself — the novelette literary form and the first person narrative . Her forte was in the form and narrative form, she said .
 Readers of Sagan looked forward to the gradual expansion of her adolescent heroines into mature characters . It seemed possible that her precocious, perceptive power would enable her to develop into a major influence .
 Her third novel appeared, Those Without Shadows, in which the author did away with the first-person narrative, substituting a collection of vaguely dicpicated characters in a brief .
 Competition for employment is, and will be moreso in the future, increasingly keener in all fields . As we set our eyes on the uphill road ahead, we can see that it Is quite different .
 Government and industry are able to absorb more engineers and scientists than are available, says Althougli . The supply of average, below average, and incompetent people can only be guaranteed a very small slice of the economic pie, if any at all .
 The teaching profession won't be as easy to enter in the future as in years past, says John Sutter . Sutter: "The teaching profession, in which so many of our graduates are employed, is not as easy as in previous generations"
 A certain score on the National Teachers Examination is a requirement for employment in Florida schools . A score on a certain score is required to be a teacher in Florida Schools .
 Most colleges stipulate that their candidates for graduation make a certain mark on similar examinations if tliey are to receive a degree . Most colleges require candidates to make certain marks on similar exams .
 Teaching and administrative jobs on the high school and college level will carry bigger salaries and more advantages . Education will have to do more to compete with government and industry for the well-trained and competent .
 If one can live in Georgia cheaper than In Indiana and if Indiana ranks as one of our leading states educationally, then an average teacher from that state might be in contention for the same teaching assignment for which you may apply .
 The only thing we can do is spend more time in serious study rather than cheating ourselves of the educational advantages provided for us here . We should not cheat ourselves of our educational advantages here. We need to focus more on serious study and not cheating ourselves .
 We are at a disadvantage in more ways than one and this is no time for complacency. This is not the time for us to be complacent. We need to be on top of our game. We are not complacent, we need to make sure we are on top
 Delores Bowens is a graduate of Monitor High School in her home town, Fitzgerald . Bowens graduated from high school in her hometown of Monitor, Fitzgerald, in 1964 .
 She is currently a Junior at Savannah State College, majoring i n Mathematics . She is majoring in mathematics .
 Her associates think of her as an ideal co-ed. an intelligent young lady that has a promising future. Her associates say she has a bright future .
 Some persons tend to take life as it comes or think of life as a routine . Some people tend to live life as they come or take it as a daily routine . Life is not a routine, it is a life of its own .
 Delores has a different opinion of life, "I think that life is just what a person makes it," says Delores . Delores believes that life should be based on the person who makes it .
 "It was obvious that she had attempted to overstep her limitations and broaden her scope as a writer," she said . It was obvious she had oversteered her limitations, she said.
 A beautiful woman, Paula, aging and plagued by the problems of love — an unfaithful mature lover, and an unhappily smitten young man, too young for her — make up the main elements of the plot . I came out. opinion was mixed .
 Although Brahms seems contrived and artificial as a whole, it still succeeds in being entertaining . At times one is surprised by a wholly originial and poignant paragraph that reminds the reader of the earlier work of Mile Mile .
 Recent Sagan novel was translated and published in this country . One can see in Brahms a definite indication of maturity, not a really good book, but one can't help thinking the hext one will be .
 The Wonderful Clouds was serialized in ""Playboy" magazine before appearing in book form here . The book is a chronicle of infidelity and adultery . It was published in October 2013 .
 Being well past the age of precocity (born in 1935) she seems to have done an about face and is now retrogressing as a writer . She seems to be retrogretressing as well as being well past her precocity .
 She likes to create dances and is always willing to teach her new steps to friends when they come around . She is willing to learn new dance steps from friends .
 He is active in the following activities a t Savannah State College . He attended St. Pius High School in Savannah, Georgia .
 He is president of the Student Council, Secretary-Treasurer of Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society . He is also secretary-treasurer and president of Phi Phi Phi Epsilon Phi Phi Kappa Phi Honor Society.
 He has been listed twice in Who's Who in American Colleges and Universities HJs . Fellow students think of him as a good example of a typical young man .
 He is a sports fan and spends his leisure time reading novels and dancing . He is also a dancer .
 When asked what changes he would make if he were President, he replied. "I would like to see Savannah State College become a college president," he said .
 I would strive to build multiple purpose classroom buildings and make provisions for different organizations to have clubrooms . I would make provisions that different organizations had clubrooms, he said .
 Home Economics Club lustalls Neiv elected officers . Installation of elected officers and initiation of new members held in impressive ceremony .
 The Home Economics Club is a club made up of students majoring in Home Economics . The club is a student group of students at the University of Cambridge .
 Home Economics Club purposes are to help ID Develop professional spirit and co-operation among members . '2' Inform students of opportunities offered by the home economics profession . 'Keep in touch with current topics in home economics world and its general scientific trend'
 Anna Cooper was reelected to the office of president with Lottie S Shellman to assist her as vice president . Anna Cooper will be reelected as president of the Women's Conference . The election will be held in New York City .
 The other officers are Mary Nell Hollls, secretary; Evelyn Cruise, assistant secretary; Areatha Ware, treasurer; Norma Hendrix, chaplain; and Mary Jones, reporter .
 The members hope that with the cooperation of each student, this year will be a most progressive and prosperous one . The members of the students hope that this year's election will be the most progressive .
 The members hope that with cooperation of each student, this year will be a most progressive and prosperous one . The members of this year's students hope that .
 Most popular fur pieces being worn are mink, chinchilla, ermine, fox, beaver, and raccoon . This season fur pieces adorn dressy coats, sport coats, suits and jackets .
 Regardless of what you call them, they're smart, collegiate, and saucy . Regardless of the name, the students are smart and collegiate . They're smart and sassy .
 These smart little vests should be a 'must' on every coed's fashion list this winter .
 The zest, zing, and zip are guaranteed by designers to add zest and zip to any wardrobe .
 Other fashion apparel that rate high this winter are the coordinate sets . The coordinate sets are also popular this winter .
 In various dyed-to-match colors, these coordinates come in various dyed to match colors .
 Those of you with a flair for blending will like the matched coordinates . You can also blend your own blend using the same coordinates .
 Those that have a yen for contrast may mix either part of the original set with other clothing .
 The latest coordinates are rather snazzy with their unique ""intarsia"" designs . The latest coordinate coordinates were unveiled in New York .
 You're in for a fabulous wardrobe if your fashion choice happens to be coordinates sets . Whatever your choice may be, you're going to be a fashion designer .
 Many outfits for the busy college coed have been shown in suede material this winter . Suede material has been worn in the past year .
 The most popular in the group are full-length coats, blazers, handbags, jumper dresses and belts .
 Suede earbobs and bracelets will match your outfits . Those inclined to be a wee bit individualistic and different will simply adore the suede earrings .
 This winter's ""fashionlogue"" seems to be just what the coed ordered . Yes, this winter's fashionlogue is just what you need to wear .
 The next colunm promises to present some even more desirable and appealing styles .
 Ill Defense of the (iiaiil Handhag) by Gwendolyn Buchanan . A young lady walked into a variety store to purchase a very necessary article .
 She knew that it was in there, but she just couldn't put her hands on It . She knew she had to find it, but couldn't find it .
 Out came lipstick, shades, hankerchief, pointless pencil, nail polish, lotion, powder sponge, bobby pins, and a bobby pin . Cliange purse is now available on the internet .
 There's a young lady seated in class waiting very nervously to take an examination . She was waiting nervously for the examination .
 The instructor stumbled over the long, black bag In the aisle . She had begun to relax before the instructor stumbled .
 They'll twist an ankle running to open a door for a lady with one hand full of books . They'll run to open the door for the lady with a book in her hand full .
 Often they are almost knocked off their feet by the swaying bag . That's the thanks they get. That's what they get .
 The smaller bags occupy less space; they are easier to carry, and are less hazardous . In the case of the stumbling professor, they are less dangerous .
 A lady could hardly go armed against any eventuality with a ""loadllllmlted"" two-by-four handbag . The bag is a two by-four-bag .
 There are times when a girl may need a personal item such as a tube of hand cream, lipstick, bobby pins or lotion . A tube of lipstick, lipstick or a bobby pin can also be found in the bathroom .
 Such ""extensive equipment"" calls for a bag with a reasonably large capacity . The bag should be large enough to fit into a large bag .
 The average bag usually weighs less than three pounds — even when its loaded . Average bag is usually three pounds .
 Savannah State College student, Jeanette Greene, explains the College program lo Florida Governor as military leaders look on . prior to President Kennedy's arrival at Hunter Air Force Base at Savannah Georgia .
 The Clouds is a portrait of an unhappy marriage written much as a morbid, slightly depraved 18-year-old would have imagined it . ""Bonjour Tristesse"" depicts the vivid sad summer of a young girl as it might have been remembered by the mature woman years later
 Base Information Officer, is receiving Savannah State College Annuals from Miss Jeanette Greene, Junior, Business major . Base information Officer is receiving the annuals from Ms. Greene .
 1962 Annual was received on behalf of the President of the United States . The 1962 Annual is received by President Eisenhower .
 Poetry C'est La Vie was written by Veronica Lynne Owens . The poem is a collection of poetry by Owens .
 A thorn erases all your mirth And merrimriment, C'est La Vie. And whilst you set it free, A thud erases your mocks . And whilst . you set . it free; a thorn erasing all your . mirth and merrim
 Sailing would be heavenly, But then rip tides begin to heave And roar, C'est La Vie. Sailing .
 When thatwintry wind whistles across the campus or through the stadium, there's no iicecl for you to get that left-out-in-the-cold feeling .
 Your new outerwear, your ""fashion front"" in Fall and Winter, can be both warm and fashionable . Your outerwear is your "fashion front"
 Fashions in outerwear, particularly those styled for campus, are more functional and individually styled than many other areas of a man's wardrobe . This year's new coats are no exception to that .
 New pile linings, usually of fur-like acrylic fibers, provide excellent light insulation with a lofty feel .
 They're covered by single-breasted shells of processed Dacron and cotton . They're also covered by processed material of processed cotton and Dacrons .
 A removable hood for blustery days completes the picture of fashion and warmth . The hood is removable and comes with a removable hood .
 SALT SEA SPRAY . . was the test for the rugged, dark-blue denim coat .
 Adapted from a classic boating jacket, this climate-controller is of water-repellent, processed denim, with a brilliant scarlet lining .
 Metal hooks and rings across the front shut out the icy blasts . Set-in sleeve and front-yoke styling keeps this weatherproof roomy even when hooked up to the military collar and center-zippered hood .
 Duffel Coat is this season's comeback favorite . Duffel coat is a favorite of this year's fashion season .
 Toggle rope closures are the distinctive trademark of this large and bulky coat . You'll see it in tan and camel's hair tones of brown .
 This above-the-knee coat is warm, practical, and ideal for campus and stadium wear .
 New this year are zippered jackets in just-below-the-waist ski styles . Zippering jackets are just below the waist .
 They're quilted for warmth, faced with water-repellent nylon and processed cotton . They're also faced with nylon and processing cotton .
 Solids in olive, black, tan and navy will be the most popular colors . Some models will feature detachable hoods, and some models will have detachable .
 Con-trast is the word for rainwear colors this Fall . Con-transformed is the best way to show up in the rain .
 Raglan styling and 40"" lengths are most popular, particularly among yoimger men . Zip-in linings make these campus favorites a good het well into Winter .
 The patterned raincoat is seen for the first time this year in muted plaids . It is the first of a number of patterns seen this year .
 Of college men this year will be the popular long, flowing muffler . The popular long-haired muffler is a favorite of many college men .
 It will most usually be seen in broad, 3"" stripes of college colors, or in bright solids .
 The Mail-Fist is not as husky and masculine looking as this Fall's new gloves . The new gloves are available now .
 The sportscar set has given us the knitted wool glove, usually in tan or light olive . The glove is a sure-gripping tan pigskin palm .
 Tan and black pigskin shells will also be seen with liners of knitted wool in matching colors . Tan, black and black pig shells are also seen with matching liners .
 Shearling-type glove remains a standard in every man's wardrobe . The Shearling type glove is still a standard standard in the world .
 These thick, husky grippers are simply made of skin-suede leather, with the fur turned to the inside of the glove .
 We're not what we mean by acjc-^surius. We mean "acjc-surius" and "surius."
 The well-dressed man can add a little touches to his wardrobe-next month . You can find out what we do mean and what little touches can be added to your wardrobe .
 He stated that the Greeks had their special day of thanksgiving, even thougti it may have been quite different from ours . He said that Greeks had a special day, even though it may be quite different .
 The speaker commented on the death of the originator of the prc-Thanksgiving Service at Savannah State, the late Rev. Rev. William Johnson .
 WERNER fConliniietl Irom training with a ""B-plus"" average in his course work . WERner trained with an average of B-plus .
 While at Lackland he took such courses as astronautics, world affairs, effective communication, and military law .
 Tuskegee, Alabama, until he entered the Air Force and served for a period of five year . He was a member of the U.S. Air Force .
 In the fall of 1961, he entered Savannah State College and was graduated in August of 1962 . He was born in Savannah, Georgia, and graduated from Savannah State in August 1962 .
 Werner is now attending a 16-week missile training course at Sheppard Air Force Base . Werner is also attending a missile training program at the base .
 He will be trained to handle the Air Force's Titan II. a long-range Intercontinental Ballistic Missile capable of carrying a nuclear warhead . The Titan II can carry a nuclear missile capable of launching a nuclear weapon . The Air Force will use the Titan II to launch a missile capable
 If he completes successfully, he will be stationed at a missile site near Little Rock, Arkansas . If he is successful, he'll be stationed in Little Rock .
 CoUesire Magazine OFF CAMPUS, a new look at "extracurricular entertainment,"" bows this month . CoUESire Magazine is a new take on the magazine's definition of college life .
 OFF CAMPUS stands unique, A national search for promising talent to be featured within the pages of Off Campus is now underway . Off CAMPus stands unique .
 OFF CAMPUS invites contributions from all talented fiction and feature writers, cartoonists and illustrators . Off the campus invites contributions to all talented writers and cartoonists .
 Approximately one-fourth of each issue will be student contributed . Basing its appeal to the more sophisticated tastes of today's college audience .
 The balance of each issue will contain an unusual blend of professional wit and purpose . Each issue contains a unique blend of humor and purpose.
 OFF CAMPUS is a monthly look at the colleges of the nation . Fashion, entertainment, sport^s and featured campuses provide a well-rounded monthly look . Off Campus is created to appeal to tlie man who wants to be where the ■""action"" is happening .
 OFF CAMPUS is now on sale at nearby bookstores and drugstores at fifty cents a copy . Self-addressed stamped envelopes should be included if return is requested .
 SAVANNAH STATE COLLEG 1962-63 Basketball Schedule Home Gaines Dec. 31 . SC Area Trade: SC Area Traces .
 N & I College Jan. — Benedict College . Jan. 19 — Paine College Feb. 19 . Feb. 6— Edward Waters College. Feb. 8 — Bethune Cookman Games Away .
 Claflin College, Orangeburg, is located in Georgia . Fort Valley State College, Georgia, is based in Orangeburg .
 Columbia, S C, 'Feb. 16— Paine College, Augusta, Georgia . Feb. Feb. 17, February 16, February 17, Feb. 16 . Feb . 16, Feb . 17 .
 All Home Games are to bcplayed at 8:00 P.M. in Wiley Gymnasium . Albany, Georgia, is a state-run school .
 Jg-U The Reverend Amjocollo ElHjah Peacock was born in Bathurat Gambia, Gambia . He is also known as The Rev. Amo-U the Reverend Amojocollo .
 Rho Beta Chapter of Zeta Phi Beta Sorority is happy to have increased its chapter with the addition of six neophytes . The Greek chapter is now at the center of the Greek community .
 We welcome these young women into our sisterhood . Freida Brewton, Barbara Dupree, Nokaleta Mattox, Deloris Mitchell, and Elizabeth Ann Morris, welcome them .
 Soror Ella W Fisher, Regional Director, will preside at this conference . Soror . Ella . Fisher is Regional Director of the Regional . Agency .
 New members Indiictefl into Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity . During the fall probation period . New members of the fraternity .
 The fraternity also inducted five new members into the Sphinx Club . They are Sam Ward and Sam Ward . Sam Ward is one of the new Sphinx members .
 Carolyn Elaine Boyles, '64, Savannah, majoring in Biology; Louise Bolden, 64, Royston, '66, majored in Biology . Carolyn Elaine . Boyles: "I was a great student. I was very happy to be here"
 Fund raising Post-Thanksgiving Dance to be held December 1, 1962 . Basileus Devereux, Elementary Education . Dorothy J Dorsey .
 A tentative program is being drawn up for the celebration of Sigma Week in March calls for the appearance of one of the Regional or National officials .
 They that are serious in richculous things will be ridiculous in serious affairs, Cato The Elder . Mr B (\ Inril, Vice President of Guaranty Life Insurance Company, ami tir tir.i(l) Copeland, Senior Business Intern confere.
 State of Georgia State of the University of Georgia is ranked No. 1 in the U.S. state of Georgia . The state is ranked 1,000th highest in the country .
 Evanel R Terrell brought a close it's most successful mual food bazaar . Terrell held a close to the end of its most successful food baza .
 This activity was conceived w ith the purpose of offering the t:ame Economics Club a pref lofessional training organization, an opportunity to promote b-nter public relations in the College Community .
 This project underwrites the educational good of sending a promising home economist to attend the Annual meeting of the American Home Economics Association . The project is sponsored by the College Clubs section of the Association .
 Students are made up into preparation work groups for advanced production . Last minute details involving art education includes decoration of the dining room .
 Christmas tree decorations, display tables for re-sale foods, and exterior building decoration, are among other decorations .
 The business Community assists the group each year by providing apples and oranges, a beautiful 12 lb turkey, a large premium quality ham, a cake and a roasting chicken for the culminating raffle . The raffle proceeds proceeds from the proceeds of the annual event .
 Besides offering every one gustatory pleasure, fine fellowship and new friends are added each year . New friends and family members are added to the annual event .
 Student direction from the Home Economics Club was under the leadership of Anna Cooper .
 The SSC Debating team defeated an opposing team from Fort Valley State College . The topic of the debate was the topic of discussion .
 The basketball team captured their seventh straight Southeastern Athletic Conference tournament . They defeated Edward Waters College in the afternoon semi-finals, and Albany State in the final round .
 The Eleventh Annual Press Institute was held at Savannah State College, Georgia . Georgia, was held by the Press Institute of Georgia .
 Jack LeFlore, sales manager of the American Yearbook Company, spoke at the opening session . Paul Swensson. Paul Swenson. Jack Leflore, American Year Book Company, also spoke . The session was held at the University of Wisconsin .
 The ""college received the Medalist Award for news released through metropolitan newspapers . The college was awarded the award for its coverage of metropolitan news .
 Cited also were the Tiger's Roar, Alumni Bulletin, and the Savannah State College Bulletin . The Savannah College of Technology was founded in 1973 .
 Savannah State College Basketball team played in the NAIA Basketball tournament in Kansas City, Kansas City . IVIarch The Savannah State team won the tournament .
 Moore, has received an appointment as a Therapuetic Dietitian at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, in Baltimore 4, Maryland . Moore has been a Therapist at the hospital for six years .
 Miss Moore completed the internship in dietetics at Freedmen's Hospital, Washington, D.C. in September 1962 . Miss Moore was a graduate of Savannah State College in the class of '61 .
 Miss Moore is a member of The American Dietetic Association and the Delta Sigma Theta Sorority . Miss Moore has been married for more than 20 years .
 The fourth annual presentation of George F Handel's famous oratorio . SSC Choral Society Presented ""The MessiiUr" Handel .
 Savannah State College Choral Society sings "The MESSIAH" by the Savannah State . Choral society under the direction of Dr. Dr. Michael Lister . Lister is a member of the group .
 Chairman of the Department of Fine Arts, was held SUhday evening, December 2, at 6;00m. in Meldrim Auditorium .
 The singers were assisted by members of the Men and Women's Glee Club, faculty, alumni, alumni and leading singers in the community .
 Of the nine soloists heard. three sopranos were Margaret Tilson, a sophomore music major from Savannah . Three soprano soloists were heard .
 Aurora Griffin, a freshman music major from Miami, Florida, and Naeline Buchanan, a junior music major who comes from Douglas, Florida . Aurora Griffin is a sophomore music major at the University of Miami . Naelin Buchanan is a junior at Florida State University .
 Eudora Moore Allen, a senior music minor from Savannah, two juniors from Sylvani^r; 'John Calvin Reed and James W Johnson, tenor solos, and leading bass solos performed by 'Joshua Walker of Savannah, Launey F Roberts. Eud
 Savannah State College Choral Society presented the MESSIAH December 2 . Choral society sang the song at the Savannah College of Music .
 Chrisliuas Eiitertaiiiiiig Aroiliul ihe World Presidcnl's Message THE TIGER'S ROAR December 14, Editorial Comments .
 Several hundred miles to the south of us. men are not so fortunate. But several hundred miles from us. Men are still fortunate .
 Several thousands of miles to the east and west of us. men still hunger for what is supposed to be an inherent right of all hujuanity— freedom and liberty .
 There is a family of ""havenots" the head of which earns a good salary at the plant, or post office, or as a truck driver . But somewhere between his place of employment on payday he makes a check-sapping stop . There are the slums.
 Macon or Brunswick, there is the Ignorant tenant farmer applying 18th century farming techniques in an era of 20th century agriculture . Macon is the first tenant farmer to apply 18th-century farming techniques .
 Perhaps they are shown more pity than the rest of the rest since the odds were against them from the start . Perhaps they should have been shown pity since the start of their career .
 We send thousands of youths, along with more mature persons, to the south of us. to the east and west of us . hoping that their presence will gain the friendship of foreign peoples. to . gain their presence . But more important, to . save our own necks.
 Programs for care of the aged, blind, crippled, and feeble-minded are in operation . Satisfactory, or nearly so . programs for care for the elderly, blind and crippled are in . operation .
 Professors are deputy head of the Department of Social Sciences and member of the Army's elite Corps of Professors . Jr. Jr.. Jr.. is deputy head . of the department of social sciences . Jr.. . He is a member of an elite corps of professors .
 The ABC-TV network telecasts -MEET THE PROFESSOR"" Sunday, December 16th, at 1:30m.
 Colonel Jordan believes it is vital that future Army officers have a broad understanding of the political and economic problems of foreign countries . Future Army officers will be able to understand the political, economic issues of foreign nations .
 He designed the course in ""Problems of the Developing Nations."" which was added to its curriculum last year .
 Students hear lectures by visiting authorities and have frequent contact with foreign students . Students must also read and discuss the material in addition to reading and discussing .
 This gives the cadets insight into the political systems of the developing nations in Asia, Africa, and Latin America .
 Colonel Jordan will be seen conducting a class of cadets in the developing nations course on the program .
 Colonel Jordan is also charged with the administration of a unique project called SCUSA (Student Conference on United States Affairs) SCUSA brings about two hundred students from other colleges and universities to West Point each year .
 The program gives the students the opportunity to participate in stimulating round-table discussions and to hear talks by outstanding statesmen .
 Prior to his appoiniment as Professor at the Academy in 1955, he served in the field as Artillery Battery Commander .
 Foreign Aid and the Defense of Southeast Asia is published by Praeger this year, and other works .
 Some of the people who received a small percentage of your resources could turn out to be good citizens . One or two of them might be quite outstanding. Some of them could turn up to be outstanding.
 Students from Savannah State and those from high schools could form a domestic task toi-ce here . Students would go through the streets of Savannah instructing the ignorant and counseling the doubtful .
 They could arrange a program of out-of-class help tor junior high and high school students . The program could be offered to help students in junior and high schools .
 Such action might induce more high school graduates to come to college . Such action could induce more students to come back to college, officials say .
 Such a program could graw in magnitude and proportion throughout this state and nation, says author . "Such a program ... would graw ... in magnitude, proportion," author says .
 Let us resolve to do something of this nature during 1963 and if we meet any degree of success, next year this time we can feel proud of having made a noteworthy contribution to our fellowman — and ourselves .
 Failing to collect all gift wrap materials in one spot will result in frazzled nerves and frayed ribbons . A smooth solid surface with plenty of working space is the key to collecting all the wrapping materials .
 Don't wait till wrapping day to find out that your gift paper won't i-over big packages . The paper paper can also be used to protect big packages from i-overs .
 Wary of skimpy-looking packages, people often use more paper than they need . Not realizing that they are creating an equally ungainly effect at corners .
 Allow enough so that the width of the gift wrap will overlap the package by no more than an inch . Allow enough time to wrap the wrap around to overlap the wrap . Wrap wrap should be enough to cover the entire package .
 The gift paper you use is a big factor in the all-important ""first impression"" your gift makes .
 Don't skimp on quality, but don't feel that you have to spend a fortune on gift wraps . Some of the bestgrade gift wraps are sold in variety stores .
 Something like Trophy or Excello Brand print, definite without being gaudy, would look well on most packages .
 Stick-on bows in numerous beautiful versions are avilable in variety stores . Satin Glo makes some in geometric flower-like designs with geometric designs .
 If you're in a do-it-yourself mood, here's a pretty way to tie a fancy bow . If you want to tie it up with a pretty bow, you can do it yourself .
 First make a loop between the thumb and first finger, keeping the ribbon flat . Keep the ribbon in place between the thumbs and first fingers .
 Additional loops can be made the same way and tied in the middle to form a multiple bow . Additional loops are also possible to make the same bow .
 You'll be making no mistake if you follow Miss Rapp's suggestions for some imaginative ""extras"" that will really wrap up your reputation as a smooth Santa .
 The celebration of Christinas is well established in the life of all Ameiicans . It is unique in many ways .
 "No other occasion furnishes the potential for good during the entire year," says President Obama . No other occasion in the year furnishes more potential than this year, he says .
 It is at this time that the thought of others over-rides many of the selfish interests which dominate other parts of the year . The thought of other people overcomes many selfish interests .
 No other occasion contributes so much to family life and the rejuvenation of values developed within the home . No more occasion than the birth of a child .
 Students will be making their way home with memories and anticipations that gladden each heart according to the respective homes from which they come .
 Christmas to the college student provides opportunity for thinlting, planning, and evaluation . Christmas to a college student is an opportunity to thinlst, planning and evaluation.
 During this recess from college, students often secure work to help pay expenses for the rest of the school year . Students often secure jobs to help with expenses for remainder of the year .
 In other Instances, there is spare time which may be utilized to improve one's knowledge and understanding of subject matter areas which have been covered during the school year .
 Many of them read books, write papers, continue experiments, and travel . Many of the world's most famous people live in the U.S.
 The reunions with families and friends will be assigned only a part of this extra time . Families will be able to reunite with friends and family .
 Students' purposes and plans which students have developed for themselves will receive additional implementation . Students' needs and plans will be added to the curriculum . Students will be given additional implementation of their plans .
 The continuous inquires of friends and loved ones concerning one's progress and his plans for the future keep the student ever aware that much is expected of him .
 Parents, relatives, and friends express their faith in each student to succeed in studies and program of education which he has chosen to pursue .
 The celebration of Christmas for 1962 provides the basis for heartfelt thanks as one thinks of national and world conditions . The celebration is the basis of heartfelt thanks for the country .
 Only through the realization of the meaning of Christ does our civilization continue to exist . Only through realizing the true meaning of Jesus Christ will keep our civilization alive . Jesus Christ is the only reason for civilization to continue .
 There is further hope that through Him civilization can continue to exist and make progress . There is also hope for the future of civilization .
 The men and women enrolled in our colleges and universities are faced with the challenge to initiate to Inspire, and to develop the mind and will of the modern world to overcome barriers .
 Campus Library Award Committees are asked to submit nominations of senior students for the national award . The deadline for nomination is April 30th, The award will be made at the winner's commencement .
 Collections will be judged on the basis of Intelligent interest, scope and imagination shown in creating the collection .
 Collections of any type (excluding textbooks) are eligible whether centered in a subject or avocation, a single author or group of authors, or a general collection . Collection of any kind (including textbooks) eligible .
 Miss Loveman was especially concerned with broadening the book horizons of young people . She wanted to help young people learn to read and learn more about books .
 The Three Wise Men appeared out of the desert bearing frankincense and myrrh for the new-born Infant at Jerusalem . Recipient of the 1962 award was Walter S. Rosenstein, a senior at Dickinson College in Carlisle, Pennsylvania .
 Christmas gift-givers' have appeared and disappeared mysteriously throughout history . Smce then, the act of givmg has been shrouded in an air of mvsterv that surrounds both giver and gift, and .
 Father Christmas in England and Pere Noel in France . He re-crossed the Atlantic from the Vnited States to England .
 The splendor and enchantment of the holiday season can be yours in a nutshell if you dared to write 'ole ""Saint Nick"" regarding your fashion whims earlier .
 Those that did, will wake with ecstatic glee on Christmas morn to find bewitching ""after-five"" dresses wrapped under your Christmas tree .
 These figure-beguiling creations come in this season's newest and most exciting holiday color . The holiday color is this year's most exciting season .
 Chiffon leads the list of fabrics, with wool and chiffon . The dresses are also shown in wool .
 The styles are available in sleeveless, halter-type, backless, dirndl skirt, sheered pleats, or bell-shaped skirt .
 Although some decolletages remain sophisticated, others are more demure and simple . Some decollets are more modest than others .
 Print material is used for a new purpose in the U.S.
 This new addition to the holiday styles rivals the traditional ""after-five"" dress like real close .
 The new lowered waistline is featured in some of the new cocktail dresses . Others come complete with self-sash to be worn or discarded .
 These dresses are styled in adorable printed silk surah, chiffon, and the sheerest of wool .
 You too can be the "belle of the ball,"" or a "beautiful" person . December 14. December 14 .
 Men appeared suddenly out of the desert bearing gold, frankincense, and myrrh for the new-born Infant at Jerusalem . Christmas gift-bearers appeared and disappeared mysteriously every year .
 In Spain, the three Wise Men still bring the presents and distribute them on January 6th, the Epiphany . Spanish children put their shoes out on the window sill and fill them with straw for the camels — then awake to find that the straw .s gone and presents have been
 In Italy, La Befana is reputed to eat bad children as well as reward good ones . The gift-giver is known for his reputation as a gift giver in Italy .
 Legend has it that Befana was too busy with her housework to offer hospitality to the three Wise Men . Legend says she asked them to return when she was not so busy .
 French children know that Le Pere Noel will come down from heaven and bring good things if they are well behaved . If they are not well behaved, they will be brought good things . They did not come back .
 In Mexico, gifts come tumbling from a gay clay bird or animal filled with fruit, candy, nuts and small gifts . The pinata is filled with small gifts, fruit and candy, and a clay bird .
 The pinata is hung from a doorway or tree and the child, blindfolded, breaks the pmata with a stick . The child is blindfoldened and breaks the pinata using a stick to break it .
 Each child strikes to pick up as many gifts as possible . In the mad scramble that follows, each child is left scrambling to get the best gifts .
 In Denmark, presents are brought by the little gnome said to dwell in the family attic or barn . In some parts of Scandinavia, gifts are also brought by two gnomes, an old woman and an old man .
 In Russia, Grandfather Frost often is assisted in his gift-bearing by the Snow Maiden . The Snow Maiden is also involved .
 In ancient times, the gift-giver was a local bishop accompanied in a procession by demons who scattered at his approach . The gift-giving was accompanied by a procession of demons .
 'GOD REST YOU MERRY, GENTLEMEN . . . The festive holiday season is upon us .
 The days are drawing in, the nights are filled with music and laughter . It's time to take a good, solid look at your formal wear so you'll be ready .
 So your formal clothes are the blue chips in your wardrobe . An extra investment not only of money but of time and thought about tailoring, fit and fabric, will pay you steady dividends .
 WILT YOU WON'T — not in the new lightweight fabrics now available in formal wear . The lightweight fabrics are now available for the first time .
 Worsteds are lustreless, lightweight worsteds or blends of acrylic or polyester fibres and worsted . They are proof against the most sardine-packed ballroom, stuffy and steamheated though it is .
 You'll be coolly, comfortably turned out in these fabrics for all . seasons .
 Natural shoulder, single-breasted dinner jacket with black satin or silk faille shawl collar is a smart, correct jacket .
 Gaining steadily in popularity is the notched lapel, often seen on the dinner jacket with flaps on the pockets that may be worn in or out . Notched lapels are often worn on dinner jackets .
 Some undergraduates are wearing the high-fashion peak lapel . The lapel is a feature of dinner jackets with a little more shape at the waist .
 One of these will add a real touch of elegance to the formality of your image . Matching fabric trimmed with silk, or pure silk in a brocade or textured weave .
 The single-breasted shawl collar vest has satin lapels and three buttons . The vest is one of the world's most expensive designs .
 The pleated satin cummerbund with matching tie is a smart variation on a theme . The tie-in is the latest in a long-running trend .
 Your dress shirt, with black pearl studs and cufflinks, has pleated bosom and leaves a dazzling V2"" of white cuff showing .
 Home tconomics students prepare Christmas Bazaar under direction of Mrs. Mrs. J. Smith . Mrs. Smith: "Home Economics students have been very successful"
 A prize package designed to be opened both before and after Christmas is this jolly Santa Claus cookie canister . The prize package is designed for both Christmas and after .
 All you need are a paper bucket, a bit of cotton and colored paper, and some pomsettia leaves .
 You'll be much more in step in your patent leather plain-toe eyelet-ties, or your slipon pumps with a grosgrain bow . Besides that, you'll be in step with your black patent leather eyeletties .
 A smart alternative is a pair of highly-polished, black calfskin shoes with plain toes, of course .
 Your hose are thin black silk, nylon or rayon . Plain, with no ribbing please, please, and gartered for extra sleekness that formal dress demands .
 Chesterfield coat, velvet-collared, worn with a black, dressy snap-brim, is a classic Chesterfield .
 The black homburg or derby are both equally correct . More adventurous alternatives, if you've got the face for it, are the black or derby .
 A white silk scarf and light grey suede or natural chamois gloves will complete the picture of a deb's delight .
 Savannah State was paced by Johnny Mathls, 6' 5" center, who collected 23 points . Mathls collected 23 of his 23 points for Savannah State .
 Aaron Johnson, Aaron Johnson and Charles Day scored 14 points . Charles Day collected 10 points for the team .
 Area Trade's James Grant scored 29 points for Area Trade . Area Trade teammate James Grant was the high man of the game . The game ended in a victory for Grant .
 Savannah State to Inclnde Basketball and Volleyball . Intranuiral Program of Savannah State To Inclunde Basketball . 33condes left .
 Savannah State led the tournament in point-averages per game with a rating of 97 pts. game . Savannah State was ranked 97 points per game in the tournament .
 April Gwendolyn Brooks, Pulitzer Prize poet, appeared on Savannah State campus to inaugurate National Library Week which began on April 8 . Brooks is the author of the Pulitzer Prize Prize-winning poem .
 The singers visited Wilmington, N C; ; Roanoke, Virginia; Washington, D, C; Laurel, Laurel .
 Payne honored by faculty, alumni and student body for twenty-five years of service to Savannah State College . Payne was honored for his service at the college for 25 years .
 Joseph A Johnson of ihcInterdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta gave Lhe bacculaurate sermon . Joseph A . Johnson gave the sermon at Atlanta's ihCII Center .
 Savannah State College Library received the John Cotton Dana Award for an excellent library publicity program . The Savannah State Library was awarded the award for a publicity publicity program for the library . The award was given to Savannah State's library library .
 Anthony Sheffield one of the Tigers gun fire from the outside being defense by two of South Carolina Area Trade players . Anthony Sheffield and Anthony Sheffield are one of Tigers gunning for the Tigers .
 Savannah State intramural basketball arid volleyball is back in action at Savannah State . It's the time of year again for intramurals .
 The i n t r a m u r r :i I basketball loop will be compos^^d of eleven teams competing for hardwood honors . The loop is composed of 11 teams .
 Each other team in the league still has players from last season and will probably be vastly improved over last year . Competition for the title will be keen in the Premier League this season . Each other teams still have players from the last season .
 Richard M Coger became the first Savannah State student or graduate to be accepted as a Peace Corps volunteer . He is the first person to volunteer for the Peace Corps .
 Massie of the National Science Foundation was the commencement speaker . Massie spoke at the commencement ceremony .
 H MTurner, pastor of the First Congregational Church in Savannah, delivered the baccaulaureate sermon .
 The class presented a $50D check to the college's National Defense Student Loan Fund . The class also presented a check to donate to the national defense student loan fund .
 The College began program of building and campus improvement in September . September The College will focus on improving campus facilities .
 Roads were re-surfaced; the Fine Arts Department moved to a renovated section of Hill Hall . Roads were resurfaced; Fine Arts department moved to renovated section .
 November College suffered loss of second professor in less than one month . November College lost second professor within less than a month . Professor's death is the latest in a long line of faculty deaths .
 Homecoming was observed; parade, coronation, and other activities were rated as successful . Homecoming and coronation activities were also rated successful .
 i7ers of all flings open a door ir Sweden — throws in a gift — Ihen vanishes . But one of the strangest gift5:i7ers flings in a door and knocks it out .
 The gift, called the Julkapp, is done up in so ii'iany wrappings that it is hard to find . The gift is a gift that's done up with so many wrappings you can't find it .
 Penney Company, ave more than 50,000 different kinds of gifts to choose from in department stores . Penney Co. Penney's stores have more than half a million different types of gifts available .
 Penney's cliief toy buyer alone selects upwirds of 1,000 different toy and me items from which Penney stores select Christmas toy S'.ocks . Penney has a toy store's toy department, which has 1,500 toys and me toys .
 Turkish Bishop St, Nicholas, devoted his life to charity and good works more than 1,600 years ago . The red-clad figures who ring their clapper at shoppers have a real life model .
 St. Nicholas unintentionally originated the custom of hanging stockings by the fireplace at Christmas time . St. Nickle originated the tradition .
 Nicholas knew of a poor and proud nobleman who had no dowry for his three daughters . Nicholas knew that a poor nobleman was forced to give his daughters no dowries for his daughters .
 Nicholas peered in the nobleman's window, saw him fast asleep, and stealthily climbed the roof to Ihe chimney . Nicholas then crept into the window and climbed the chimney to see him asleep .
 He pitched down three gold pieces, expecting they would land at the hearth at the nobleman's feet .
 One of the daughters had hung up a pair of stockings to dry and the gold pieces landed in the toe of one of tliem . The gold was found in one of the girls' stockings .
 Puritans in England issued a series of ordinances forbidding church services and festivities on Christmas Day . They also banned making plum puddings and mince pies from 1642 to 1652 .
 In 1659, Massachusetts passed a law in 1659 making the observance of Christmas a penal offense . In America, such celebrations had a heathen origin, such as Christmas .
 In England, Christmas merriment returned with the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 .
 Mr Rosenstein was selected from a group of 52 finalists nominated by college and university committees throughout the United States . Sponsors of the award anticipate even greater participation this following year .
 In America, the zeal against ""heatlien customs"" persisted until the middle of the 19th century .
 As late as 1856, Christmas was an ordinary working day in Boston . Those who refused to come to work were dismissed from work .
 In 1870 classes were held as usual on Christmas in public schools . Children who did not attend were severely punished for not attending .
 More immigrants brought with them their own special gift-givers . But things began to brighten as more immigrants arrived .
 A German colony had moved into Pennsylvania along with ""Cliristkindlein"" who was to be transformed into Kris Kringle . Swedish settlers brought a giftgiver descended from the old god Thor to the colony in Pennsylvania .
 Clement Moore bumped into a tiny, fat Dutchman with red cheeks and white hair . Clement C Moore bumped up a tiny Dutchman in the street .
 The Dutchman was the very image of St, Nicholas himself, says Moore . Moore said that the old Dutchman's image was that of St. Nicholas himself . Moore told Moore that he believes the Dutchman is the image of himself .
 Penney's Santa is usually equipped with an artificial beard made of yak's hair from Tibet . The modern flesh and blood Santa today is often equipped with artificial beard .
 Father Christmas re-crossed the Atlantic as Father Christmas in England and Pere Noel in France . But it was from the U.S. that he re-existed in England as Pere Noel .
 Xiiias Entertaining ent fountains on Christmas Eve wliile the midniglit church bells are ringing, and then runs to church, the future mate will be found standing standing on the church steps .
 Jul, as it is known, lasts thirteen days . Christmas comes but cnce a year, but in the Scandinavian countries it lingers for a long time .
 The French prefer cakes shaped like a Yule log, frosted with chocolate to resemble the bark . French prefer Yule logs shaped like logs .
 After Midnight Mass. families and friends gather to make merry all night and to partake of an enormous meal called ""reveillon,"" which features oysters, sausages and pancakes .
 In some villages, a big party is given on Twelfth Night, and the king or queen of the evening is the lucky person who has found in his pastry a tiny doll, a bean or a little wooden shoe .
 Traditionally, the big Christmas visiting day in France Is January 6 when friends call on each other with gifts . The big Christmas visit day is January 6 .
 French children had already put out their shoes for Bonhomme Noel on Christmas Eve . French children put their shoes out for the festive festivities .
 Mexican hostesses face the plight of some Mexican women . Hostesses are struggling to live up to expectations of holidaymakers .
 A man and woman dressed as Mary and Joseph lead a donkey from door to door, knocking for admittance . Each night they are refused at all but one home, which invites them in for supper and hospitality .
 Remember that next time you invite the ""crowd"" over for a glass of Spanish sherry and some Christmas cheer .
 The very ultimate In femininity and vogue is seen in the new French cuffs . The ultimate in fashion is the ultimate in femininity .
 Santa's pack will be overflowing this Christmas with a million and one items for you, the fashion minded college coed . Christmas pins (holiday bells and flowers), Christmas pins and flowers .
 SSC Choral Society IConliniteil jrom Piini' I) Sylvania, Mary Armstrong, Beryl Cook and Mary Armstrong sing in the chorus .
 Romona Marks, all freshman music majors from Savannah, and Mrs. Myra Thomas, a member of the Fine Arts faculty, are pictured in Savannah .
 Staging for the performance was under the direction of Felix J Alexis, Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds; scenery .
 Both farmers and their cattle fast the day before Christmas in parts of Germany . Farmers and cattle fast before Christmas and then both enjoy a hearty meal .
 As you sit down to Christmas dinner this year, give a thought to the ways in which foreign families spread good cheer .
 Norwegians sit down to a gigantic Christmas breakfast with as many as 40 different kinds of hot and cold dishes . Norweigians eat up to 40 different types of food each year .
 In some districts of Portugal, even the ghosts look forward to Christmas . The ghosts of some Portuguese districts are looking forward to festive season .
 For the Portuguese, leave food on the table so that the spirits of the dead, if hungry, can share in the Christmas cheer . For the . Portuguese leave food for the dead so that they can share the festive cheer with their family .
 Danes go to special pains to avoid one unwanted Christmas guest, the Shoemaker of Jerusalem . Danes avoid unwanted Christmas guests, avoiding one of the Danes .
 According to an old Danish legend, Jesus rested at a shoemaker's door while on the road to Calvary . The shoemaker is said to have been the shoemaker at the time of Jesus' death .
 Danish farmers make the sign of the cross over all their farm implements . The Shoemaker sits down and rest, bringing bad luck to the farmer and his household .
 Much of the world's Christmas customs sound exotic and strange to our ears . But much of our own Christmas cheer has been imported from abroad, says author .
 This is true not only of the Christmas tree (from Germany} and the Christmas card lan English idea), but also of the ingredients of our holiday dinners and parties . The Christmas tree is from Germany and the card is from the English idea .
 Turkey is a native American dish, but plum pudding and mince pie are English . Plum pudding is English; so is the wassail bowl . Wassail bowls and plum pudding are also English .
 Sir Walter Raleigh developed Sack Posset as a Christmas drink . He developed the drink as a drink for the festive season . Sir Raleigh invented the drink in 17th century .
 Take 2 quarts of milk, 2 cups of sugar, warm to scalding, add 4 beaten eggs yolks, and add one bottle of Oloroso type Spanish Sherry . Add 1 bottle of Sherry, 1 cup of sugar and 4 beaten egg whites .
 The Urn of Fate is a Spanish custom which has yet to reach our shores . Another Spanish custom is known as the Urn Of Fate, which means 'Fate'
 The names of friends are placed in a bowl and on Christmas Day each person draws the name of the one who shall be his best friend till next Christmas . Each person draws his name to the one he will be best friend until next year .
 A large jar of earthenware, called a pinata, is filled with gifts and then hung from the celling of the house or from a nearby tree . A pinata is then hung in a large jar filled with presents and hung from a tree .
 Blindfolded children try to break the jar with a stick . When someone succeeds, they all scramble for the candy, fruit and gifts inside .
 Another Swiss Christmas ritual, observed -in Switzerland, has to do with the selection of a future mate . Another Swiss tradition, observed in Switzerland, involves selecting a mate .
 President of Delta Eta Chapter Alpha Phi Alp Fraternity congratulates Otis Mitchell for message delivered by hi on DcLcmber 6. 1962, for Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity . If any young boy or girl drinks from nine differances, it would be a mistake .
 February 7-8, 1963 has been set aside for the annual affair . Andrew T Hatcher, Thompson, McClarrin To Visit During Press Institute .
 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. will deliver the keynote address on Thursday, February 7 at 10:20, in WillcoxGymnasium .
 Tompkins Junior High School teachers presented a discussion on Industrial Arts in the JHS curriculum . Dr. Clay Hall is featured in a weekly series of lectures at the school .
 Director of Technical Sciences, Savannah State College at the legular in-service workshop . The workshop was held in Savannah, Georgia, at the state's largest college .
 "Before one can consider meeting the scientific and technical needs of Junior High School students, he must first be thoroughly aware of the student's real needs," he says .
 There is a definite relationship between the Income of parents and the achievement of their cliildren in school as recorded by standardized tests, but this relationship does not hold true when it comes to Naiive ability .
 Students should be made aware early in their educational program of the many scientific and technical jobs available to their group, so they can start pursuing the necessary courses to qualify for such jobs .
 Industrial arts is designed to introduce to and provide an opportunity for students to understand our present day industrial complex . The program is financed heavily by the Defense Budget of the U.S. Government . Industrial arts aims to introduce students to and . provide an . opportunity to understand the industrial complex which
 Electricity, electronics, metals and drafting should be the key areas of an up-to-date Industrial arts program . Electrical, electronics and metals should be key areas in the Industrial Arts program .
 Civil Rights Commission will be the luncheon speaker on Friday, February 8 at 1:00 m.m. at 1 p.m . The luncheon will be held at the University of Charleston, Georgia .
 Publishers THE WALL STREET JOURNAL and BARRON'S NATIONAL BUSINESS, AND FINANCIAL WEEKLY, who will serve as the keynote speaker on Thursday . Publishers The Wall Street Journal and The National Business, and Financial Weekly, will host the keynote
 He will deliver the principal address at the public meeting in Meldrim Auditorium on Thursday, February 7 at 7:30 m.m. The public meeting will be held at Meldim Auditorium .
 Mr Hatcher is the first Negro to serve as Associate Press Secretary for the President of the United States .
 U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D C; S. Joseph Ward. Joseph Bradford, Information, Information . S. Ward. Ward .
 Esquire's Don Ferguson is Managing Director, Radio-TV Division, Esquire, Inc., Don Ferguson, General Manager. Don Ferguson: Esquire is proud to be a proud member of the Esquire family .
 Thelma Roundtree is the Adviser to the Student Newspaper, Saint Augustine's College . She is also the Adviser for the St. Augustine's college newspaper .
 Mrs. Lillie Allen Powell, Secretary, Public Relations, will serve as assistant to the Director . Mrs. Powell will be the Director's Assistant to the Secretary of the Public Relations .
 Luetta C Milledge, Director of Dramatics, who is serving as Associate Director and co-ordinator, is the Associate Director at the University of Cambridge .
 Milledge are Mrs, Louise L Owens, assistant professor of English, Miss Mary Ella Clark, Miss Albertha Boston, assistant prof. of Business . Mrs Owens and Miss Boston are also assistant professors of Business and English .
 The freshman talent show will be Savannah State's biggest event of the coming month . Assisting the participants will be the staff of the Savannah State staff .
 M.C.C'ing the talent-student affair will be James Sapp and Warren Williams . Sapp and Williams will be on the panel for the talent show .
 Much talent has been discovered among the freshmen, and a great deal of it will be exhibited on the show . Much of the talent will be shown on the program .
 Savannah State College, will be the consultant and main speaker at the Fourth Annual Workshop for Teachers of Social Studies in the state of South Carolina .
 The workshop is sponsored by the Division of Social Sciences, South Carolina State .
 Andrew T, Hatcher, Associate Press Secretary to Hie President, win speak at the public mectiiig Thursday, February 7, at 7:30 m. vannah Morning News and Evening Press . Andrew T Hatcher will be the guest speaker .
 Collegiate Press Workshops include 4-H Club News Seminars, Community News Service Workshops, Radio and TV Workshops . 4-year-old 4H Clubs are required to participate in these programs .
 High School Publlcalton Workshop, one catch all — Metropolitan Newspaper Workshop, a Yearbook Division, Elementary Division, and a special seminar for Educational TV will be offered . High School Publicity Workshop will be held at the end of the year .
 All publications must be mailed with a fee of $2,00 postmarked January 18 to be eligible for rating . The fee is required to be postmarked .
 All participants are required to pay a registration fee of $1,50 which will entitle each participant to attend the Annual Luncheon on Friday, February 8 .
 So far, every team has been defeated at least once, which supports our prediction that competition would be unusually keen . So far the competition has been unusually keen, with each team losing at least one .
 Directing the loop this year is Coach Richard ""Smiley"" Washington and Dr. Dr. Dr. Richard "Smiley" Washington . Directing this year’s loop is Coach Richard Smiley Washington .
 Raymond Hopson is the head of the Physical Education and Recreation Department . Hopson has been in charge of the physical education and recreation department for more than 20 years .
 The Savannah Sta'e Colleije Chaiitcr of Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society held its annual induction ceremonies . January 24. January 24 . The ceremony was held in Savannah, Georgia .
 StandniR m. m rear but not visible are the three students who were inducted into the Hall of Fame .
 College officials had to add an extra day to the day that most students sleep late — Saturday . Saturday was added to the list of days to make sure students had enough class hours in this quarter .
 An article appeared recently in the Savannah Evening Press on the orRanizine of a honor system at one of the local high schools .
 The honor system would curb or eliminate cheating on examinations by having students pledge complete honesty in the taking of tests . Students to consider it their duty to report to authorities whenever other students attempt to copy on tests or give out copies of stolen examinations for profit .
 U.S. high school and college students have resorted to various dishonest practices in order to ""pass"" examinations . Such a system should be organized here and at other educational institutions, he says .
 Being such an institution, it is not surprising that a representable number of our students do ""got"" examinations .
 This should be of vital concern to both faculty and student body . If not checked, this malignancy could spread to such proportions that our rating system here would be invalidated .
 It would be possible for a dishonest ""honor"" graduate's record on a Job could be harmful to the reputation of the school . It would tlien be possible to a dishonest "honor" graduate .
 It is the role of the school press to bring forth for all to see those things which are considered to be undesirable or harmful . While reaction to this editorial may be disfavorable on part of those guilty of these malpractices, it is .
 The Tiger's Roar is definitely and uncompromisingly against all such dishonesty and will campaign vigorously against this evil . It will campaign against all dishonesty .
 It Is almost unbelievable that instructors here are not aware of the situation. It is almost unbelievable .
 "Some type of action by the sincere and honest students at this college to halt this assault on the integrity of our institution is long overdue," says the student body .
 This rationalized promise by which much of the injustices of today are explained away should be dispelled . The promise of explaining away injustices should be unequivocally dispelled, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 The Emancipation Proclamation was indeed a step in the direction of ""Justice writ large"" but a far cry from unqualified justice . It was a step toward justice, but it was not a step towards justice .
 Since Abe Lincoln set pen to that famous document of ""freedom"" the black man has walked on rugged grounds . The black man having stepped, ualks on, but he has walked .
 Blockades have been placed in his way, The roads have been revamped by the contractors and architects of bigotry and hate . Blockades were placed in the way of the president, according to CNN.com .
 The Negro has trodded peacefully into towns where stones, stakes, boiling oil and jeering wiiites awaited his arrival . The Negro is known for his peaceful approach to African-American towns .
 He has stopped at the back window of restaurants and for equal price, received scraps reserved for the dogs and the Negro . The dog and Negro are among the dogs he has been seen at restaurants .
 The black man has had to rest in the scums of iast-class housing, along his way, along with the scum .
 He has to take what was left after the feast, on that which his black hands planted, worked, picked, cooked and served . He said: "He has to . take what . he has been left after . the feast"
 The story of the Negro, since the Emancipation Proclamation, has certainly not been one of free flowing melody . The story has not been as free flowing music since the emancipation of African Americans .
 Too often, the story has been of desolation and long suffering, too often, it has been a story of detached and autonomous people in a nation claiming dedication to unity . The story has often been of detached people in the nation claiming to unity, but too often has been detached and
 The black man walks Converse to the scriptures, the black man is forced to make two steps to God's one . The laws and treaties espousing freedom and equality since 1863 have been numerous, but have been only ink filled scraps of paper .
 Marvelous though, is and has been his ability to walk on when the road was all uphill . Marvelous is his ability that he has been able to walk through adversity .
 "Even more marvelous has been his ability to achieve recognition and merit when twice the effort, time and ingenuity of any other individual had to be put forth," he says .
 In the period since the Emancipation Proclamation, we have seen the black man, in spite of gross unfavorable odds, produce great men in every existing field — from syrup-making to surgery .
 One would reasonably surmise that time alone (1863-19631) would have eradicated the American injustices and made for the realization of racial peace under the Emancipation Proclamation .
 In a 100-year lapse of time, slavery would be a memory, segregation dead and prejudice passed away . One would reason that in a one hundred years, slavery was a memory and segregation was dead .
 To tliink this would certainly be a careless thought. as well as a thought in error. To tlink this is certainly be an error of judgement .
 There is a new hope and a new dignity, all encompassed with a new approach, says President Obama . Today there is a New Negro, says Obama .
 "The barriers that stand before the new Negro must come down, never to rise again," says President Obama . The barriers "must come down," he says, "Never rise again"
 It is for certain that in this new day, the laws proclaiming justice must be realized or scrapped . It's for certain, in this New Day, the law proclaiming justice is either realized or scraped .
 "Not for one minute more can political, economic and social injustices exist under the roof of democracy," says David Cameron . Cameron: 'Not for a minute more' can political injustice exist under roof-top democracy . 'We are not going to tolerate injustice'
 The new Negro demands that democracy be defined or practiced or scrapped and forgotten . "The new Negro" is demanding that democracy must be defined and practiced, he says .
 Dr. Simpson says research centers develop around LJ ni versities . Simpson: "Research Centers Develop Around LJ Ni versities" The Editorial and Research Service published the editorial .
 George L Simpson, Jr., Jr. is the Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . Simpson is a former Air Force Secretary of State George L. Simpson Jr.
 Simpson stipulated the plausibility of establishing research centers in the South . Simpson contended that research scientists that will automatically have to work at these centers are attracted to the metropolitan areas more than they are to small towns and communities .
 Simpson attributed to the fact that in the metropolitan areas entertainment and speaking engagements are at a high level . Simpson attributed the high number of speaking engagements to the high level of entertainment in the area . Simpson: "It's a good time for people to come out of their homes and live in
 In these areas, there is a great deal of informal activeness where research shop talk and intellectual discussions are held .
 Savannah State Faculty Puhlishes Research Bulletin . Annual Faculty Research Edition of the Savannah State College Bulletin was recently released by the college .
 The bulletin contains articles on research as well as creative writings . It also contains articles about research and creative writing .
 Inasmuch as this edition contains a wide variety of contributions, it is considered to be one of the best ever published . This edition contains many contributions to the world's top science fiction .
 K'e have no regret, no remorse, or sorrow Accepting what fate has brought our way . Write a Letter to the Editor .
 The uncharted juture we stand to treasure II we run with patience the race. We run the race . We stand by patience and patience. We stand with patience . We run to treasure. We are in the uncharted space .
 The dawn of tomorrow will be exciting if we dedicate ourselves to the task that lies ahead of us, says President Barack Obama .
 Savannah State College students represent an exciting hope for the future . Savannah State students represent the future of teachers, doctors and lawyers .
 Here are the scientists needed to light the way for future generations . Scientists need to be on the cutting edge of the world's most powerful inventions .
 Engineers translate the scientist's findings into productive machines and processes . Here are the engineers who can translate the scientists' findings .
 Here, in short, are the men and women whose minds, skills, and energies will adapt the treasures of the earth to the services of mankind tomorrow .
 We do not have to be reminded that we live in a world of great tension and compression . But, we do have to remind us of the tension in the world, says CNN.com.com .
 'We face difficult problems, revolutionary changes, and dynamic challenges as well as unsurpassed opportunities' 'The past ten years area area prologue to the future,' he says .
 Culturally, the masses of the world are stirring with a rampant nationalism that is sweeping across entire continents . The masses are stirring in a way that's sweeping across the world, especially in Asia .
 Educationally, there is a passion for knowledge in the world today that never before in the history of civilization has been equaled . Free people know that it takes an educated population to remain free, for free people .
 Politcilaly, we live in a divided world which is chiefly dominated by the split and fused atoms . Politicians are divided in a world dominated by a divided and fused world .
 Economically, we are experiencing aggressive competition in our domestic and foreign markets, says the government . We are experiencing 'aggressive competition' in the domestic market, he says .
 In a time such as ours, we need outstanding men and women if we are going to meet the economic, political, and social challenges of our times, says President Obama .
 "Our critical shortage is for persons with the intellectual capacity and the qualities of character necessary to cope with such problems," says the government . "We have a critical shortage of people with the mental capacity and qualities of . character," she says .
 Two poems, ""Personality"" and ""The Portrait of a Word"" were written by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter's poems include "Personality" and "Portrait of Word"
 President Payne revealed that a letter of commendation on the liigh quality of the Bulletin was received from Dr, Harmon W, Caldwell . President Payne said that the letter was received by Dr Harmon W .
 Savannah State students do practice teaching according to Mrs. Darnel H Dawson .
 The persons listed below have completed the professional education sequence and have been admitted to student teaching . Dorothy C Hamilton, Assistant Professor of Education at Savannah State College and Co-ordinator of Student Teaching, is the person listed below .
 James Luten; Gussie Lee Copeland, Mrs. Eldora Greene, Moses Jackson, Eldora Greenhouse, Moses .
 Winter isn't really going to go on forever ... it just seems that way . E SCHOEFFLER, esquire's Fashion Director, says winter isn't going to last forever .
 You've probably noticed some gaps in your coldweatJier wardrobe . And by now, you're probably noticing some gaps between your wardrobe .
 This Winter is the perfect time to fill in those gaps . So, here is a review of this Winter's newest fashion ideas .
 This wintevoffer enough variety to suit any discernnig young man with ideas about fashion . SUITS on the scene .
 Dark blue unfinished worsted is your best bet for the basic, go-anywhere suit . Dark blue is your go-to-the-world suit .
 Dark gray sharkskin bird'seye worsted is equal to all but the most formal after-dark occasions, as well as dark gray shark's eye worsted . Dark gray shark-skin is the most comfortable option in the world .
 Pin stripes, especially in dark blues and bromis, are playing a successful revival this year . Pin stripes are due for a long run, and are due to be a long-term success .
 The much more casual, soft muted glen plaids are most often seen on the fashion scene in light and dai'k tones of gray . They are often seen in light, gray and light tones of grey .
 All wool material or blends of wool and polyester fibers make for light*veight warmth in today's suits . Wool material is light and comfortable .
 No matter what your great-aunt says, horse-blanket Winter weights just ai-en-necessary anymore . Winter weights are no longer necessary anymore, even for horses .
 The silhouette of your new lightweight Winter suit is natural shoulder, with straighthanging, center-vented jackets remaining the rule.-button models . Tapered tapered trousers, either belted or in the newei', self-belt variety, are all pleatless for a sl
 Short snap-tab collars on dress shirts are the front-runners in fashion today . buttondowns, both featuring barrel cuffs and button-back neckbands, are also front-runner in fashion .
 Wool challis ties printed in soft, muted patterns . Both provide the right background for foulard and wool challis tie prints .
 Nothing cuts winter chin like a lannel shirt, says author .
 Wool fibers are either all-wool or blends of either wool-and-cotton or wool and polyester fibers . They're either blends of wool and cotton or wool- andpolyester fibers. Wool fibers can be found in wool, cotton, polyester, wool, poly
 Oversized tartans and solid colors, classically styled with medium spread collars, are standouts for comfort and good looks . Oversize tartans, solid colors and solid collars are standout for comfort .
 Shetland pullovers in heather tone mixtures or in vibrant colors are the hardy perennials of the pullover breed, and are always m fasliion .
 Try one of the new Tyrolean-influenced heavy-knits . The new heavy-knit heavy-kits are inspired by the world's best-knit knitwear .
 These lively patterned pullovers have V-necks that button up snugly against the Wintry winds . The V-ncks are the perfect pullover for the Winter .
 Cardigans, now available in lighter-than-ever-weight yarns, are fast becoming year-round favorites .
 Button one up against the icy blasts now, and get the bonus of casual good looks over your cotton sport shirts .
 Shearling jacket: or knee-length outercoats . Straying from the ground is liable to wind up in shearling jacket .
 Stadium coats with shearling lining are this year's fashion pace-setters . Shearling coats with bulky stadium coats are the latest trend in fashion .
 Cotton pile lining under smooth fabric shell is another fashionable way to fight frost . Cotton pile pile lining is another way to keep warm in winter .
 Lightweight and warm, it features a zippered front and parka hood for extra protection and trim good looks . Zippering front and hood hood are added to the coat .
 Rain may dampen more than your spirits if you're not ready for it . Rain may not hurt your spirits, but it can dampen your spirits .
 Florance Street School, Norman Elmore; Doris Marie Strange, Mrs, Leo Harris . Doris . Strange's mother, Mrs. Strange, was Mrs. Elmore .
 Eudora Moore Allen, Mrs. Thelma Lee, Sophronia Tompkins, James Luten; Dorothye Virginia Carter, Mrs, Dorothy U, Adams, Sol C Johnson, A Dwight; Delores Ann Clark, Mrs., Mrs. Elizabeth Smith, Mrs
 Christine Robinson, Sol C Johnson, A Dwight; Norman Benedict Elmore, Miss Geneva Young and Miss Geneva. Young, Alfred E, Beach, O L, Douglass; Lawrence Hutchins, Gary Douglass, Gary D. Douglass .
 Sol C, Johnson, A, Dwight; Ethel Lacine Ross, Roger Jones, Sophronia Tompkins, J Luten; Eunice Veal, Mrs. Veal . Sol C . Ross, Jr. Ross, J. Luten, Jr., Jr
 She spends part of her spare time as a charm instructor at the I'WCA in Savannah .
 Coach Frazier's youthful Tigers have picked up steam to bolster their season record to four wins against five setbacks . Coach Frazier\s Tlfiers Showing Improveweiit by Therman Thomas ""
 The current edition of the Tigers is one of the tallest teams ever to don the Blue and Orange . Average player height is about 6' 2"", Although blessed with height, the squad is a bit lacking in speed .
 Al Frazier changed his attack from the old run-and-shoot type of offense to a ball-control type of game . Al Frazier has changed his approach to the game to counteract this weakness .
 The squad's attack is centered around Johnny Mathis, a towering 6' 4"" center . Mathis is one of the best players in the country's history .
 Tigers have the makings of a wellbalanced ball club . Tigers have not yet reached their mid-season form, having not yet hit their midseason form .
 Only three lettermen from the long-to-beremembered squad which achieved national recognition are now playing varsity basketball at Savannah State .
 Delores is one of many student teachers doing intern work in Savannah, Georgia . Delores works in various schools, mostly in the Savannah area .
 As a member of the Delaware State Department of Public Instruction, School Librarian Certification Revision Committee . As a school librarian certification librarian, she is on a school library board committee .
 He is a member of the Editorial Committee of the Savannah State College Research Bulletin . He is on the editorial committee of the Bulletin .
 The author of many articles in professional and national publications, he is the author of an article which appears m the current issue of COLLEGE AND RESEARCH LIBRARIES .
 In addition an effort was made to access the role of the library staff in the process . The library staff was also involved in the effort .
 Students Here Vote ""Pro"" On Birth Control Question . Students here vote ""Pro" on birth control question .
 A great deal has been said for and against birth control measures, with sharpest reactions being posted by those who view the problem In a religious or moral light .
 One eminent Catholic gynecologist who helped in the development of the pill said that "". . . . the use of birth control pills for legitimate purposes Is completely moral,"" while Catholic Church officiais say the pills may not be used for the prevention of conception .
 They approve of the pill being used to prevent miscarriage and promote fertility . They do not approve of using the pill to prevent miscarriages and to promote fertility, however .
 The population of the world at the three billion mar\i and rising, birth control has become an International issue . Birth control is an issue for the world with a population of three billion .
 Statisticians say that by the year 2000, the earth's present population will double . Statistician say by 2000 the population of the world will double by that date .
 Josey was one of two Negro citizens appointed to the Board of Managers of the Savannah PulDlIc Library . Josey is a member of the Library's Board of Directors .
 Eugene Gadsden, a local attorney and an alumnus of Savannah State, shares this historic honor with Mr Josey Josey . Eugene .
 Mayor Malcolm Maclean recommended the appointment and City Council approved it on Wednesday, December 19 . City Council approves the appointment .
 Josey was born in Norio\k, Virginia, and educated in the public schools of Portsmouth, Virginia . Josey is best known for his role in World War II .
 Something must be done to curb the present birth rate if the over-populated countries of the world are going to stabilize their economies . Already extensive birth control promotion is being carried out in countries with populations exceeding one blliion .
 Puerto Rico and the country of India are two of the areas where such measures are being used on a large scale . Puerto Rico, India and Puerto Rico are examples of the measures being used in large scale.
 Extension Service Facilities Outlined at Savannah State College . The campus is located on the second floor of Hill Hall . The Extension Service Office is located in Hill Hall, Savannah .
 Georgia Agricultural Extension Service for this area is not an office, but a collection of offices . The agency is composed of several offices, which form the service .
 Augustus Hill, state agent in charge of the extension service, says that the agency offered various types of services of interest and benefit to both urban and rural citizens . Augustus Hill: "It's a good time for rural and urban citizens to take advantage of the services."
 Farmers may receive free professional aid from the agents, who are trained In their specialty . Agents are familiar with the latest techniques and developments in the field of agriculture .
 Area farmers may have their soils tested and analyzed so they can fertilize their land properly . Area farmers will be able to get their soil tested and analyze .
 Help in such areas as insect and pest control, marketing, farm improvement and the prevention of soil erosion is al.so available .
 The agents also can help solve social and economic problems like family budgeting, rural recreation, and personal problems . The agents can also help solve problems such as budgeting and rural recreation .
 Students in the junior high ; schools and the lower grades are I taught many skills and practices • which will be of benefit to them . Students in junior high; schools and lower grades will be taught skills, practices .
 Many a successful housewife can give credit to a 4-H Club and a club worker for the acquisition of basic household skills . A club worker can also be credited for the skills acquired by a 4H Club .
 Raymond Johnson, a retired mail carrier, lives in a small cabin with his wife . He says he is proud of his small but neat cabin in which he lives with her .
 He moved to the city after he retired from the Post Office . As a matter of fact, this is the main reason he moved .
 It was almost impossible to tell what thoughts Mr Johnson was entertaining, but I tell you I doubt that there is a more broadniinded' individual in tliis region . Mr Johnson's 'broadniind' individual was entertaining .
 One could be easily fooled by his rather rural appearance and speech, but if you knew him like I know him, you'd agree that he is quite a person . However, one could be very easily fooled .
 Evidently the old man hadn't lit the tobacco well the last time because it went out again . The tobacco went out of his tobacco well again, but he was able to get it back .
 He went through the same procedure as before, lighting the paper and transferring the fire to his pipe . He then transferred the fire onto his pipe, transferring it to the pipe .
 "The horn honking outside was that of my brother who had stopped by to pick me up on his way home from his job at the forestry lookout station . "Drop a word of cheer and kindness; in a minute you forget; But there's gladness still swelling, and there
 The seminar is being sponsored by ijy the Division of Business Administration, Dr. Dr. George Ogunlesi .
 These discussions are held from time to time, and are attended by college seniors, business and professional people . These discussions have been held in the U.S.
 The flu epidemic has struck a number of students and faculty members in Georgia . Persons who speak during the seminars are usually authorities on the topics being discussed .
 In less than a week after the general outbreak, the college infirmary had been filled to capacity with stricken dormitory students .
 Owing to quick action taken by the college doctor and nurse, the number of flu cases here have been kept at a minimum . Owing largely to the quick action, the flu cases in the college have been avoided .
 The Fraternity wishes to make it clear that this is not an Alpha project exclusively . The fraternity is not interested in Alpha Alpha Alpha .
 All able-bodied members of the college community are asked to donate blood . The college community is asked to give blood every day .
 Death Debaters and advisors examine plan of affirmative team after debate held here February 27 . Death debate was held in the first place in the U.S. state of origin . Debate was held on February 27 in New York City .
 The case for the establishment of such an economic community was presented by Clarence Holmes, first affirmative, and Prince Mcintosh, second affirmative . Clarence Holmes presented the case for such a community .
 Facts Revealed Concerning Credit Unions In an address on Thursday, February 14, at Savannah State . The team supported its stand on the issue mostly on the grounds that such an economic community alledgedly alledgeded .
 James R Coats, Regional Representative of the Bm-eau of Federal Credit Unions. Coats is a regional representative of the Federal Credit Union Unions .
 He said that it took only five persons to start such an organization, provided that they all would have a common bond of association .
 This association could be in the way of fraternal ties, membership in a labor union, a farm organization, a religious or church group, etc . The fee charged members is only 25 cents .
 The other basic requirement is that the members must all live in a well defined neighborhood, comunity, or rural district . would halt Communist expansion and would result in increased productivity and higher standards of living for all member nations .
 Bobby Hill and James Brown convincingly submitted arguments branding the proposal as unworkable, unrealistic, and would create a host of new problems . Both teams exliibited a clearcut mastery of the topic under discussion .
 At 7:30m. on the same date, Mannie Roberts and Verlyn Bell debated South Carolina State College . At the same time, the same topic was debated at the same venue .
 Savannah State Debating Society defeated South Carolina State in Columbia earlier during the season . Savannah State won the competition earlier this season .
 Delta Eta Chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc. has announced plans to initiate a blood-donating campaign at Savannah State College .
 The supply of blood in the city of Savannah is not up to a desirable level . It has been revealed that the supply of the city's blood has not been met with a high level .
 Delta Eta Chapter voted unanimously to undertake this humanitarian project . At a recent meeting, the brothers of Delta ETA Chapter voted to undertake the project .
 Johnnie Mae Hill, Budget Assistant, Savannah State College, died February 28 at her home . Hill was budget assistant at Savannah State University .
 Hill was a graduate of Savannah State College and had been employed at the college since January . Hill was also employed as a teacher at Savannah State .
 In June. 1962, upon the resignation of E A, Bertrand, she became Acting Comptroller until sickness made it impossible for her to serve . She served until sickness forced her to quit .
 She was a member of the First Bryan Baptist Church and the Keyboarders Secretarial Club, Savannah State College . She also attended Savannah State University and Savannah State .
 Etta Lee Smith, all of Savannah, Savannah; father, Wesley Smith and grandfather, John A Smith of Washington . Smith's parents, Wesley, Wesley and Etta Smith of Savannah; John A. Smith of D.C.
 Rho Beta Chapter of Zeta Plii Beta Sorority at Savannah State College observed Finer Womanhood Week February 28 to March 3 . Religious Emphasis Week Observed On Campus .
 Soror Georgia White, basileus of the chapter, presented the Anne W Jordan Memorial Prize to Louise Tarber, freshman girl with the highest average . Soror . Georgia White presented the prize to Louise .
 A special display of articles from Africa was exhibited through the courtesy of the many friends of Zeta Phi Beta Sorority . The display was exhibited by the friends of the Zeta fraternity .
 Savannah State College began its annual observance of Religious Emphasis Week on February 17 at 6 p,m, in Meldrim Auditorium during vesper services .
 The speaker was Reverend E, P, Quarterman, pastor of the Second Baptist Church in Savannah . Reverend Quarterman is a pastor at the church in Savannah, Georgia .
 Reverend Quarterman also served as Religious Consultant during the five-day celebration . Rev. Quarterman is a religious consultant for the event .
 Rabbi Solomon Starrels of Temple Mickve Israel represented the Jewish Chautauqua Society as a lecturer on Thursday, February 21 .
 The Rabbi lectured at 10:20m. in Wilk'ox Gymnasium as a participant in Religious Emphasis Week Program . The Rabbi spoke at 10.20m .
 Rabbi lectures on college campuses under the auspices of the Jewish Chautauqua Society . The organization creates better understanding of Jews and Judaism .
 Other activities throughout the week included a special AllCollege Assembly on Tuesday, February 19, in Meldrim Auditorium . Musical Interludes in Adams Hall, group singing and Prayer Meeting . Other Activities during week included musical interludes .
 Savannah State Men^s Glee Clnb Presents Annual Spring Concert Leaves For Germany . Mrs. Mrs. Glee leaves Savannah State for Germany .
 Lillie A, Powell, secretary in the Office of Public Relations for more than four years, recently resigned her position . She will join her husband, Sgt. Sgt. Powell, in the U.S.
 Powell received the B.S. degree in Business Education in 1958 . Powell was immediately employed as a clerk in the Office of Public Relations .
 Savannah State College Men's Glee Club presented its annual spring concert Sunday afternoon, March 3 in Meldrim Auditorium . Men's glee club under direction of James Thompson, Jr., presented its spring concert .
 Accompanying the group was Roland Allison, famed choir leader and professor of music at St. Louis Cathedral .
 Choirs and voice students whom he has trained have appeared on coast-tocoast telecasts and broadcasts . He has enjoyed a great degree of success as a choir director . Choirs, students and choir directors have performed on coast TV shows .
 Also accompanying the Glee Club was Walter L Green, head record librarian at North Carolina State Sanatorium .
 Mr Green is now, and has been for a number of years, a celebrated piano teacher .
 Green graduated from North Carolina College where he was an accompanist and assistant director of the North Carolina college Choir . Green was accompanist, assistant director and accompanist during his entire college career .
 He devotes countless hours to his music and gains wide recognition for his work . He is now head record librarian for the largest hospital in North Carolina Sanatorium system .
 A specially arranged exchange program between the well-known Morehouse College Men's Glee Club and the Savannah State College men's glee club have just been completed .
 Men's Glee Club has represented its Alma Mater for three years under Mr Thompson's direction .
 The Southern Regional Conference of Iota Phi Lambda Sorority will be held at Savannah State College . The conference will celebrate the 25th anniversary of the sorority .
 Nu Chapter's 25th Anniversary will be highlighted with the celebration of the celebration . Nu Chapter will be celebrating its 25th anniversary with the support of Nu Chapter .
 The public program will be held Friday . According to Mrs, Thelma T Lee, President of Nu Chapter, President, will be in attendance .
 Ossie Ware Mitchell, the National President, from Birmingham, Alabama will be the speaker . March 15. 8:00 p.m. at Savannah State College .
 Alabama, Florida, Tennessee, Georgia, and Georgia, Iota Phi Lambda Sorority was organized August 19 . The sorority is organized in four states .
 Nu Chapter recognizes the responsibility of it^ organization to all worthwhile community efforts and makes contributions of time, needed articles and money to many programs . Nu Chapter is proud of its contributions to the community .
 Georgia Association for Retarded Children and Savannah Council of Church Women . Savannah Councils Council of Churches Women. Georgia Association of Retards Children. Savannah Council for Retards. Church Women.
 Learning among us has come to be regarded too much as a means of hnprovlng one's material comforts . Learning is now regarded as a way of coping with the challenges of living in modern times .
 People do want money and are willing to work and to speculate In order to acquire wealth . People do not want to work, they want to speculate in order to obtain wealth .
 They crave entertainment and throng moving picture shows and Jazz palaces . In the feverish pursuit of such ideal pleasure, they crave entertainment . This is the perfect place to be entertained .
 Underneath these hectic tendencies of the age there are more determined movements in the direction of the things that make for a sound mind In a sound body .
 Poise — The ability to enter a room and to remain in a room without feeling that your arms and legs are insecurely fastened and that your clothes are wrong, This is a valuable asset in any walk of life .
 Voice Training — Everyone realizes the value of pleasant, welJ-modulated voice . Voice Training is essential for people with a pleasant voice .
 Spirit of Cooperation — The production of a play does not depend upon any one person, but upon everyone concerned, 4 . Spirit of cooperation — The . production of the play does . not depend on any one individual, but on everyone concerned . 4.
 There is no job where a knowledge of people is not of vital Importance. A Knowledge of Human Nature is of vital importance. A knowledge of human nature is vital to your job .
 The relation between employer and employee, between teacher and student, between parents and children depends on it, says the author . Character, motives, emotions, which is the foundation of all acting, must be studied .
 To put yourself into Juliet's place, think her thoughts, and understand Juliet on the stage is to understand many Julletish qualities off stage . To understand Juliet, Juliet's qualities are off stage, and to put yourself in her place, is to put you into her place .
 An appreciation, a love and an understanding of the arts develops the individual's taste for better things in life, students say . Students at this college might give a detailed account of the value and necessity of teaching the correlated arts .
 To strive to go adventuring along unlcnown paths; to seek to make real a dream; to find the moaning of that wondrously patterened thing called life . These are desires which even live in the heart of man, says author .
 Ages ago, great souls felt its urge and went forth on pilgrimages, each to the shrine of his ideal . The pilgrimage is a pilgrimage to a shrine of the ideal .
 All over the world, those in whom the vision dwells, go forth in like manner, giving to the quest the added joy of fellowship . And today, all over the . world, all of whom . the vision . dwells .
 Czechoslovakia was a communist country, but Czechs were not allowed to even debate at ours . Czechs are questioning why they were allowed to speak at a Communist university and not at a university . The Czech Republic is now one of the world's most populous countries .
 If there is any truth in what these "extremists" have to say, it is a grave error and contrary to the spirit of an academic institution to deny students the right to hear them. First, if there is truth in . what these ""extremist"" have to
 If the views of the extremists are untrue, UR students still are cheated by being denied the opportunity to hear them out . If they're not, they're cheated by not hearing them out, they should be allowed to speak to them .
 To label everything a Communist or Bircher says as untrue smacks of self-appointed infallibility and forfeits to the opponents of democracy many otherwise valid concepts . Besides, to label everything Communist or . Birchers says is untrue, it's self-defeats to opponents
 In a letter to the OSU Daily Barometer, he says that every few months a major catastrophe strikes a large portion of liumanity — that fateful day shortly after finals when students suddenly are faced with reality .
 Success 1963 is hard to come by after a term of sloughing, self delusionment and cramming . Success 1963 was 'Success 1963' and 'Success 1962'
 Immediately after the above rude awakening, honor student and flunky alike begin to make noises against our competlve grading system . Immediately after, honor students and flunks alike begin making noises against the system .
 Their arguments are quite sound, but only if they are taken out of context with our society . Their arguments will only be taken out context with society, they say .
 Life is one long series of competions. and it is because of this very competition that democracy can even exist. Life is a series of competitions. Democracy is one of the greatest challenges to democracy, says President Obama .
 "It's easier to compete and succeed against and equal than against something superior," he says . "Now, as every businessman knows, it's easier than to compete against and compete with something superior"
 In order to compete in a field, a company must have well-qualified personnel . A company must compete in order to have a well qualified personnel . This is a job that can be done by a company .
 "In order to be an individual of that capacity we must be able to stand on our mining who is most qualified to do a job," says the minister . "We must stand by our mining skills to be the best in the world," he says .
 Grades give an Indication of willingness to work and willingness to accept at least some of the rules of society . Grades are given out to students who work hard and accept society .
 Grades reflect not only intellectual ability but also the degree to which a person will apply this ability . Grades are based on a person's ability to apply that ability to the extent of this ability, rather than intellectual ability .
 We should abandon protectionism and instead teach Johnny how to compete, says CNN.com editor .
 It's not the grade that counts, it's what you learn. And, to those who say that it's not a grade, you learn . It's the most important thing you learn, says CNN.com .
 Let's abandon selfdelusion and go out and face that cruel, nasty world as it really is . Instead, abandon self-delusion, let's face the harsh reality of the world, it's not self-made . Let's go out to face the cruel and nasty world
 The struggle to win social equality for all has not been completely won . But the struggle for social equality is not completely won, says the BBC .
 Millions of people still dream . . . still ask . . for the right to be treated as human beings . Millions still dream and still fight for the rights of human rights .
 I hope that the students and administration will take some action to this effect very soon, Therman Thomas. I hope it will happen very soon .
 "Come out victorious" is the attitude of coming out victorious, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "We have to stand on our own feet and face the hard tasks," he says .
 We need young men and women who are well skilled to carry on government business and light the way to new formulas . We need them to carry out government business, says Mr Hammond .
 A person who steals his way through college by getting examinations will be the person who faces difficulty tomorrow, says the author . "A person who gets examinations will face difficulty tomorrow," he says . The author says .
 He may graduate from college with honors because he has stolen his way through by cheating on examinations . But he will be the same person who is turned down on a job because of a low score on the test .
 We should strive for honorable grades and also accomplish something from the class. We should want to strive for an honorable grade . We should also strive to strive to be honorable, not just honorable .
 You may not see it now but your grades determine the kind of future ahead of you, I DARE YOU to attend class reguiraly . A person who comes to college to lay around in the dormitory all day is wasting his time and somebody's money .
 A college student not only upholds his standards at school but he also upholds them wherever he goes . A student at the University of North Carolina University upholds the standards of a college student .
 Education is expensive, and it is left up to the individual to take advantage of his college career to make the best out of it . It is up to college students to make sure they get the best of their education .
 The world is rapidly changing day by day and it is calling for men and women with the ability to think, read, write, and express themselves to cope with these accompanying changes .
 President Kennedy ordered a total embargo on all Soviet shipments of offensive weapons to Cuba . The embargo was imposed in late October .
 B General Eisenhower refused to campaign for Republican candidates during the Cuban crisis . The Cuban crisis was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in Cuba .
 The party in control of Congress fared better than in any election since 1936 . D. C. D. was the party in charge of Congress for the first time since 1936. D
 The Council of State Chambers of Commerce analyzes the Administration's budget proposals for 1964 . Answers to these questions are given in a critical analysis of the Administration budget proposals .
 The study was made In Washington by Eugene F Rinta, a noted fiscal analyst . The study is made in Washington .
 The budget was found to be jeopardized by the size of the budget itself . The ""one truly heartening"" feature in the budget was the ""recognition by President Kennedy and his administration that . . . significant reduction of individual and corporate rates is essential for the attainment of . our
 The expenditure estimate for 1964 is S98. billion— which exceeds the highest budget total during World War 11 (the $98 billion total of fiscal 1945 1) The expenditure estimates for 1964 are S98 billion . The highest budget for 1964 was $98.2 billion .
 The 1964 total is S4. billion above the current estimates for 1963 and SI 1. billion higher than the 1962 fiscal year which ended last June 30 . The total is estimated to be about $4 billion more than current estimates .
 1964 expenditure total is 29 per cent above that of 1960, the last full budget year of the previous administration . Council analysis further notes that the 1964 expenditure . total is the last year's budget year, 1960 .
 That represents an annual increase of $5.5 billion over the four years since 1960 . That represents a $5 billion annual increase over the past four years .
 Defense and Space programs account for the entire increase of $4.4 billion . Defense and space programs account to the increase in spending .
 Rlnta analysis discloses that many categories of nondefense expenditures show a further rise in spending beyond the sharp increases in spending since 1960 .
 Congress voted to buy bonds to help pay for the U.N.'s special operations in the Middle East and in the Congo . 12.5% of Congress votes to buy the bonds, 12.6% to help fund the operations .
 Great Britain was admitted to membership in the Common Market in September . Great Britain is now a member of the European Common Market .
 By January 1, 1963, California had become the nation's most populous state . California was one of the most populous states in America .
 In both major leagues, balloting for the 1962 Most Valuable Player narrowed down to a slugging outfielder and a peppery Inflelder . The 1962 winner of both major league balloting was Bob Greene, who won the batting batting batting title .
 His poetry, full of strewed syllables but few capital letters, speaks of his romantic individualism . His poetry is full of . strews syllables . but few capitals letters .
 The Joy of Cooking has been the kitchen bible to legions of women for 28 years . Her book, The Joy Of Cooking, was published 28 years ago .
 She wrote gracefully ghostly short stories and a popular volume of memoirs called Out of Africa . C. C. She also wrote a popular memoirs about Africa .
 D Symbol of The Netherlands' resistance to Nazi aggression during World War H, she abdicated her throne to her daughter in 1948 after reigning as Queen for fifty years . Queen of the Netherlands was a symbol of the Dutch resistance during WWII .
 E. He gave to ihe world's largest auto-making firm the leadership of a supersdiesman and daring investor . E. E. gave ihe . He gave . ihe leadership of the world’s largest auto . firm .
 She was admired through much of the world for two generations . F. A. F. F was a philanthropist, author, politician, and First Lady .
 He was the second-generation head of a backslage family that owned and ran the nation's biggest chain of legitimate theaters . G. G. He was a second-gengen owner of the country's biggest theater chain .
 Murnace Coleman, freshman from Jacksonville, iierforms a creative dance on the Freshman Talent Show February 22 . Coleman is freshman at Jacksonville University .
 The $1 billion drop anticipated in farm price supports is largely accounted for by anticipated substantial sales in 1964 of cotton expected to be placed under price support .
 An indicated reduction of $160 million In Rural Electrification Administration and Farmers Home Administration loan programs is almost wholly accounted for by a bookkeeping device . The reduction is almost entirely accounted for .
 A drop of $248 million in net postal service outlays is accounted for by a lower postal deficit . Lower deficit due to the full year effect in 1964 of postal rate increases approved last year . Postal service spending dropped by $248 .
 Foreign economic and technical assistance shows a reduction of $145 million from 1963, but the fact is that these activities are being expanded by $278 million, or more than 10 per cent, .
 Railroad handkerkerchief blouses are the things that complete the denim ensembles . The trainee blouse is one of the things you need to wear to complete the outfit .
 These two items, denim and bright red blouses, are leading the casual fashion list this season .
 Two young lovers starry-eyed, there on a moonlit beach; Dreaming and oh, so satisfied as If Heaven were In their reach . Poem of the month: "Ecstasy" by Veronica Lynne Owens .
 Too filled with love to utter a word, they share their first embrace . As if by magic, music's heard that roaring waves couldn't even erase . Too full of love, they embrace .
 The ""fascinating rhythm"" gay. have both their souls possessed; . The art of dancing they convey, as they whirl with unusual zest .
 The atmosphere they did adore, and shared the splendor of their first kiss . There they would come forever more, for they found eternal bliss .
 Dreamy-eyed they said good-bye, to this Paradise by the sea; For. obviously. For. Obviously. For obviously, obviously. They said goodbye .
 The TIGER'S ROAR is February ■ March, 1963 . Vivian Brown won the best dressed girl contest .
 :i national women's fashion magazine, annually sponsors a contest to find the ten best-dressed co-eds on the campuses of American colleges and universities . Junior Artvella DoaiiCh, Sophomore r GLAIVIOIIK MAGA/IND, is Junior Art
 Candidates who win in local contests are entered into the national competition . Candidates from all over the world are entered in the competition .
 Frankie Strickland was chosen by a majority of students at Savannah State College who cast ballots in the election to be the best-dressed girl on campus . Frankie is a senior tailoring and dressmaking major .
 She participates in the Home Economics Club, the Girls' Glee Club, and enjoys sports and planning social affairs . She is also a member of the Glee club and enjoys planning social events .
 Frankie Strickland and Lottie Shellman had a run-off after the total number of votes received by the two candidates was so close to being equal, it was decided to have a special election . Since there were twelve candidates, there were 12 candidates, and since the total
 The contestants were nominated by an all-college student committee composed of presidents and officers of the various student organizations on campus .
 In addition to the eight candidates whose pictures appear on this page, there are four others .
 Anna Cooper, Barbara Davis, Mattie Lattimore and Delores Wilson are featured in this week's Top 5 PBS special . They include Anna Cooper and Barbara Davis . The show is a chance to learn more about the lives of these women .
 This year is the first year Savannah State has participated in the contest . This year's contest was held in Savannah, Georgia .
 Gwendolyn Buchanan and Lottie Fussell served as chairman and co-chairman, respectively, of the contest . The contest was held in New York City, New York .
 Expenditures for the conduct of foreign affairs indicate a reduction of $50 million . This is more than accounted for by the absence in 1964 of a oneshot $100 million outlay for United Nations bonds in 1963 .
 Rinta: Budget reductions would appear to provide a weak foundation on which to base increases in nondefense activities . He says expenditures for purposes otlier than defense, space and interest are being held at the 1963 level . The budget message stated in the President's budget message, as
 Analysis further pointed to a substantial increase in the number of Federal civilian personnel . The analysis also pointed to an increase in civilian personnel in the federal government .
 Coxmcil study noted that the Kennedy Administration will have increased Federal civilian employment by more than 229,000 in three years and five months .
 Analyst Rinta notes that the President's tax program places primary emphasis on rate reductions designed to increase demand and. thus, energize the economy . Analyst says the tax program is aimed at increasing demand and energizing economy .
 On this basis, a balanced budget could be expected within a year or two, says David Cameron .
 You may obtain a copy of the Council analysis by writing to the Council of State Chambers of Commerce .
 Committee calls for U.S. colleges and universities to re-examine the philosophy, objectives and operation of their foreign student programs . Evaluation of Foreie:ii Student Programs Called For By Committee .
 Committee on the Foreign Student in American Colleges and Universities issued a 26-page report . Report tells schools to spend more money, cooperate more closely with governments and agencies which sponsor such students . Report: Colleges must place international education ""into its proper perspective""
 The urgency of the need to improve foreign student programs is underlined by the recent increase in the number of such students, Committee says .
 The schools must strive for greater cooperation among themselves and with governments, foundations, international organizations and other agencies which sponsor foreign students .
 Admission policies must be revised to put emphasis on admitting those students whose basic objectives can be best served . Admission policies need to be revised, says the author .
 Committee: Candidates' potential contributions to their countries' development should be considered . Committee: Candidate's contributions to country's development should also be considered for admission .
 The authors suggest that a regional cooperative basis for English training may be the answer in many cases . They suggest that regional cooperative English training could be the solution .
 Orientation programs for foreign students must not only help the student master the details of living on the American campus, but must also look to the longrange objective of exposing the student to American life to give him an understanding of social and political institutions .
 Report: Closer cooperation between academic advising and personal counseling must be established . Report: Academic advising, personal counseling need to be closer together . The report also calls for closer cooperation between advising and counseling .
 Nathaniel Watson, a sixth grader at Hodge Elementary School, imitated Jackie Gleason, and Melvin Watson, fifth grader who imitated Frank Fontaine .
 City of 120,000 people has sprung up overnight on vacant land . It is the largest city in the world, growing from a population of just over 100,000 . The city was built overnight on empty land .
 City of 120,000 souls has sprung up during the four hours it took you to explore the first one . Imagine pushing your way through the crowded supermarkets, churches, and theaters to the city's outskirts .
 A third mecca has sprung up before you could even reach the outskirts of the second city . Imagine walking through the first city to discover that a new mecca had sprung up in the second .
 New people are coming into the world faster than you could jostle your way through the crowded streets which contain them . New people will be arriving in the world as soon as possible, and they are coming in .
 The answers to these questions would appear to lie in the rate of advancement we make In nutrition and In agricultural practices during the years aliend .
 Recent work in nutrition Is resulting in many interesting new food products which should help feed tomorrow's buigeonlng population .
 Neither tastes or smells like fish, yet has much food value . Among them is flshflour, which neither tastes or tastes like fish .
 Press-cake is the residue left after oils have been taken out of seeds . It provides nibblers with a tasty morsel made from peanuts .
 In Guatemala City, the Institute of Nutrition for Central America has made a drink called Incaparina . The Institute has made the drink in Guatemala City .
 Incaparina. made of corn, sorghum, and cottonseed meal costs only three cents a glass . Three glasses equals three glasses of milk in nutrition .
 Agricultural Advances Most Important in meeting tomorrow's food needs will undoubtedly have to come from improved agricultural practies . Agricultural Advises Most Important as these nutritional gains are .
 Americans tend to take for granted their natural resources, good health, and wholesome food as a part of their heritage . Americans are inclined to take the natural resources and good health for granted .
 Little thought is given to the constant battle taking place in the production of food and other resources and the protection of health from opposing natural forces— pests .
 Pesticides are the important weapons used against insects, diseases, weeds and rodents . Pesticide is the most important weapon in the battle against insects and diseases .
 Scientists have recognized the importance of pesticides and have reported their conclusions . Scientists have also reported their conclusion .
 It is difficult to realize that our forefathers suffered from famine and that many deaths were caused by pests in those early days . It was difficult to . realize that . many deaths caused by . pests in the early days of the famine and famine .
 As recently as 1874, grasshoppers caused damage so great In our Middle West that Congress called It a national disaster . Congress called it a 'national disaster' in 1874 . Grasshoppers have caused damage to the Middle West .
 Insect-borne diseases and other pests destroy their food supply and threaten their health . Insects-borne disease and other pest diseases destroy food supply .
 Great strides have been made during the past 50 years as a result of the use of a broad spectrum of pesticide chemicals, according to Bear . Research Is in progress which promises even greater progress, he said .
 He cites the fact that many new developments are now underway and others are still but a gleam in scientists' eyes .
 There are many plant diseases caused by viruses, and as yet there are no chemical means for controlling them . As yet, there is no means of controlling them.
 It seems feasible that controls for this purpose might be developed . It is possible that controls could be developed for this type of purpose .
 A chemical sterilent which would cause insects to lay Infertile eggs is still another idea which it is believed might have merit in man's battle to control farm pests .
 Direct and capital grants to accredited colleges and universities represent only one phase of Gulf's Aid to Education program . Gulf's aid to education program is only one of several phases of program .
 Gulf Merit Scholarships to children of employees and annuitants; employee giftmatching to Independent, nontax supported colleges; department assistance grants; graduate fellowships; and faculty salary supplementation grants . Other sections of the plan include Gulf Merits Scholarships for children and annuants
 Population boom can readily be seen In this illustration . Population boom is seen in this illustration of population boom in 1830s .
 College men have taken the raincoat out of the strictly foul-weatheicalegoiy-nnd turned it into an allweather fashion . College men are turning it into a fashion trend .
 Today's young man uses his versatile raincoat as an all-around, all-purpose coat .
 A new raincoat is available for sale in the U.S. this Spring . There are a variety of raincoats available .
 The wurd for this year's raincoat is brcvity~~ they measure knee length at their longest, several inches shorter in the newest models . The latest models measure knee-lengths at the longest and measure knee .
 Set-in sleeves are also on the scone, and fly-front button closures are the rule . Fly-front buttons are also the rule, and set-ins are also included .
 Mfi-st Spring raincoats arc fitted with highb:d collars and have slash pockets . Spring raincoat is fitted with a high b:d collar .
 In some areas of the country, notably the East and West coasts, the continentrd influence is showing in raincoats with all-around or half belts .
 Most rainwear this Spring will be seen either in very dark or very light shades . Black and white rainwear will be worn in dark and white .
 Black, dark olive and dark blue are the colors on the nether end of the rainwear spectrum . Light natural shades, off-white, and pale olive provide the bright spots .
 A dressy jet-black is a smart bet if you've got a few formal occasions coming up . It's a dressy black suit for formal occasions .
 Pattern patterns are on the move in popularity, particularly in muted plaids and checks .
 Soft, subdued patterns in contrast with the stark dark and light solids . They're soft and subdued patterns . Soft patterns are soft .
 Colorful stripes are the keynote in the lightweight self-liner raincoats . Big bright plaid is the idea in heavier, ?ip-in linings for Winter-Wear rain coats .
 The latest rainwear in Spain is the latest in a long-running trend .
 They're predominantly polyester and cotton blends, all cotton poplin and cotton twill, polyesters and wool combinations, and all-wool gabardines . Polyester and wool blends are mostly polyester, cotton blends .
 FADED BLUE DENIM... is the big color in rain jackets this Spring . Water repellency and stain resistance have been made in the light colors .
 Zippered with plenty of room at the waist and oversized deep slash pockets in which to bury your hands . Ideally casual for campus wear, they're zippered up against the weather .
 Generally' they're plain-bottomed, but some have parka-type drawstring below the waist .
 Linings run from light cotton blends and laminated plaids bonded to the inside of the shell to deep fleece and quilts for extra warmth . Linings range from cotton blends to quilts and fleece quilts .
 The HOBO HAT has made its mark in rainwear this Spring .
 A simple cone of processed cotton, it reverses to a felt-like material for fairweather wear . The cone is a simple cotton-based material .
 It can be turned, pulled, yanked and folded into any shape that suits you . It can also be turned and pulled, pulled and folded .
 Next month's feature is a look at the newest in colors, cuts and fabrics for Spring and Summer of '63 . When you change your mind, change your hat with a few twists of the wrist .
 The group sang compositions by noted composers such as Tschaikowsky, Handel . They sang compositions such as Handel's Handel and Tschchowsky .
 Featured among the compositions were the wellknown ""Gloria"" by Antonio Vivaldi sung in Latin . The well-known ""gloria" by Vivaldi was sung by the composer .
 Troy Hickman, trumpet, Kenneth Swindell, trumpet; Paul Johnson, trombone; and Melvin Washington, baritone, all from the Instrumental field of music . Accompaniment was provided by a brass ensemble composed of Troy . Hickman's trumpet ensemble .
 Richard Welling Student Government Achievement Competition was established in 1957 by the National Self Government Committee . Student Councils Invited To Enter Contest .
 The Competition is designed to give suitable recognition to outstanding student government activities at USNSA member schools . The Competition aims to recognise outstanding student Government activities .
 The Competition was named in honor of Richard Welling '1858-1946 . Welling was the founder of the National Self-Government Committee . The competition was named after Welling, founder of National Self Government Committee .
 Mr Welling developed a strong interest in student self-government as a young man . Through his work in municipal reform he became involved in student reform .
 Entries must consist of a report on the program being submitted, plus supporting materials as may be helpful to the judges . Entries are required to include pictures, press releases, letters, descriptions and other supporting materials .
 The report should be typewritten on 8'^ X 11 white paper, double spaced, and contained in an appropriate binder . Report should be typed in 8' ^ X 11 x 11 x 10 white paper .
 Judging USNSA and the National SelfGovernment Committee, Inc. select a qualified panel of judges . Judging is the work of the National Security Council and the Self-Government Committee .
 Baritones are Harvey Bryant, William Day, Lawrence Hutchins, James Newberry, Leroy Stanley and Willie Turner . Willie Turner is the baritone baritone .
 The $17,271 total is more than double the amount given the previous year . The money was donated more than twice the amount that was given last year .
 Gulf Marketing Department representatives will present the grants to presidents of the 34 institutions on February 20, Thirly-four Direct Grants . The direct grants are given by Gulf in an effort to improve the economic well-being of privately operated colleges .
 Dr. John Seabrook Huston-Tillotson College, Austin Dr. M, K, Curry, Jr, Jr. Bishop College, Dallas Dr, John J Seabronok, Texas, is a member of the Dallas College of Medicine .
 'The funds are distributed annually in accordance with a formula designed to promote a balanced educational program in each school'
 The Oglethorpe Reporter — Atlanta, Georgia Superior J, F Beavers — College Park . The Beavers are College Park.
 The Carver Mirror — Albany, Georgia Superior . The Johnson Explorer — Sol C Johnson, Savannah Superior High School . The Hornet — Lee Street School, Blackshear Excellent COLLEGE NEWSPAPERS The Pen — St. Augustine's College, Raleigh .
 The Atom Smasher — Sol C Johnson, Savannah Superior . The Wildcat — Price High, Atlanta, Georgia Excellent . The Fairmontontan — Fairmont High School, Griffin, Ga. N, C .
 Director Publications were evaluated and judged by the staff of the Savannah Morning News . Director Publications are judged by staff members .
 He was the valedictorian of his high school class and salutatorian of his college class . He was graduated summa cum laude from law school .
 Attorney Gadsden has been active in many civic and social organizations . He has served as a judge for more than 30 years .
 33 pages of regular 8ij"" X 11"" size, the booklet touches on several areas of mathematics and somewhat resembles a professional manuscript in that clear, concise graphic and verbal illustrations appear on each topic in a stepby-step order .
 To undertake a project such as this would be quite easy, but to get the finished product ""off the press"" definitely requires certain amounts of sound-thinking and the employment of organizational skills .
 PresiSavannah State College began celebrating its Sixteenth Annual Men's Festival on Friday . Payne plaque and congratulations from Presi. State College .
 The Men's Festival Committee voted to cast aside tradition in this year's program by beginning its activities on Friday instead of Sunday . The committee voted for the change in tradition .
 The activities began with the presentation of the Morehouse College Men's Glee Club, under the direction of Albert T, Perkins, on Friday .
 North Carolina spoke in observance of Religious Emphasis Day on Sunday, April 7 at 6:00 P M.. in Meldrim Auditorium . North Carolina .
 The idea of writing a book was conceived and it was agreed that the undertaking would be a Joint effort on the part of all members of the class, certain committees were formed . Mr Osborne H Brown, Director of Public Relations and Field Consultant Underlines .
 The ""Thinking Committee" was the core of the project, and its members were charged more or less with the responsibility of steering the undertaking through its various steps of development .
 This was done by taking suggestions from class members at regular intervals and allowing them from time to appraise the progress of the entire effort .
 Of course there was typing to be done, proofs to be read, and records to be kept . Of course, there were typing to do, and proof to be made .
 The students carried the project from start to finish with almost no outside help . Sylvia E. Bowen. assistant professor of mathematics and the instructor of the functional math class last quarter .
 Federal Government through the National Defense Education Act of 1958 has made provisions for 89 foreign language institutes in the country .
 50,000 elementary school children are now learning foreign languages in Georgia . Not one of Georgia's three Negro state-supported colleges have been approved for a summer institute .
 Georgia spoke at the All-College Assembly for students and faculty April 11 . April 11 is celebrated annually as Education Day .
 Also presented was the coveted plaque designating as ""Man of the Year" The plaque is the student whose achievements and contributions to the school and community have been most significant . The award was presented at this hour .
 This recognition is one of the major highlights of the annual celebration . The recognition is a major highlight of the celebration .
 The aims of the Men's Festival are to promote finer manhood, help prepare men to shoulder the heavy responsibilities of a democratic society through participation In wotthwhile activities, and to help .
 Second place went to Charles McMillan, a native of Savannah, who Is majoring in mathematics here at Savannah State .
 The successful candidate must have received votes from three-fourths of the men voting . In order to win the award, the winner must receive three-fiveths of votes from the men .
 Norman B Elmore, senior, Bobby Hill, senior; Lawrence Hutchins, junior; Leander Merritt, junior, and Charles McMillan, senior . The six men nominated for the award were Norman B . Elmore and Bobby Hill .
 Final activity of the celebration was a luncheon-meeting in Adams Hall at noon Thursday, the 11th .
 Honorary Chairman, Bobby Hill and Otis Cox, General Secretary, Otis G Cox and Dean Nelson R Freeman, Faculty Adviser . Payne, who served as Honorary chairman; . Hill, Hill, Cox, Cox and Freeman were General Secretary . Freeman was Dean of the University of
 Group sang numbers in German during assembly program sponsored by Department of Modern Languages . Group sang songs in German at assembly program .
 An attempt by the faculty advlaer of the Sixteenth Annual Men's Festival to free the election of the Man of The Year from the usual lobbying effects of various campus factions is certainly a step in the right direction .
 In spite of these efforts it seems that the men still continued) to put fraternal ties above what is supposed to be the real purpose and objective of the yearly celebration .
 From the outset, even within one hour after a policy of non-crallsm was called for by the adviser, the men proceeded to elect officers in a manner very much like what has thus far been the custom— along fraternal lines .
 The election of student council officers and campus queens will take place within a few weeks, we should be especially careful . In seeing to it that the most qualified persons are nominated and elected .
 One very strong advocate of the tactics used in campus politics during past elections defends the practice on grounds that his fraternal brothers are ""always most qualified" otherwise they would not be backed by the rest of the brothers . He did not stop there, but went on to say that under no
 The whole situation is akin to the present-day and quite famous philosophy of one group which holds that the members of another group are always incompetent and unable to hold positions where different kinds of skills and abilities are necessary .
 If there is one thing that campus politics at Savannah State needs, it is to be cleansed of nil such outside effects as the situation described in the preceding paraf;-aphs .
 The calibre of conversation that transpires within a group is a clear indicator of the character of tlie people within . Bobby L Hill is the author of a new book, "Bobby L Hill"
 Conversation is an equal measure of intelligence, success, and potentiality . Conversation is a measure of success, potentiality, and intelligence .
 The mere fact that college students spend more time among students than instructors is a vote for the importance of high calibre conversation in student circles . Students spend most time with students than with instructors .
 The discussion carried on by students while eating, resting, or waiting is of paramount importance in today's ""Push-button"" oriented world .
 The value of tliis conversation is coupled with the value of your dollar, your futui-e, and even your degree received from Savannah State College . Savannah State is a small college in Savannah, Georgia .
 At Savannah State College, one seeking an Educational and rewarding conversation by browsing in the library or sitting in the college center; or visiting in one of the dormitories, bends an ear .
 Where negative effects are inevitable a best defense is knowledge of the problems, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 "To acquire this important knowledge, one must read, study, and exchange ideas," says author . To acquire this knowledge, read and study, exchange ideas, he says .
 This ""idea exchange"" is best facilitated by informal discussion or conversation with those of equal or greater knowledge . This is best for those of greater knowledge to discuss ideas .
 Savannah State College students have an urgent and collective obligation to alter, change, and shift their modes of conversation . Savannah State students need to change, change and shift modes of conversations, says the author .
 No longer can fruitless gab passing across the table tops in the ''Rec"" degrade and devalue the entire institution . "Rec"" will no longer be able to devalue and degrade the institution," says D.C. professor .
 "We cannot afford to discuss trivial issues when pertinent ones govern our very existence," says President Obama . "We are not talking trivial issues. We are not discussing trivial issues," says Obama .
 Instructors, students, and organizations must raise the question . Instructors must raise and answer the question.
 "Aufuil 21" is the first edition of this year's Collegiate Press Association's prestigious Aufuils . The Collegiaia Press Association is a member of the Boston College Press Association .
 The American Bar Association and the Southeastern Lawyers Association in which he serves as a member of the Executive Board . Gadsden is associated with the American Bar . Association and Southeastern lawyers Association .
 Mr, Gadsden was the first chairman of the Political Guidance Committee . He was chairman of a group which has successfully given direction to the Negro ballot in Chatham County .
 He has run for office on two occasions — in 1962 for the Chatham County Democratic Executive Committee, and in 1963 for State Senator from the Third District of Georgia . He polled approximately 10,000 votes in 1962 .
 He is married to the former Miss Ida Jenkins of Savannah . They have two cliildren — a daughter .
 Instructors will not be replaced by mechanical devices in spite of the many advantages to which these instruments can be used . lC.ml„„n;l Iron, Pagf I)
 In addition to these four schools, he lias attended Middlebury College Language School . He also went to Middlebury college Language School.
 For three days the girls wait for the night of the big dance featuring the famous jazz band . Gwendolyn Buchannan: The girls wait three days for the dance .
 Their escorts arrive and they can hardly wait to get on the dance floor . The couple's escorts arrived at the end of the night .
 One reason they put men's faces on money is that women are satisfied just to get their hands on it . One reason is that men are more interested in putting men on money than women .
 In a conversation out of class, one can't get in a word for the person who has an answer for every question, knows about everything and is always right . "One can't say a word" to the person with an answer to every question and always right.
 "This very person knows nothing and hears nothing. About the subject matter in class, this very person know nothing," she said . "I'm not going to talk about it. About it, I'm not talking about it," she added .
 Students line up in line to register for school in New York City . Students from around the world take part in the event .
 When he finally reaches the window after standing for approximately a half hour, the window is closed . The window was closed when he reached it .
 President Kennedy recommended the formation of a national service corps to meet pressing American social needs . President Is Seekiii«>; National Service Corps 'From the Peace Corps Volunteer'
 Response Predicted Findings of the task force indicate tliat American citizens — from college students to retired persons — would respond to a call to increase the potency of volunteer organizations .
 National service corpsmen would go only to communities to which they had been invited . Like the Peace Corps Volunteers abroad, they would be limited to what they were invited to .
 The age minimum for national service corpsmen would be 18, They would serve for one year, with an option to sign up for a second . They would be expected to plan and organize support programs .
 Interest in inviting service corpsmen has come from several sources, among them . Interest has been expressed in the past by the military community .
 The Gallup Poll recently reported that 62 per cent of persons questioned on the issue believed that Congress should make funds available for a national service corps . The poll found that 62 percent of those questioned believe Congress should provide funds for the corps .
 I have heard and I am sure you have too many undesirable things that your fellow students are planning to do during our forthcoming election period to make it everything but successful . I have also heard and . I'm sure you are planning and I'm not sure if you have any undesirable things to
 We must learn now that we, as college students, can participate in an election without slinging mud and maligning those who are running for office . We need to learn now, we must learn that we can't slinge mud, maligning candidates .
 Elmer Thomas was tired and I'm sure he was too after the long walk up to Sheppard's Lake . Would On a 50-MHv Hikt on a 50m Hikt Hikt .
 Raymond Johnson sat down, took off his shoes, and paused for a minute to rest his weary feet . Raymond Johnson sits down, taking a break from his work .
 His eyes moved about from the trees in bloom in an easterly direction, toward the clearing in the trees where the Sun was about to rise . While sitting there, the sparkling water on the lake caught his attention .
 Many great minds have pondered over the question of whether or not somebody's up there pulling the strings or not .
 Some say that he started the wheels to turning and then left the whole thing alone . Some say he started it and left it all alone . Others say he left it alone .
 Those who say that this all began with some reason or another say it began with an accident . Just a long chain of actions and reactions stemming from some physical occurance eons of centuries ago .
 To illustrate his point, suppose I was a gangster by profession, and I am just casually walking around in the bank building . To illustrate my point, imagine I was in a bank building in a gangland by profession . The bank building is a bank in the heart of the city
 It seems that after I 'size up the situation' I might or might not decide to rob the place . It seems after I "size up" the situation, I might . might . not decide . not to rob a bank .
 In fact it seems that there would be an endless number of things I might decide to do, maybe even apply for a loan . "There would be a lot of things to do," he says . "I would like to be able to get a loan," he adds .
 A turtle appeared from behind a tree and moved along past us . Just then a turtle appeared behind a nearby tree .
 Mr Johnson picked up an old bottomless tin tub to encircircle the creature . Mr Johnson then encircled the creature with a bottomless tub .
 If you answer in the negative, then, I am confident that no one else would either. If you answered the question, then you would either agree or not . If you do not, you will be surprised by the results .
 Savannah State College election period takes place this month . Let's do everything humanly possible to make this the cleanest and most fruitful election in the history of the college .
 Students remember to vote for the candidates by their qualifications and not for biased and maligned reasons . Students should vote for candidates not to be biased or maligned for reasons .
 If your friends are in contention for the office of Student Council President or ""Miss Savannah State College"" and you don't think they are qualified, cast your all-important ballot . Cast your votes for the persons whom you feel will represent you and project the college's image .
 No definite answer can be given to that question, but it does appear that collegians are pretty resilient . No one can give a definitive answer, of course .
 James Frltschcl, during a recent convocation program performed Frank Tlrro's ""An American Jazz Mass."" a work wlilch takes the classical liturgy of the church and puts It In a jnzz idiom . James Frrchcl performed Frank
 Few convocations, including an appearance of a member of the Russian Embassy, caused as much comment and discussion . Few convocation convocations have had as much discussion and discussion as many .
 College convo officials decided to get a sampling of student opinion from students . The convo was so much stir that it invited students to take a look at the issue .
 A questionnaire was drawn up and handed out at random to about a tenth of the 1,130 student body . It was handed out to students at the University of Cambridge .
 A Touch of All Artist Work of Tompkins High Students Impressive to Intern Teacher . Students were asked to check out three alternative art projects .
 The Wolverine football team is currently proving that talent at their school is not an ephemeral attribute . In particular that is noted for its outstanding football team, the Wolverine Football team is at the top of the list .
 Tompkins High School has a "touch of an artist" at work . During this Spring season, visible evidence can be seen of the artist's work .
 A modest male student presently enrolled at the school is certainly indicative of the preceding classic phrase . The school has a reputation for its modest male students .
 This is mainly true because he draws with the skill, depth and insight of a professional trained artist even though he is young in years . This is due to the skill and depth of a professionally trained artist .
 Even a cursory glance at some of his work reveals that his lines, dimensions and profiles have method in their arrangement .
 "Above all, his specialty seems to be accentuation and intricate detailing"
 English Literature bulletin board display in one of his English Literature classes .
 The bulletin board depicts some of the leading characters in The Canterbury Tales . The display is sketched in cutout form and each character seems to be animate and able to communicate with viewers .
 This young man's originality and uniqueness, by no means climaxes with his drawing ability . However, this young man, however, has originality, uniqueness .
 This fact is exemplified by his original bulletin board title . This fact of his original, quite appropriate, was exemplified in his original title .
 "It is apparent that with each passing year this young man's ability In art has become refined and polished like a fine jewel. It is apparent . With each passing . year, this young . man's talent In art is refined, polished and polished .
 One hundred and twenty high school students attended the Chemistry Career Day program sponsored by the chemistry department . The program was designed to acquaint high school seniors with the many opportunities available in the field of chemistry .
 Leander Merritt, John Kight, Ida Dukes and Theresa Smart spoke briefly to the visitors on what the department had to offer, jobs in one and to add any remarks they wished .
 As music it is alright, but as an aid to worship it contributes little or nothing; 2, I'm all for it. As music is alright . As music . It contributes little . or nothing to worship. 2, he says, as music .
 It repeated too often it would not only become meaningless, but even monotonous because of the same rhythm, tones, etc.."" the same criticism frequently leveled against present forms of ritual. However, it repeated too many times it would become meaningless .
 Of the 67 colleges who checked number one. only one felt the ""Mass"" was sacrilegious . Only one of the 67 . colleges that checked out number one felt that the Mass was sacrelegious.
 Many agreed that It could be used only on special occasions or that it would be a long time before churches would accept it . Many agreed it could only be used for special occasions .
 A few of those who indicated they were all for the new liturgy also had some reservations . The majority felt it had something new to say; something important to add to the worship experience .
 More than one-third of the nation's publicly supported community junior colleges are found in three states . Florida, California and Texas are among the three states where most are found .
 Most of the privately supported ones are located in eastern and southern states . Most of them are privately supported states .
 Private junior colleges in the South place major emphasis on academic courses with little or no emphasis on terminal programs . Private junior college in the south often places major emphasis in academic courses .
 They are dependent on income from tuition, contributions and endowments . The university is dependent on tuition and contributions from tuition .
 Public junior community colleges should include terminal, technical, vocational programs, many kinds of adult education and community services . Public junior colleges should also include terminal and technical programs, says John Sutter .
 Community colleges, if available in the South, could offer post-high school education to students . Community colleges could offer opportunities for students of all types who will or can't attend college away from home .
 There is conclusive evidence that the percentage of high school graduates who continue their education is much larger in communities where community colleges are located than in those where they are not .
 Career Day ended with a tour of the chemistry department by the seniors, after which they were served lunch In the school cafeteria .
 Nearly one hundred students from 13 African countries have now left Bulgaria . The latest figures compiled by the Coordinating Secretariat of National Unions of Students .
 The students left as a result of racial discrimination, poor living conditions and the Bulgarian government's refusal to allow the formation of an AllAfrican Students' Union lAASU) in the country .
 These include 28 from Ghana, 23 from Kenya, 7 from Ethiopia, 2 from Guinea, one each from Angola, South West Africa .
 At least 11 people from Nigeria, 6 from Somalia, 5 from Togo, 4 from Niger and 3 from Mall Mall . Tunisia and Zanzibar, and at least 11 from Nigeria and six from Somalia .
 Unconfirmed reports Indicate that 3 students from Algeria have left as well . 3 students are believed to have been from Algeria .
 A number of other students are reliably reported to wish to leave, providing arrangements can be made for their departures .
 Women's waistlines are in disputed fervor over exactly where you coeds' waistlines should be .
 The new faslilon item is fabulous and provocative . But, there is one new item they all agree is fabulous .
 The sassy, swirly, dream-of-a-a ""Shift"" that you've heard so mucli about. That highfashion item just happens to b^^ the sassy and swirgy, dream of a "Shift" The high-fashion item is
 Fashionably speaking, tlie new ""Shift"" is the answer to every female's prayer .
 The easy, flowing lines of the ""Shift"" make it possible for it to be worn by all figures and heights . Just tlilnk of it, , , , or . The easy-to-be-wearing lines make it easy to wear .
 The ""Shift"" dress is designed mainly for leisure, casual and street wear . This group is composed of flare, wrap around skirts complete with narrow sashes to flatter your waist .
 A kaleidoscopic color sclieme from which you have to select from . Adding to the fashion appeal of the swingy, new garmet is the kaleidoscope color choice .
 It may be purchased in seersucker, denim, poplin, hopsacking sailcloth, terrycloth. linen, twill, gingham. cord and synthetic blends .
 Most of them aro cut in the famous A-line that accentuates and complements .s youthful figures . Most of the A-lines are cut in a shape that accentuate and complement.s youthful .
 This new look in the casual skirt has invaded college campu.ses everywhere and caught on like wild fire . The casual skirt is a look that has been embraced by college students everywhere .
 Other outstanding features of these skirts are tlie self-belts, slim, leather belts and narrow, matching cords . Self-belted skirts are slim, slim and leather belts .
 Wrap-around skirt also features hidden beauty . In addition to being attractive on tlie outside, wrap-around skirts also feature hidden beauty features .
 Tlijs merely means that some of the skirts are lined with bright cotton material . Some of the women's skirts have been lined with cotton material.
 They also feature a minimum of buttons that don't quite make it to the hemline . The most expensive item of clothing available in the U.S. is priced at $99 .
 To complete the casual outfit, pert and smart little blouses have been introduced . Pint and smart blouses are now available in the UK .
 They feature the soft convertible collar and cuffed, three-quarter length sleeves . The soft convertible sleeves are soft convertible and three-quarters length sleeves.
 The perfect ingredients for all of you coeds to blend to achieve a supreme delight in the fashion world this Spring .
 First year Woodrow Wilson Fellowships awarded to 1,475 college students . 1,154 others were honorable mention . Recruiting drive for future college teachers culminated today .
 Each Fellowship covers tuition and fees for the first year at the graduate school of the Fellow's choice, plus a stipend of $1,500 and dependency allowances .
 Sir Hugh Taylor, president of the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation, said in making the announcement . The announcement was made in honor of President Wilson .
 Norman Elmore, SSC Senior Englisii Major, received ""Honorable Mention"" in this year's competition . Norman B Elmore was awarded an Honorary Mention in the competition .
 This is the largest number of winners chosen in any one year thus far . The winners have been chosen as 'good bets' for college teaching . They are chosen as "good bets" for college teachers .
 We hope they will follow that career, yet we do not hold them to such a firm commitment . We do not expect them to follow that path, but we do .
 Seminar in Elementary Curriculum is a course designed to acquaint students with ideas, methods, and techniques used in teaching the Language Arts, Social Studies, Arithmetic, and Science in the elementary school .
 The picture below shows a group of students dramatizing an excerpt from the adventures of Robin Hood . The picture was taken in the Seminar in Elementary Curriculum class .
 This Project was one of six planned by the students under the direction of the instructor to acquaint the students with various types of children's literature to enable the prospective elementary school teachers to teach the Language Arts more effectively . The students planned the project to prepare the students for future teachers .
 Students are doing creative writings and developing poetry files . Language Arts students are also doing creative writing projects .
 Students pretend that they are actually a faculty in order to develop more knowledge and skills in all phases of the course . The students pretend to be a faculty .
 Their classroom appears to be one that may be actually found in an elementary school . Their classroom may actually be a classroom found in a school .
 The faculty has inservice teachers' meetings where all of the teachers, at different grade levels, compete in presenting materials in a unique fashion .
 These presentations are based on extensive reading and research in each of the four phases of the course .
 The student,s in Education 341, under the guidance of the instructor, Mrs. Mrs. Johnson, was awarded a gold medal for her efforts .
 Those winning honorable mention may receive alternate awards from universities or other sources . Their names are now being circulated among graduate schools of the U.S. and Canada .
 Dissertation Fellowships to former Woodrow Wilson Fellows in the Humanities and Social Sciences . Fellows must give evidence they can complete requirements for the Ph.D. in four years or less . Dissertions are given out to former Wilson fellows .
 Eberle stated that the members of the Regulations Commitee were very anxious for . procedures be changed to provide for new and unifying campus political alignments . The committee would be glad to assist in any way possible .
 As an individual, Dr. Eberle said that he intended to recommend to the Regulations Committee, to the administration, and to the faculty that student elections be abolished unless there is immediate drastic improvement in the carrying out of elections .
 Harold Taylor is the former president of Sarah Lawrence College . He was the college's first president . He is now the president of the college in New York .
 Taylor first became interested in experimental education and in the modern educational ideas with which he later became identified at Sarah Lawrence College . Taylor became identified as the founder of Sarah Lawrence college .
 During the McCarthy period he was a vigorous leader in the fight for the freedom of universities and teachers . Throughout his career he has taken a prominent role in the struggle against racial and religious intolerance .
 He has consistently tried out his educational ideas in practice, both in the classroom, and in the community, he says .
 His articles, speeches and television appearances have received national attention . His articles have dealt with the major political and social controversies of his generation .
 Sarah Lawrence College has expanded range of educational experiments in music, theater and dance . The college's director of music and theater has been in touch with students and scholars in every part of the U.S.
 After serving for 14 years as the President of Sarah Lawrence College, Dr. Dr. Lawrence has served as a Vice President of the College of Nursing at Sarah Lawrence .
 Taylor retired from his post in August 195D to devote himself once more to teaching and writing . Taylor retired to focus on teaching, writing and teaching .
 Sin:e then travelled in Asia and Russia under a special grant from the Ford Foundation to confer with political leaders, intellectuals, educators, students and artists .
 Taylor is conducting a study of the feasibility of founding a world university . Taylor has been lecturing at colleges and universities and writing books .
 He is a trustee of the Putney School and of the Institute for International Order . He is chairman of the National Research Council on Peace Strategy, a diiector of the Peace Research Institute .
 On Wednesday, April 24, the library will present an original, one act thirty minute radio drama over Radio Station WSOK, from 11:30m. to 12:00 noon . Taylor's lecture will be entitled, ""Reading, Writing and Thinking"
 This radio play, ""'Let Freedom Ring."" was written especially for this occasion by Mrs. Mrs. Barbara Jones . Mrs. Jones' radio play was written specifically for the occasion .
 Luetta Colvin Milledge is Assistant Professor of English at Savannah State College . She is the author of the book, "American Dream"
 Kobiriiii.i U.-bh, Laordice Winfrey, Ma.xinc Koseberrv, and Jeunnetlc (irccn.i.u.l.v) were interviewed . The interview will be aired on CNN.com Live
 Another first place award was received for stories of the college that appeared in local, state and national publications .
 The college received a second place in the printed magazine category for Its general information bulletin . The college was honored with a print magazine category .
 Elton C Scott, associate editor of the student yearbook, was one of the resource persons at the press meet . Elton Thomas, student editor; Veronica Owens, assistant editor; and student editor at the school yearbook .
 A great i)art of the success '<\ ihi irniu.il M.ns Festival activities at Savannah State held recently can be attributed to the eiqht i;cnlleincn jnilured above .
 Savannah State College Men's Glee Club is currently on a tour of cities on the eastern seaboard . The club is currently at Savannah State State College .
 The singers will be in concert in Durham, North Carolina, Washington, D C, Atlantic City, New Jersey, Chester, Pennsylvania .
 Montclair, New Jersey, Newark, and Wilmington, North Carolina. magazines. magazines .
 She directs the College Playhouse at Savannah State College . She has presented several original productions on campus and surrounding communities .
 National Library Week Convocation will be held at the all-college assembly . The convocation will take place on April 25 .
 A Special exhibition on the work of the French writer will be held at the National Gallery in London .
 Albert Camus, who won the Nobel Prize for his writings in 1957, will be featured . Camus won't be featured in this week's edition of the book series .
 The first part includes 27 books and one pamphlet in French, by the author . The second part consists of seven panels containing manuscript pages of LA CHUTE . The third part includes 10 panels of photographs depicting the life of Camus .
 The average college man wheels around in slacks and sports jackets every day and most nights . College men wear slacks, sports jackets and sport jackets all day and nights .
 WELCOME BACK TO LINEN— nebounding in fashion importance this Spring is the llax suit . Natural linen in natural shades is the most important suit of the year .
 Most of these classic warm-weather suits are cut on natural shoulder lines . Straight-hanging jackets, narrow notched lapels, center vents and tapered trousers are key to the suit .
 The natural, neutral tones of linen will go anywhere you go — in style — and they're a natural fr.r dress-up wear straight through Spring and Summer .
 Colors are dark this Spring, headlined by blue-grays in sharkskins and muted plaids with deep casts .
 You'll also spot some dark blue unfinished worsted, lightweight flannels and serges for those definitely dress-up occasions .
 The accent is on light, cool, comfortable fit for the warm weather months ahead . They're light, including blends of worsteds and polyesters that are comfortable, porous and dressy .
 New deep and dark stripes and lighttoned seersucker plaids are on the scene for the first time this year .
 Way out m front in dress-shirt popularity with young men is snap-tab collar . Snap-tab collars are popular with men in the U.S.
 Gleaming white broadcloth shirts, with barrel cuffs and tabbed collars, are your best bet for dress-up occasions . White broadcloth shirt is the best bet to dress up in the world .
 White oxford tab collars and medium-spread collar white oxford button-downs with barrel cuffs . Less formal are white button-downs with barrel-cuffs and white tab collar collars .
 No young man's wardrobe is complete without a spread of regimental stripes on his tie rack . Regimental stripes are right for any occasion, short of a formal dinner .
 The ONE-MAN COMBO is not the name of a swinging jazz solo, but a chie to the return of matching and related tie and handkerchief sets . For a change of pace, take a look at the narrow solid knits that are returning to fashion favor .
 Continental matching sets duplicate-the designs, both stripes and figures, in both the tie and handkerchief . You can choose a related color breast pocket handkerkerchief, picking up one color in your tie .
 GEniNG TO the BOTTOM of THINGS ...is the.qukkest . Visit the.iy to find out what's news in shoes.iy .
 The Mocassin design, with a moderate wing-tip, is the most popular model . Jet-black is the perfect underpinning for this Spring's black, dark gray and dark blue suits .
 For Spring and Summer is new lightweight headgear . For spring and summer, headgear will be lightweight and lightweight .
 Intermediate to dark shades of gray and olive will coordinate with your new Spring Spring tailored wear .
 Your hat completes the picture of the well-dressed young man, particulaVly so on any dress-up occasion . Nearly needless to say, your hat .
 The SPRING SPORTSWEAR SCENE. ..is ti,6 subject for next month's column. The spring sports scene .
 Sport Jackets, Slack-s, Sport Shirts and Sport Ilats take a look at the news in our latest issue of our sportswear . We'll take a peek at the latest in the world of sports .
 NSA sent out an appeal to its member schools to raise money for the African students . The DePauw student government said that the $2,500 came entirely from individual student donations .
 NSA officers expressed profound approval at the efforts of the DePauw student government . NSA International Commission officers telegraphed their thanks to the student government for the fund-raising effort .
 Many African students have been brought out of Bulgaria as soon as sufficient travel money is available . The Coordinating Secretariat of National Unions of Students iCOSEC said .
 NSA is forwarding money collected on American campuses to COSEC to underwrite the travel costs of the students . The students will eventually be placed in American and Western European universities .
 The angry students gathered in front of the Bulgarian Ministry of Educaton blocking traffic, until they were forcibly dispersed by police . Many injuries were caused by the students .
 Savannah State College Coordinating Committee attended the Fourteenth Annual Convention of the Georgia Youth Industrial Education Association . The first wave of 17 students, all from Ghana, arrived in Vienna from Sofia, Austria, on February 13 .
 The convention was held at the George Washington Carver Vocational Technical School in Atlanta, Georgia . The convention is held in Atlanta .
 In the spring of each year a two-day conference is held to discuss information pertinent to Vocational Education . The conference was held in the spring .
 Delegates say they have been subjected to racial discrimination and excessive political indoctrination . Delegates said they had to be subjected to discrimination and political indefence .
 State President, Georgia Youth Industrial Education Association, was the speaker . Friday morning, second general assembly .
 Theory Examinations, Oratorical and Essay Contests; Friday afternoon, delegate assembly, election of officers . Delegates will vote for officers on Friday afternoon .
 The members of the Savannah State College Coordinating Committee are Eddie Btvins, Chairman; Clyde W Hall, Robert Pindar, Charles Philson, Frank Tharpe, Eugene Jackson .
 College ill Ohio to Begin Adniittiug High School Graduates as Sophomores ject already learned,""""The Rev. Rev. Frida Ghitis said, "I'm not going to go to college, but I'm going to college"
 This program, he said, was more than Advanced Placement, in the accepted sense . This program is more than advanced Placement . It's more than "Advanced Placement," he said .
 College-bound high school students whose scores on standard tests indicate they have superior knowledge of certain subject matter may waive up to five freshman courses and be admitted to sophomore classes at the College of Steubenville . High school students must waive five freshman classes .
 The tests involved are the Advanced Placement Tests and the Achievement Tests of the College Entrance Examination Board . Normally, achievement tests are given in a number of subjects .
 For the present those which may earn a waiver of a freshman course at the College are English, mathematics, modern language, biology, physics, chemistry and history . English, math, history, science and history are among the subjects which may be eligible for a waiver .
 The College has been a cooperating institution in the Advanced Placement Program since 1960 . However, because it is available to so few students, the program was proposed and accepted .
 Any student who is freed of the demand to take a freshman course will be admitted into a course on the sophomore level . Students will be able to choose a course at the freshman level .
 The student still must meet the number of hours demanded for graduation . He will take additional courses later in his junior and senior years to compensate for the courses waived .
 Choice of the subject to be studied and the area of interest will be made by the student . Students will be able to choose the subject of their study .
 Alpha Kappa Mu National Honor Society, Savannah State College attended the society's twenty-fifth national convention held at Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College, Prairie View .
 Dr. Elson K Williams, faculty advisor and director of Region V Elmore completed a year's term as a national officer . Dr. Williams was a faculty advisor at the University of North Carolina University .
 Cruse, Miss Moss, and Mr Clemmons were also very active participants at the various sessions of the convention .
 To fill out a void in the teachers' backgrounds, teachers' subject matter, so that they may begin an advanced degree program, at some graduate school without having so many undergraduate prerequisites to take .
 Teachers must hold a bachelor's degree, and be employed as a teacher of chemistry or general science, grades 7-12 .
 I2) have taught and/or held bachelor's degrees for at least three years . They show apparent ability to secure sufficient benefits from the Institute . I2 students are required to have a bachelor's degree in order to qualify for I2 benefits .
 Costs of tuition and travel for participants selected will be borne by the National Science Foundation .
 Launey F Roberts, Jr.. teacher, Chatham County School System, since September, 1959 assigned, Tompkins Elementary School . Roberts was recently appointed to Assistant Principal of the John W Hubert Junior High School, Savannah . Roberts Receives Assistant Prineipalship
 Classes will be conducted on Saturdays from 8:30m. to 12:00m. on the college campus . Mr Roberts' formal education was being enriched through the variety of Dates Classes .
 Chemistry 200: Physical Laws of Chemistry . This course concerns itself with laws that include matter and its structure, mass energy, the states of matter, solutions, the periodic table, and inorganice nonmenclature .
 Lab experiments and problems that illustrate the application of these laws are stressed . Lab experiments are stressed to show how the laws are applied .
 Lab experiments and problems that illustrate these principles are stressed . Lab experiments are shown to illustrate the principles of lab experiments .
 All applications should be completed and returned by August 15, 1963 . Problems and lab experiments related to --the course work is emphasized .
 Charles Pratt, director, Inservice Institute in Chemistry, Savannah State College, Savannah, Georgia . Charles Pratt is director of the In Service Institute in chemistry, In service Institute .
 He is enrolled in a program of studies geared for advanced educational administration which includes a workshop that commenced in June for a duration of nine weeks .
 GTEA, CCTA, Mid-town Toastmasters Club; AF of M, Local 704; and member of Palen Methodist Church, Savannah .
 Mr Roberts is married to the former Harriet L Harris of Savannah, who is also a graduate of Savannah State College .
 Mr and Mrs. Roberts, having been conferred the baccalaureate degree, 1960, is employed with the Chatham County Department of Family and Children Services .
 The Savannah State College Division of Technical Science reports that its six point summer program is in full swing . Siiiiiiiiiier Workshops ProoTPssiiig is a summer program .
 Engineering Drawing Workshop, Electric Motor Rewinding Workshop, Machine Tool Operation Workshop and Electronic Workshop . In-service class, ""Modern Techniques of Evaluation,"" and Annual Workshop for Trades and Industrial Education teachers .
 The machine tool operation drawing consists of a study in workshop involves the operation basic drafting instruments and equipment, geometrical construction and multiview projection . The workshop in engineering is a study into the operation of a machine tool .
 Drafting room practice is provided for each participant, either the use of drafting machines or convention T-squares and triangles . Practice is also provided for participants .
 The electric motor rewinding workshop offers experiences in electrical magnetism and the construction and repairing of split phase motors .
 Each student is required to completely rewind at least two electrical motors . Students are required to rewind two electrical motor motors .
 The first All-College Assembly was held in Meldrim Auditorium on June 13 . The first assembly was held at Meldim Auditorium .
 Many of the students were in-service teachers . This uniqueness, he said, was bound up in the fact that many of them were in service teachers . The uniqueness of the school is bound up by its uniqueness .
 Payne congratulated them for making the decision to attend the summer session . Payne also congratulated them on their decision to stay in the UK for the summer .
 This is a good sign, he said, because the times Indicate that education is challenged . This is the times when education is being challenged, he added .
 Mr. Payne in his introduction as an experienced teacher and administrator . Payne is described as an "experienced teacher and an administrator"
 Straight turning, taper turning and thread cutting are the basic operations covered . Straight turning is the basic operation covered by the company .
 Each student is provided with a lathe so that he can perform all operations individually . Students learn to use the lathe to make small pieces of wood .
 Savannah State College Division of Technical Sciences, with Philco Corporation and Georgia Division of Vocational Education, will hold an Electronic Workshop for in-service teachers of post high school electronics .
 The class will be taught by a representative of the Philco Corporation . The Philco TechRep Equipment and system will be used in the class .
 Philco representative will be Mr, W H, Sullivan, Electronic Engineer of division's staff . Assisting Philco representatives is Mr W H Sullivan, Mr Sullivan, of division of staff. Assisting Mr Sullivan is Mr Sullivan .
 The electronic laboratory in the technical science center will be utilized . The electronic lab will be used in the electronic laboratory .
 There will be an in-service class for trade and industrial education teachers entitled, ""Modern Techniques of Evaluation,"" The course will be concerned with the administration and use of standardized achievement tests, as well as teacher-made objective tests .
 Faculty and parents packed into the gymnasium to witness these exercises . President William K. Payne, Payne, presiding .
 Before the commencement address, speaking for the Board of Regents was its chairman, James A, Dunlap . Speaking for the board was its .
 Mr Dunlap outlined a five-point improvement program for Savannah State College . He said it would cost an excess of $1 million .
 Mr Solms said Georgia has made great strides in education in the past decade . He said that even greater strides are expected in the future .
 The Savannah area is home to the Savannah School of Economics, Athens, Athens and Savannah, Georgia . The Savannah school includes elementary education, elementary education and construction technology .
 Dr Warsi is a native of Gorakhpur, India . He received his high school education at M, G, College, his bachelor of science degree at St. George's College .
 Warsi Warsi received the highest marks in mathematics throughout his high school and university experiences . Warsi was awarded the top marks in high school, university and high school .
 He has done research in topology differential geometry and abstract algebra . He has also done research into topology and abstract geometry .
 He has written three papers for publication and several articles pending publication . He has also written several articles for publication .
 Fall quarter at Savannah State College will begin on September 16 . Fall quarter will begin September 17 .
 Freshmen orientation period for Freshmen will extend from September 16 through September 20 . Returning students will report September 19 for physical examinations .
 Steps have been taken to expand housing and teaching facilities at the College . Additional facilities — a new dormitory for women, a new classroom building and a new gymnasium — will not be available for use at the beginning of the fall quarter .
 It is urgent therefore that beginning students and returning students who wish dormitory accommodations, complete arrangements for dormitory space as early as possible .
 "Ihe Tiger's Hoar Slalf" is the Summer edition of this year's iReporter's weekly feature program . This week marks the 50th anniversary of the publication of Ihe Tiger .
 Tlio TlBti'i 1 il<r To 1 Ollieo a\ Snonnnli, Couigl . imilFT Tionllilr by h< .luJfi be oblBinc by »iii Tlaf>'»
 It is evident tiiat the American Negro is tired of being denied first-class cltlzcnsiilp. My kind of democracy is my kind of democratic socialism .
 The recent demonstrations that have developed throughout the South, give evidence that the Negro no longer can accept being treated as second-class citizens . The Negro is no longer willing to accept that he is treated as first-class citizen .
 We use the term ""new Negro,"" because the Negro of today is determined to obtain the rights which were granted him one hundred years ago by the Emancipation Proclamation . The term "new Negro" is used to refer to the new Negro .
 The Negro's reasons are quite simple, but his philosophy is even more concise . The Negro says he wants to be a better man than a man .
 His reasons are that he wants to take his place in an American society as a person who con share the responsibility of a democracy . He wants to be in the U.S. as an American citizen .
 Next, he wants to show tlio world that he can do more than play ball, sing, or dance . He wants to be able to play ball and sing, and dance .
 "I can be a leader in politics, scientific research, and other aspects of human endeavors," she says . She says she hopes to continue to lead in politics and scientific research .
 The Negro's philosophy is that, he is an American citizen, and he desires to live in a country which his forefather fought and died in every major American war . The Negro is a citizen of the United States .
 President Kennedy sent a Civil Rights Bill to Congress, stating why discrimination in America must cease . Kennedy sent the bill to Congress in 1963 .
 This will mark the Ilrst time in many years that a President of the United States has spoken so boldly against discrimination, and it appears he int^ends to do something about it .
 It is up to the men in Congress to show to America and to the world they are persons who believe in the Constitution of the United States . A person cannot be judged by the color of his skin, but only by his merits .
 SSC: "When I left SSC, I carried with me a reservoir of unforgettable memories, knowing that I was leaving a place with memories beyond measures" "I was leaving SSC with memories that were beyond measures," she says .
 With tlie passing of just four years upon my return, it seems as though it has been a decade since I returned to the UK .
 When I enrolled for the summer session, the whole student body, to me, had changed. When I enrolled, I realized that the student body had changed, and that it had changed a lot .
 I ask you to check your attitudes, dispositions, and most of all your responsibilities . The impressions that you give Tiere will be lasting ones, he says .
 The attitudes displayed during the course of some such conversations leave an impression of dismay . The attitudes shown during such conversations are often dismayed by some .
 I have assumed that we all chose to study within the walls of SSC; I did. I did, I did . I'm not sure if I was going to study at SSC, I'm going to go to SSC. I'm sure I am not going to be
 If we do not utilize the good that is within her to destroy the bad that is without her. the bad without win inevitably destroy the good within. And, if we don't utilize the . good that she is within, the bad will inevitably destroy her, she says . The bad
 It is possible that the all inclusive answer — if it were given — would be purely subjectivism . The all-inclusive answer would be simply subjectivism, the author says .
 I feel, the pessimistic viewers should examine their conscious, analyze their quality traits before unjustly imposing the entire responsibility on SSC . Everyone is not willing to assume responsibilities, and it is easier to cite the inadequacies of others rather than admit selfdeficiencies .
 Savannah State College could not be guilty of all the litigation attributed to her in her absence . Savannah State has been in the news for more than a decade .
 It may appear that I am trying to defend SSC, if you think I am, then, and only then is it true . If you think you're defending SSC then it will be true, he says .
 This is food for thought in that it shows respect for the counsel. But this feeling of defense is peculiar to ail defenders of iMotheri SSC . This is not the only defense that is being defended by iMothers SSC.
 "I find it difficult actually to believe that some of us are aware of our attitudes," she says . "I'm not sure if we are aware that some are aware," she writes .
 It is time for us to think earnestly about our position in relationship with our Alma Mater, especially what we say . It's time for students to think seriously about their relationship with the school .
 I am, in plainer words, I am a bundle of prejudices — made up of likings and dislikings — the veriest thrall to sympathies, apathies, antipathies . I am the verstitute of sympathies and apaths .
 If SSC were as Charles Lamb , she would haxe exacted the preceding quote thereby proclaiming the ill effects of such a bundle of prejudices . SSC would have exacted that quote from Charles Lamb .
 "She has to withstand the veriest thrall of sympathies, apathies, and antipathies," she says . She has to endure the 'ververiest thrattest thrall'
 Examine your present status in life and proportionately cite the environments wherein preparations for each flight were made . Examine the present status of your life in life .
 I can agree, there are unfavorable features about our Alma Mater; I can name a few, but such is true in any school, college or university . Such things are true in all schools, colleges and universities, but that's true .
 It is a challenge to discover what makes the misgivings here with SSC more controversial than those with another institution of higher learning .
 It has to be the humanity of a controversial nature that infiltrates the walls of SSC . It is evident that such a negative attitude towards SSC is not widespread, and I sincerely feel that a few of us are guilty of this .
 Idle gossip does not seek to rectify any irregularities in our college program. Idle gossip is not the best way to fix any irregularities, the college program director says .
 When some few of us seek to downgrade the status of SSC, we are serving a like injustice to ourselves . I am curious to know how we manage to pursue a course of academic studies towards a baccalaureate degree and not maintain a sense of loyalty towards the institution confer
 There has been no survey to determine the extent of such attitudes of referral; however. No survey has been conducted to determine whether such attitudes exist .
 Savannah State College should become more conscious of the descriptive representation presented . Nevertheless, this can not go unnoticed, and I feel everyone .
 If one comes to SSC with nothing, does nothing while here, he should expect to leave with nothing . If one does nothing, he will be left with nothing. SSC should expect nothing. If one is not doing anything while at SSC, he would be leaving .
 SSC is limited when it comes to perform academic miracles; this is expecting too much . She is degraded for having opened her arms to receive those seeking to receive more than they will ever be able to contribute .
 Many years SSC has failed to recruit the better athletes due to the lack of finances . Many years the club has been unable to recruit better athletes . SSC is currently struggling to find the best athletes in the country .
 SSC. in some instances, is able to get good athletes but is unable to keep them . SSC . in some cases, it is not always able to keep the best athletes .
 "We have b een getting players from states as far away as Ohio, Indiana, Indiana," says coach . "We're getting players ... from states like Ohio and Indiana," he says .
 For the last few years athletes at SSC have not received what they had anticipated while attending school . SSC athletes have not been able to receive what they expected to receive while at school .
 The athletes that will come here in September, and. in all probability, they will work hard to build a good team . As soon as the season is over they have to start worrying and wondering about funds which will enable them to . complete a full academic school year .
 It is a bad reflection on the college as a whole, when players from other schools hold a conversation with our players, they are too embarrassed to talk about the situation . It's not a good reflection of the college in general, coach says .
 The school recruits these athletes from other cities and states, and promises are made that are not kept . "Promises were made that were not kept," the school says . The school says it recruits athletes from around the world .
 "After they get here, they find that it is different, especially after the season is over," says Luis Suarez . "It is different for them to be here," says Suarez .
 The writer has known athletes who have had to leave the college because they owed the college a great deal of money . Athletes owe the college, when they were supposed to have been receiving a grant-in-aid .
 During the years of 1959-63, SSC lias had a successful basketball team . The team was known for its success .
 The team has participated in many tournaments and came out as champions, but for some reason or another, the players seem to be confronted with the same problem of having to stay in school . The team is in the midst of a series of tournaments that have been held in recent years .
 The state doesn't appropriate funds for athletic programs and other extra-curricular purposes, therefore, the school has to depend on the alumni association and other cliaritable organizations for their support .
 The people of the community and a large number of the students have lost interest in the atliletic program . The program is now being run by a group of students .
 They claim that the teams lose too many games for them to ""waste"" their ""money"" and ""time"" to come out to see a losing team play ball .
 It will be a long time before SSC's Athletic Program advances to a status that will challenge its competitors, if the program continues to receive this kind of support .
 Professor Leroy Brown, instructor in metal work, demonstrates the operation of the dial test indicator . Summer.63 THE TIGER'S ROAR Dep£ .
 The dial indicator is graduated to read thousandths of an inch so that practically any required degree of accuracy may be obtained . The dial indicators are graduated so that they can be read thousandsths of inches of the inch .
 The indicator is also used to check alignments, amount of concavity, wobble of material, centering and many other uses . The indicator also checks alignments and concavities of material .
 Leander Cannick, Levern Carter, Aberdeen Allen, and Aberdeen Allen . Professor Brown, demonstrator .
 The Department of Engineering Technology, under the direction of Dr. Levern Carter, will provide advanced electricity and metal work . Advanced Electricity, Metal Work In jartnient of engineering Technology, is in charge .
 Clyde W Hall, offers for the first session Engineering Drawing, Advanced Electricity, and Advanced Metal Work . Clyde Hall offers first session of Engineering Drawing and Electricity .
 Each student is required to engage in drafting room practices, which will include experiences in each of the above-stated instructional areas of the course .
 Sol C, Johnson High School, Savannah; Willie Simmons, instructor, Harralson County Consolidated School . Willie Simmons is instructor, Savannah-area school . Sol C and Willie Simmons are instructors at Harralralon School .
 Advanced Electricity is designed to enable students to get an understanding of AC and DC electric motor principles, circuity, and construction . Students will learn and practice safe work habits of the electrical industry .
 Upon completion, it is hoped that the students will have a working knowledge of the outlined content . Upon completion of the project, students will be able to understand the content .
 Sol C Johnson, Savannah, Savannah; Selton Daniels, industrial art education, Eatonton, and William L Simmons, instructor .
 Theodore Pittman, industrial art education, Blakely; Leander Cannick, Savannah, Savannah and George E Lovette, industrial arts education, respectively . George E. Lovete was the first industrial art teacher in Savannah .
 Savannah State College, Division of Technical Science, in co-operation with Georgia State Division of Vocational Education, is sponsoring an electronics workshop from July 22 through August 9 .
 A specialist — to be named later from the headquarters* instructional staff of the Philco Corporation— will be in charge of the workshop . The workshop will be held at Philco's headquarters* in California .
 Classes will be held in the college's modern electronics laboratory . Participants will receive five quarter hours' credit for this experience .
 "An Explosion into the Future" opened Saturday, June 22. at Savannah State College Library .
 The Phelps-Stokes Fund is the sponsor of this exhibition, which is based on a seven-year survey . It will continue through July 12 .
 The show is being circulated under the auspices of the Smitlisonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service .
 Kimble resigned as director of the American Geographical Society to undertake the study . Kimble, who resigned from the society, is the subject of a new study .
 He drew upon contributions from 46 specialists and scholars and himself visited Africa many times during the course of the project .
 Westerners can no longer afford to ignore these changes since Africa now occupies a pivotal role in the future of the world . Westerners should not ignore Africa's role in shaping the world's future, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 Tropical Africa is a mosaic of tribes and tongues, of cultures, societies, societies ajad nations . Tropical Africa has a rich diversity of cultures and languages .
 "Within Its borders lives herder and hunter, hunter, cultivator and fisherman, miner, miner and trader, and the followers of every other art and calling," says the author .
 While most of these people still belong to an antique world, almost all of them now know there is another word and, from time to time, make excursions .
 The political map may show 40 or so clean-cut pieces, but there is nothing all-of-a-piece about the lives lived by the people in any one of them . The map is not just a political map, but it shows the lives of people in each piece .
 This award is to assist Dr. Charles Pratt, Head Department of Chemistry and Professor of Chemistry at Savannah State College .
 Dr Shapley. Pratt in his study of the ISOLATION OF FLAYONOL GLYCOSIDES by . PAPER ELECTROPHORESIS . Dr, Shapley . in making this announcement, stated ""Sigma XI and RESA each year makes a
 Two organizations with a combined active membership of 90,000 scientists jointly sponsor eight national lectureships, publish the AMERICAN SCIENTIST .
 In his opening statement, Mr Wells noted that the~e were three revolutions taking place in the world presently . Mr Wells said that the revolutionary revolutionaries were taking place today .
 The present demonstrations in America by Negroes have been referred to by some writers as the Fourth American Revolution . Some writers have referred to the demonstrations as the 'Fourth American Revolution'
 The demonstrations now being conducted by Negroes in America are full of religion, music, philosophy, and discipline, he said .
 Wells, assisted by Robert Mobley of the SSC Audio Visual Aids Department, showed a series of slides on Africa . The pictures ranged from those of Jomo Kenyata — to the Silent Ancient Pyramids of Egypt . Wells was assisted by Mr Mobley, who showed slides
 Wells discussed a list of 25 test questions every Negro should know about Africa . Wells discussed the 25 questions you should ask about the continent . Wells also discussed the African continent .
 This test covered the areas of history, culture, economics, and some general information . It also covered the topics of culture, history, and economics .
 Willie G Tucker is Associate Professor of Chemistry at s,i\ ,iiiiiii,iii and si,iti . Tucker is an associate professor of chemistry at the University of Cambridge, England .
 Cuenter Schwarz and Leandi r Miniil explain how a deionizing column works in the analysis of proh-in r\lr,irls .
 The research program is directed by Dr, Charles Pratt, Head of the Department, assisted by two senior students, Leander Merritt and Carnell West .
 The aim of the program is to establish the Amino Acid sequence of protein found in cottonseed .
 The approach taken is by a derivative of the protein by reacting the terminal amino acid, which is then identified . The approach is by reacting terminal amino acids to identify the protein, then identifying them .
 Repetitions of this procedure should lead to the complete identification of the protein . Dr Schawrz found the research project very Interesting, and spent some tour hours questioning Meritt and West about some of the details .
 Schwarz felt that the rcsearcli project Is well on its way and was very optimistic about Its future development . Schwarz felt . that thercsearCL project is well on his way and felt that it was well-on its way .
 Elementary and Secondary Workshops enjoyed an evening of fun dancing and entertainment at Saul's Place on Wilmington Island on July 2 .
 It consisted of shrimps, fish, crabs, hush puppies, cole slaw, and ice tea . Shrimps were served by a team of chefs .
 The Workshoppers can truthfully say that the evening of July 2, 1963 was an unforgetable one . The evening was the most memorable one of the night of the day .
 The paper was concerned with flavonold compounds found in Spanlsli Moss . It was concerned about flavonolds found in the Moss .
 Credit was given as his senior research project, a requirement for all chemistry majors before graduatlofl .
 The project was sponsored by the National Science Foundation for Undergraduate Research and the Research Corporation .
 Savannah State College YMCA, W, K, Payne Chemical Society, and Alpha Kappa Mu Tutorial Society are among the society's members . Savannah State State College is a member of the Phi Phi Kappa Kappa Tutorial Society .
 The Wall Street fellowships were awarded to Scott on the basis of his work with the high school press institute of Savannah State College . The latter grant was awarded to him on the based of his general publicity and publications work on the collegiate level .
 Scott Scott is public relations director, Georgia Teachers and Education Association . Scott is a former teacher and teacher at Georgia schools .
 Illinois and the American Alumni Council workshop for editors of alumni publications tn Atlanta, Georgia. Illinois . Illinois and American Alumnum Council workshop .
 THK TiGEirS ROAR Summer 1963: SAVANNAH State md James Hawkim, B, Human Interaction PIANO SCALEso B Giimilev, and Haiel Scotl. Aims to be a state-of-the-art
 D E, DEMONSTRATION GROUP . Fior ts, Heolure R MaUird, Mrs Evella S, Brown, and Mis Mis. D E . Brown .
 Virginia Robin Announced Annual Business Exhibits at 10th Annual Business Expo . Showcase was part of the 10th annual Business Expo in New York .
 Eogcnc Johnson, and Johnnie bers of School Libraiy Adminislralion and Organization CIhss following ptesenlation ol drama, ""School ind Present," 1.5.2.5 .
 SSC's 8»lh Commencemen include Ernesline Adams, Willie Julia Adams and Geoigia Adams . Adams is a set of siblings at SSC .
 Willie Simmons, Leandoi Cannick, Adolphus Williams, Willie Nell Wiighl, Shellon Daniels . Willie Simmons was named the first African-American to play for the Harlem Renaissance .
 Heniy Porler, Carolyn Porter and Carolyn Porter are among the writers of this week's episode . The episode was produced by Annie O Ruisell and Willie Bell Johnson .
 Hall oKpkins la in-service lencheig and rcgulai students Ihc technical drawing . Hall o.kpkins is a hall of honor .
 Both sisters received the B.S. degree in Elementary Educ^ 'School Libraries— Past and Present,"" which was presented by students in the School Library Administration ii Organization Class, Thursday, June 2 .
 R. R. ANNUAL BUSINESS EXHIBIT— Some members of the class, Materials and Methods ol Teaching Business Subjects, judge scrapbooks and piojecls .
 Evelyn Robinson, Jerry Mims, and Jacqulyn Ryan, S Paul Russell listen to Mrs. Russell . Paul Russell listens while Mrs. Robinson listens .
 Prolessoi ol languages and Literature, used in the Reading Workshop . Louise L Owens, Assistant Prolessi ol . Owens, operates the audiometer .
 Betty Smith, Hose Richardson, Thomasine H Burnett, and Deloros W Phoenix were named winners of the award-winning award .
 Beatrice Ketterer Wilson, Mildred L Ellison, James Hawkins, Ellen Dorris Sellers Sellers, Enmaline Maddox, Grace Wnghl, and Lee Bertha Wilson were all named .
 Mis. Marie Butler and Alberta Wilder in a class of Art Appreciation with Mis. . Butler and Wilder .
 W K, Payne recently met with a group of IV-II graduates who held a Iwenly-yeai reunion . W K met with the group of graduates .
 Summer Work§hop Tcchiiical ScicHces Personality ;rrf Irom f-.^r 1) Annual Trade and Industrial Education Workshop .
 Trade and Industrial Education Teacher Training, will direct this workshop . The workshop will be held in London, England, at the end of September .
 This workshop will be concerned with the Youth Program of the GYEA and the Measurement of Student Achievement in T & I Situations . The workshop will focus on the youth program and the measurement of student achievement .
 Ernest B Brunson and Willie M Wllkerson are the first graduates under the engineering technology program . They were each notified of appointments starting June 24 and July 5, respectively, respectively .
 He was selected for careerconditional appointment to the position of Chartographer, with a rating of GS-7 and a salary of S5540 per annum . He had been selected for the position .
 He will attend a six month chartographer training course . Upon its satisfactory completion he will be assigned as a chartographer .
 Willie M, Wllkerson of Naylor, received an appointment with the Peace Corps. Willie M. received a Peace Corps appointment . Willie M was a member of the U.S. Army.
 After the termination of his training period, Wllkerson will be assigned to Cameroon In West Africa . The Cameroon national team is currently training in Africa .
 Both graduates majored in Building Construction Technology, Fashion Flares By Emma J Freer .
 Your fashion writer for this feature found it nice and interesting to be back on home grounds again after being on campus for three weeks .
 Styles are fun and they're fine for some people, but not always for you . Styles are fine and they are fine for a some people but not for you, says CNN.com .
 The comfortable, casual shiftlike silhouette is the highlight of summer fashion . However, I understand the gents are not happy to have us In ""sacks"" again .
 Lightweight is the key word as well as a variety of colors and textures . A variety of textures and textures are available in the lightweight version .
 This may sound strange, but his lines are more slim and silhouette than those of the females . The female line is more slim than the female line .
 Girls, we haven't said anything about accessories, which is a must in every wardrobe . Accessories are a must-have accessory .
 Willie Wright, a native of Dublin, Georgia, received his elementary and secondary education in that city . Willie Wright is a proud citizen of the United States .
 On June 2, 1958, a Bachelor of Science Degree was conferred upon him from Savannah State College In the Area of Industrial Education . He was awarded the degree in 1958 .
 His teaching career had its start at Haralson County Consolidated School, in Waco, Georgia . He successfully set up the Industrial Arts Program . Technical drawing and general woodwork were taught .
 In September Mr Wright was hired by the Chatham County Board of Education to teach at Sol C Johnson High School .
 At Johnson, he began the Brick Laying Shop which he has taught for four years . He has also taught at Johnson, which he began four years ago .
 For the school year 1962-63 Mr Wright served as chairman of his department where technical drawing, woodworking and brick laying are offered . Mr Wright was chairman of the department at the time .
 Wrighl's leisure time is spent in general house repair and cabinet making . He hopes to pursue as a career as a cabinet maker .
 In general house repair, his favorite is converting old style houses and designing them into modern structures with a minimum cost .
 Mr Wright is an affiliant with the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity . He serves as a member of the Board of Directors at the Frank Callen Boys Club .
 Mr Wright is married to the former Miss Shirley Thomas, a 1958 graduate of Savannah State College . He is the father of two lovely children, Dariuu.s, two years and Katrina Felicia, one year .
 He is refreshing himself in the Division of Technical Science by taking Technical Drawing and Advance Electricity . He is also refreshing himself with Technical Drawing, Advance Electricity and Technical Drawing .
 Library Science Class 301 presented an assembly program June 27. in Meldrim auditorium . Library Students Present Drama . Students present drama .
 The purpose of this program was to acquaint school administrators, in-service teachers, and students with the services of school libraries . The purpose was to . acquaint school . administrators, teachers, students and administrators with library services .
 This was done by contrasting past libraries with libraries of today in a short skit consisting of two scenes . The skit was created by comparing past libraries to today's libraries .
 Scene I depicted a library of the past which emphasized limited materials, facilities, and activities . Scene I depicts the library's limited materials and facilities . Scene was set in the 1930s and '50s .
 Scene II showed a library of today with emphasis on a variety of activities, freedom of movement and extensive use of books, audio-visual aids, and other materials . Scene II was a collection of books and audio-video aids . Scene I showed the library of the day, with emphasis
 Modern Mathematics is not a required course for Mathematics majors . However, many of them along with many teachers have seen a need for taking this course . Modern Math is not required for students to take it .
 In the world today it Is almost impossible to get along with the knowledge of mathematics as it was taught a few years ago . However, in the world . today it is almost impossible for mathematics to be taught as it is now taught .
 In an effort to keep up with other nations in the world, a new approach to arithmetic was necessary . The new approach was necessary for the U.S. to stay ahead of other nations .
 A modern arithmetic program introduces materials earlier than previously thought possible or advisable in our schools .
 The Members of the ""Mathematics 400"" class found the above, very important reasons to take a look at ""Modem Mathematics" Areas covered includes. areas covered includes . areas of mathematics, areas of physics, mathematics and computer science .
 Introduction to Sets, Sentences and Solution Sets, Working With Real Numbers, Graphing On the Number Line, Venn Diactram Ordered Pairs and Lattices and Operations on Sets to name a few .
 There are some who seem to feel that ""Modern Mathematics"" isn't really ""new"" at all . Some say that the vocabulary and symbols are what is ""new" about it and the early introduction of mathematical terms .
 The modern approach to mathematics at this writing has not been accepted by some 'including states' and probably some never will see its need .
 These are the people who will be caught in the changing of time, unable to put the old into a ""new"" setting .
 Stengel of sportswear fabrics is a hardy perennial whose cool, clean-cut look guarantees that you'll look the same . Casey Stengels is known for his sporty fabrics .
 Look for seersuckers with bold new striping ranging from just under half-an-inch to anywhere in the medium range — it's a sure sign of '63 .
 The traditional seersucker pin-striped pattern as lyeH, in blues, greys And browns ■with white . Slacks and jackets, shirts, shirts and walk-shorts — all will turn up in the traditional pattern .
 The new glen-plaid seersucker shirts and jackets are most striking in black-and-white or brown and white combinations . Available in blends of cotton and polyester iibers, available in blends .
 The ""LOOK OF LINEN" moves to the fore in fabrics, to let you take the rough ""with the smooth in your sportswear" Let your conscience — and your budget^be your guide .
 Natural tan is the most popular color, -with light blues and olive in place and show position . Light blue and olive are also popular colors in tan .
 Textured fabrics are in crisply tailored jackets, slacks, sport shirts and sport shirts . You'll find these textured fabrics in crisp tailored jackets .
 The jacket features bold, blazer stripes to jazz up an otherwise conservative wardrube .
 East Indian, that is — on Spring and Summer sportswear again this year . Madras has the Indian sign .
 This brilliant plaid is doing business at the same old stand, adding a colorful note to jackets, shirts and walk-shorts .
 The stoppress news in Madras is that it now comes in bigger, bolder plaids and lighter backgrounds to make a new fashion point .
 "Good guys and bad guys both ulll go for the neWWeslemstyle"" sportswear" Good guys and Bad Guys both go for sporty sporty clothing .
 The steady eye can pick this trend out of the crowd, %vith its yoke-front and contrasting border stitching . The yoke front of the yoke is one of the most striking styles of the past .
 Sport shirts and slacka aid with the lean, narrow, action look . Made of denim and denim-type fabrics, these sport shirts are made of denim-like fabrics .
 Slip-on slip-on moccasin is the most popular shoe of the day . Moccasin moccasters are the most comfortable slip-ons in the world .
 The canvas-topped deck shoe with rubber sole is no longer a purely practical shoe for sports . It's the first time a deck shoe has been made available for a practical purpose .
 This year's models come in a natural hemp color with a rough weave — the ""Linen Look"" mentioned earlier . And there's a new color in the cards .
 This Guide is an indispensable aid in selecting your college wardrobe, with pointers on what's new and what's going to be now . Tips on the care and feeding of clothes, what to wear with what, and all the important guide-lines .
 World College Organized With 24 UN Countries . Will be in session from July ' 1 to August 12 at Harrow Hill .
 The aim of the project is to try out in practice the idea of a world college, with a completely international faculty, student body and curriculum . The aim is to create a completely different international faculty and student body .
 Tutorial and seminar methods of instruction will be used, concentrating on study projects by the students . Students will work singly or in groups of two or three on issues and ideas related to the development of world order .
 The governments invited to cooperate in the estabHshment of the project were selected by Dr. Dr. John Defterios . The governments were selected to cooperate .
 Asia is represented by Japan, Malaya and Malaya . Talyor. in consultation with . various members of the United Nations delegations .
 Poland and Roumania are the Middle East by the United Arab Republic and Israel; the western hemisphere by Mexico, Colombia, Paraguay . The Middle East is by the U.S. and Israel and the United Kingdom .
 Each of the countries will be represented by one student, either appointed by the nation itself or selected by the World College in consultation with officials of the participating governments .
 The students range in age from twenty to twenty-six . Both men and women, graduates and undergraduates, are included in the group .
 Most of the students expect eventually to enter one or another field of service in international affairs . Four faculty members will be in residence, one each from Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, and the West . Others will visit the campus for particular seminars and tutorial sessions .
 The subjects in the curriculum will range from the development of ideas for new forms of international cooperation in educational and scientific programs to studies of disarmament, the peaceful uses of outer space and art forms .
 There will be no subject matter divisions or separate departments . Studies and curriculum will concentrate on building a new body of knowledge in the social sciences, the arts and humanities .
 Students will present to seminars and discussion groups the elements of their national culture and art forms with which they are most familiar . Music, theater and dance of member countries will be performed where possible, with the aid of musicians, actors and dancers in the metropolitan area .
 There will also be play readings and poetry readings of translations from the classics of national literatures . The event will be held in the UK and Australia .
 Funds for the World College experiment are being provided through private donations to the Friends World College Committee .
 The Committee's headquarters at Harrow Hill are the former home of Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Edmonds . The Committee is based in Harrow, a former London home of the Committee .
 Dr Harold Taylor is engaged in a study of the concept and feasibility of a world university . The Peace Research Institute vice president is vice president of the organization . The Friends World College Committee was invited to conduct an experimental project at Harrow Hill .
 It is hoped that some form of international financing through inter-governmental cooperation can be arranged for year-round world college programs both in this country and abroad .
 The results of this summer project will be published in published form to interested individuals and institutions, as wel as to UNESCO and other international bodies . In the meantime, the results will be made available to interested people .
 Dr. Taylor has expressed the hope that one result of this experiment may be the development of a design for world education which might serve as a basis for further projects of this kind during the United Nations International Cooperation Year in 1965 .
 Culver is business instructor at Wheeler County Training School . The staff congratulates Mr and Mrs. Culver .
 In-Service Teachers Put the Accent on Better Teaching . The educational workshops In methods and materials of elementary and secondary teaching accented ""Better Teaching" at its first reporting session .
 In-service teachers exhibited resource findings of common interest to all participants . Through a variation of panel discussions, skits, socio-dramas and other means of demonstration .
 Areas of concern grew out of a list of problems drawn up in a general session of the two workshops during the beginning week .
 A report from Group I dealt with discussion of non-graded primaries, Individual differences, and grouping . A second group dealing with ""Human Relations"" placed emphasis on guidance, studentteacher relations, and the problem of absenteeism .
 Various methods of teaching and organizing learning experiences were brought to focus . Various methods were brought into focus .
 Emphasis placed on having the psychological guidelines permeate all planning for motivation, competent teaching, an defficient learning . Emphasis was placed on . having a psychological guidelines for motivation for motivation .
 Group IV gave its attention to ""Some Determining Bases for Grading and Promotion,"" Significant in this report was an analysis of the meaning, purposes, kinds, and administration and scoring of test .
 A discussion of the use of test findings by this group proved helpful to all the listeners . The discussion was led by a group of experts who used test results to test their knowledge .
 A number of helpful suggestions for better teaching grew out of the several reports . Certainly, there were some helpful suggestions .
 Science Workshop For Elementary Teachers at Savannah State College . Workshop for Elementary Teachers . Under the guidance of Dr, B, T Griffith, Chairman of the Division of Natural Sciences and Mathematics .
 Willie G Tucker, Associate Professor of Chemistry, all of Savannah State College, began on Monday, June 10 . Tucker is an associate professor of chemistry at Savannah State .
 James P Hawkins; Secretary, Rose M Richardson; Treasurer, Betty Smith; Program Chairman. Program Chairman, James Hawkins; . Rose Richardson; Betty Smith .
 Beatrice Ketterer; Publicity Chairman, Mildred L. Ellison and Social Chairman, Emmaline Maddox. Beatrice .
 A summary or review of the science taught in the various classes during the previous school year was given . A review of science was also given of the previous year's science .
 Many plans in the areas as outlined in the ""Science for Georgia Schools Guide,"" namely living matter, rocks, minerals and soil, air and water, universe and solar system .
 Elementary and Secondary Workshops of Savannah State College met and organized Monday, June 10 with Dr. Dr. Deloris Phoenix .
 The workshops are comprised of in-service teachers from various states and school systems . The workshops will take place in various states, schools and districts .
 These teachers have brought with them Ideas, skills. potentialities, and problems . Teachers have brought together ideas, skills potentialities and problems. These teachers bring together ideas and potentialities .
 It was highly improbable to work with every individual problem; therefore, the workshops were divided into groups . The workshops were split into groups to try and solve problems .
 Evella S Brown, elementary teacher, Eulonta Elementary School, Daiien; Mrs, Lula Culver, business and English teacher, Wheeler County Training School, Alamo; Mr James E Deen. high school teacher. Mrs Culver . Mr Deen . high
 A Ellison, mathematics and science teacher, Todd Grant High School . Alma Alma, Alma; Mr, Keer, A Ellison . Alma, a math and science science teacher .
 Darien; Mr, Russell Ellington, physical education and mathematics teacher. Darien . Mr Ellingston, physical ed teacher. Mr. Russell .
 Mr Martin C Griffin is a mathematics teacher at Waynesboro High & Industrial High School . Mrs Griffin is also a teacher at the high school .
 Miss Dorothy Jones, eighth grade teacher, Waynesboro High & Industrial School, Wayneboro, was eighth grade . Mrs. Dorothy Jones is a sixth grade teacher at Brunswick High School in Brunswick .
 Louvinla Y James, supply teacher, Chatham County, Savannah, Savannah; Jeff Dunbar, high school teacher . Jeff D. Dunbar is a high school history teacher .
 Delores Jefferson, third grade teacher, Bartow Elementary School, Cartersvllle; Mr. Charles Jones, science and . mathematics teacher, Telfair Jr. Delores . Jones is a science and mathematics teacher at the school .
 Annie B Jenkins, first grade teacher, LaGrange; George Mays, high school teacher, Georgia Training School . Mr Jenkins, Mr Mays and Mrs Jenkins are Georgia's first grade and high school teachers .
 Mr William Pompey, junior high school teacher, Lomax Junior High, Valdosta, is pictured with his wife, Mrs. Cartersvllle . Mr Pompey is a teacher at the Valdosta Junior High .
 Mrs. Bertha Routt, second grade teacher, Williams James School, Statesboro . Mrs. Betty J Shaw, elementary teacher, Hinesvllle; Mrs. B. Routt and Mrs. Shaw are also teachers at Hinsville schools .
 Mrs, Aleathea Wright, supply teacher. Bernice C Thomas, member of staff, Boggs Academy, Keysville. and Mrs. Alea C Thomas . Mrs. Thomas is a member of the staff at the school .
 Monteith, Beatrice D Ketterer, Pearl Smith, Chatham, Homerville High. Monteith . Hawkins, Hawkins, Pearl . Smith, Smith, Hawkins . Monteith; Hawkins, Smith; Ketterers, Hawkins and Ketters .
 Clinch; Ollie M Marshall, Robert W Gadsden, John W. Hubert, Hubert; Rose M Richardson, John . Richardson; Betty Mae Smith. Clinch .
 John W Hubert, Chatham; Alberta Royal Warren, Annie Daniels, Screven; Mary J, Ferguson . Annie Daniels and Mary J are featured in the final episode of the series .
 African Exhibition iCoiiltmiftI from I'age 3) Chatham . Chatham, Chatham; Carrie C Williams, Liberty Elementary, Liberty, African Exhibition . The exhibition is held in the town of Chatham and will be held in October .
 Most of these groups talk differently from their neighbors, sometimes so differently that villagers living on opposite banks of a river are unable to communicate with each other . Most of the groups talk very differently from each other, sometimes even so differently .
 Many of them have dlffei-ent ways of raising food and family, of settling disputes, of dealing with Illnesses and emergencies, and even of burying the dead . Many of the people in the world have ways of surviving, raising food, family and settling disputes .
 Into It go water and soil, heat and aridity, marsh and jungle, marsh, jungle, mantled hill and naked valley .
 The Reading Workshop of SSC was organized June 10, with Mr Robert Holt .
 Group 1 worked extensively on Diagnostic Reading, where much research was used in the College Llbi'ary, at home and at home, and the reading center .
 Miss Vera Adkins demonstrated the use of the Teleblnocular, and Mrs, Louis Owens demonstrated the Audiometer . Mrs Owens also demonstrated the Audometer .
 The findings included developing reading readiness, grouping. improving rates, and vocabulary .
 Research findings presented on study skills, comprehension, and reference skills . Research findings were presented on the study skills and comprehension .
 SSC Ahimnns Receives M.A. in Ethication among the 1,300 candidates for degrees at Ball State Teachers College in Muncie, Indiana .
 Jefferson William Scruggs received his Master of Arts in Education Degree Sunday, June 9 . He received his Bachelor of Science Degree in Industrial Arts at Savannah State College in 1954 . He is now employed by the Board of School Commissioners of Indianapolis .
 For seven years, he has been a faculty member of Mary E, Cable Junior High School associated with the industrial arts department . He has also been associated with Mary E. Cable junior high School's Industrial Arts Department .
 Summer.63 SSC Science Workshop Provides Innumerable Experiences For Teachers . Workshop provides opportunities for teachers on the elementary level to increase their knowledge .
 Each teacher is required to present a problem for investigation in the specific area of science in which she Is seeking more Information . Each teacher must present a . problem for . investigation in a specific area . of science .
 After this, she Is assisted in using literature on this problem with the expectation that she will develop a hypothesis of her own, relative to the answer . She expects to find the answer through experimental work .
 The teacher is guided in her thinking on what methods to use In search for the answer to her problem, and what materials would be needed In making this study .
 After this has been decided, the teacher is now ready for experimental work . It will provide the opportunity for the teacher to arrive at a conclusion based on her own work .
 Special study in all the areas listed under ""Suggested Principles for Science Curriculum "" is required of all participants in the workshop .
 Ph. Tucker, Ph.D.. in Chemistry at Savannah State College, on Chemistry and related areas . Tucker: "Chemistry and its related areas"
 To increase the teacher's capacity to motivate students into science careers . To help fill out a void in a teacher's background in subject matter. To help . fill out . a void . in teaching subject matter .
 The lectures are divided into four main units; The Periodic System and Atomic Structure; Common compounds and reactions used daily at home school and work . Introduction to Nuclear Chemistry and Introduction to Organic Chemistry .
 The periodic chart is used with all of the lectures in order to instill in the elementary teacher the concept of periodicity of elements and compounds in a given group or series .
 Some teachers are expected to make periodic charts of all the co:nmon elements as a workshop project . The project can be used as an aid in their respective science classes .
 In the unit on nuclear chemistry, the theory of natural and artificial radioactivity is briefly discussed . A few equations are used for illustrative purposes . The theory of artificial and natural radioactivity has been discussed .
 The production and acceleration of high energy particles is also included in this unit . The production of high-energy particles also is included in the unit .
 In the unit on organic chemistry, no details will be given on special classes of compounds . No details on special compounds are given .
 Only common organic compounds will be treated as certain alcohols, flavorings, acids, and some carbohydrates . The list of organic compounds to be treated is limited to certain alcohol, flavor and acids .
 Electricity and magnetism attracted a majority of the teachers at the school . After getting a working knowledge of the atom, its structure, and its contributions to our everyday living .
 These questions served as bases for experimental work . Several simple experiments have been performed to bring out these principles .
 Participants have been provided an opportunity to study space science . In the area covering the Universe and the Solar System, the participants have been given a chance to learn about space science.
 These models are made with plywood cut in a round figure about eighteen Inches In diameter . plywood is cut in round figures about eighteen inches in diameter .
 The large sun Is represented with a large electric light bulb in the center of the figure .
 The other planets are placed in the figure . In their positions relative to the sun with smaller light bulbs . The planets were placed in . the figure in their positions .
 All bulbs are wired for AC electricity, which will light up the entire figure . It will show what is meant by space, or outer space, in outer space .
 The teachers in the workshop have heard many interesting discussions on life in both plants and animals . How life Is maintained in the bodies of both animals has been the chief topic for discussions .
 These discussions have provided opportunities to study many different principles of the biological sciences . The discussions have led to discussions about biological science .
 Aquariums and terrariums have been made to demonstrate principles of association that exist between the plant kingdom and the animal kingdom .
 The teachers are making special posters on nutrition, exercise, cleanliness, and correct posture as they relate to good health .
 Some of the causative agents of diseases are being discussed . Some experimental work with bacteria is being done to show teachers that these same experiments could be used In the elementary schools .
 Everyone appears to be most interested in the work, and will be better prepared to teach the sciences beginning next school term .
 Student Advisor and Editor-in-Chief of the Tiger's R,oar summer staff selected Wednesday . Summer staff was selected by student council members in St. Marys, Georgia . Tiger's summer staff will be based at the University of Georgia .
 At 12;15 m. June 12. at 12;30 a.m. in the Office of Public Relations in Savannah, Georgia .
 Mr Scott and Mr Baker in their summer publication efforts, will be assisted by Andrew S Russell, Instructor.
 Mr, Scott was host at the staff luncheon held in Adams Hall, Friday, June 14 at 12;30m.
 Staff members heard remarks from Miss Albertha E Boston, Assistant Professor in the Division of Business Administration and faculty advisor during the regular school year to the Tiger's Roar . Prince Mitchell also made remarks .
 The principle speakers for the occasion were Mr Baker and Mr Wilton C Scott . Acting Alumni Secretary, Mr Baker was the principal speaker of the occasion .
 July 20 date for national administration of the Peace Corps Placement Test is July 20 . Requests from 47 nations for additional Peace Corps Volunteers late this year prompted the addition of the July 20 deadline .
 More than 2,000 prospective Volunteers wilt enter training during the last five months of 1963 to supplement the 5,000 now ir the field and the 3,000 in training in the summer .
 Only requirement for admission is that the applicant has already submitted a Peace Corps Questionnaire or brings his completed application with him with him . Only requirement is that applicant must submit Peace Corps questionnaire or bring completed application .
 The test, which can't be ""passed"" or ""failed"" in the traditional sense, includes one-halfhour sections on general aptitude and modern language aptitude .
 Students who have had any prior training in Spanish or French take an additional onehour test of proficiency in the appropriate one . Students with prior Spanish and French training must also take a test of their proficiency in that one .
 The followingings are the scholastic standing of Social Greek Letter organizations at Savannah State College as of May 18, 1963 . The following is a list of the organizations at the college .
 Omega Psi Phi Fraternity is 2.514, IV, Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity, 2.475, Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity . Kappa Alpha Phi is the most prestigious fraternity fraternity in the world . Kappa Phi is a member of Phi Phi Phi fraternity .
 Students aged between the ages of 7 and 9 appeared in both scenes as users of the library .
 The program was narrated by Miss Mildred Harris, senior Social Science major, and summarized by Mrs Vivian Pressley. In Scene I Mrs, Sallie Phillips. an in-service teacher from Lesxy, acted as a typified old librarian.
 Constance Smith, in-service teacher, Tennllle, acted as modern school librarian . She is concerned with bringing books and children together, as well as the role of working closely with teachers and pupils .
 Vidalia Vidalia, served as assistant librarian whose responsibility was that of audio visual materials . Vidalia was the librarian at the Library of the U.S. State of Columbia University in Washington, D.C. Vidalia is a member of the library's staff . Vid
 Thelma Hines portrayed the modern teacher who seeks help from the librarian and the library for strengthening her classroom program . Hines was portrayed as a modern librarian who sought help from a librarian .
 Mr Jerome Smith, senior, Health & Physical Education; Mr Joe William, senior. Sociology . Mr Smith was senior, Mr William was senior . Mr William is senior. Mr Smith is senior .
 Health & Physical Education, and Mr Robert Florence, senior, Social Science. Health and Physical Education . Mr Florence is senior at the University of Cambridge .
 Religion, of which the rewards are distant, is animated only by Faith and Hope . Religion will glide by degrees out of the mind unless it is invigorated and reimpressed by eternal ordinances, by stated calls to worship, and by stated worship .
 We have just enough religion to make us hate, but not enough to love, one another . Those who obey their conscience are of my religion, and I am of the religion of brave and good .
 We cannot make a religion for others, and we ought not to let others make religion for us . We can't make a religious religion for ourselves, we should not make it for us, he says .
 ErroU Garner Concert Album Now in Release . Erroll Garner's first concert recording in seven years is in current release . ISeiv Errou Garner Concert album now in release .
 The album has met with raves from ""Variety,"" ""Billboard"" and ""Cash Box."" the trade papers of the record industry . Titled ""ONE WORLD CONCERT."" the album has been met with rave reviews .
 The ""ONE WORLD CONCERT" title refers to the universality of Garner's impact and musical appeal . Garner's influence is said to be universal and his musical appeal is evident everywhere .
 Garner's concert itinerary in 1963 will include the United States, Canada, England and Europe . Garner's world-acclaimed, world-renowned, Garner's concerts will be held in the U.S. and Canada .
 Garner, himself, is making half a dozen network television appearances in conjunction with the release of the ""ONE WORLD CONCERT"" album . Garner will be appearing in a number of network TV appearances .
 Garner spent several weeks selecting the numbers for tliis albmn from the more than twelve hours of recorded material from his performances at the Seattle Fair . Garner spent the last few weeks selecting songs from more than 12 hours of recordings .
 Garner's extemporaneous in-person performance is captured completely in the ""ONE WORLD CONCERT"" album . Garner's spontaneity and dynamic quality of Garner's performance was captured completely .
 Authentic sound quality has been uniquely reproduced in this recording, bringing the at-home listener to the front row of a Garner concert . Students seeking admission to Savannah State College for the first time are reminded that all details connected with Initial admission must be completed by September 5 .
 The final administration of the College Entrance Board Scholastic Achievement Test is scheduled for August 14 . Applicants are also reminded that the final administration is scheduled to be held on August 14.
 Applications for this examination must be made before July 17 or with a $2.50 penalty before July 31 . Applications must be submitted by the end of July 17 .
 Each person whose name is listed here has attained an average of 3.50 or higher on a full program during the spring quarter 1963 . Beach High School, DEAN'S List, is compiled from students from the school in 1963 .
 Beaton, Juliette Beaton 3.68, Branch, Margie 3.66 David, Elease 3.50 Duncan, Annie B, 3.93 3,64 Flynn, Comer 4.00 Grant, Moses A 3.00 . Jenkins, Clyde E 3.
 Emmitt 3.66 Moran, Ellsa M 3.72 Owens, Veronica 4.00 Pittman, Theodore.66 . Randolph Randolph. Emmitt .
 The U.S. Army Reserve is recruiting college graduates to participate in a language training program for Army Military Intelligence and Army Security Agency Reserve units . The Army Reserve wants to recruit college graduates .
 The Army Language School is at Monterey, California, where they will be taught to speak, read, and write a foreign language .