 In 1962, Cuba obtained nuclear launching pads in which they set up multiple missiles . Cuba obtained the launch pads in 1962, setting up multiple launches .
 These missiles were so important to the United States because of how close they were to U.S. territory . The missiles are so important that they were so close to United States territory .
 In 1962, the pilot of an American spy plane passed over Cuba and photographed a missile being installed . The pilot of a spy plane photographed the missile installation .
 The pilot immediately told John F Kennedy, the current U.S. President, that he had been in the plane .
 President Kennedy was extremely upset by this and called together a group known as ExComm . ExComm was a group of ex-commcommers . President Kennedy called it 'ExComm'
 Photographs were taken of missile installation 90 miles off the coast of Florida . They were taken by the pilot of an American U2 spy plane passing over Cuba .
 President John F Kennedy was taken aback by this and immediately wanted the missile removed . President Kennedy was immediately asked to remove the missile from the scene .
 Fidel Castro aligned himself with the Soviet Union when he was Prime Minister of Cuba . This all began when Fidel Castro, a Cuban politician and the Prime Minister, aligned himself to the USSR .
 Cuba depended very much on the Soviet Union for military and economic aid . Cuba depended heavily on Soviet economic and military aid .
 JFK scheduled a meeting with ExComm. The United States did not want a nuclear war to erupt out of this so JFK scheduled the meeting . JFK was concerned about nuclear war erupting .
 In these meetings were the president, vice president, and Executive Committee, the Attorney General, and other governmental officials .
 After that, the United States pondered over the solution that would resolve the confrontation . After that came a thirteen day military standoff, the U.S. pondered the solution .
 Bobby eventually ended up writing a book called Thirteen Days that is very popular, especially among schools . Bobby's book is now a very popular among schools, especially in schools .
 The plan that the United States proposed was to make a naval blockade around Cuba . The U.S. proposed was a plan that would have a naval blockage around Cuba.
 A nuclear war could have struck between Cuba and the U.S. If Khrushchev did not suggest the idea of writing a letter to Nikita S Khrushchchev, a nuclear war would have been possible .
 By writing the letter, Robert helped by preventing a war between the two countries, saving many people’s lives . Robert helped prevent a war by writing a letter .
 He thought of a peaceful yet effective idea, which most people can not do . "Most people can't do this," he said. "He thought of peace, but most people cannot do this."
 His campaign was extremely successful and he took office in January of 1965 . He took office on January 1, 1965 .
 "Many people like Bobby as a senator and suggested he run for president," says Sen. Bobby Kennedy . "Bobby has been a very successful senator," says Kennedy .
 In March of 1968, Bobby started his campaign for U.S. President after finishing as the Senate . Bobby ran for President in March 1968 .
 His campaign turned out very successful and he was thought very likely to win the election . He was thought to be the most likely candidate to win .
 Robert was assassinated by Sirhan Bishara Sirhan shortly after winning the California presidential primary .
 He was shot multiple times by the assassin and died that day, upsetting his family, friends, and the United States . The assassin's death upset the U.S.
 Bobby has continued to be appreciated for all that he did for the U.S. even though he has past away . Bobby has been appreciated for his work for the United States .
 On October 14, a U2 spy plane flying over Cuba took pictures of potential nuclear missiles that were examined by many government officials . The U2 plane flew over Cuba on October 14 .
 Eventually, the missiles were deemed not nuclear, but still capable of reaching the U.S. Eventually, they were deemed to be less than nuclear . The missiles were still able to reach the United States .
 President Kennedy was briefed on the dire situation and immediately assembled the National Security Council to determine how to address the issue . Two days later, President Kennedy met with the national security council to discuss the situation .
 This was put in place because Cuba had just signed a trade agreement with the USSR . Kennedy knew that the USSR having access to planting their missiles only 90 miles away from U.S. territory could be very dangerous .
 Castro and the Cubans were being defensive in their action of seeking help from the Soviet Union . It cannot be termed to be aggression against the United States of America if it was undertaken to secure a nation .
 The Bay of Pigs was an invasion that the CIA had financed which involved training a group of Cuban refugees to land in Cuba . Was there anything wrong about the British becoming allies?
 The primary goal of the invasion was to get rid of the communist government led by Fidel Castro . The main goal was to overthrow Castro's communist government .
 The Outcome of the invasion was unexpected, and the invasion failed miserably . The invasion failed, and was unexpected .
 The plan failed due to last minute cancellations of airstrikes, and the lack of knowledge that Castro had ordered 20,000 troops in advance to go to the attack site . This resulted in having the Cuban Air Force dominating the sky, which did not allow the U.S. army to
 In 1952 the United States got involved after Nicaragua solicited United States assistance to overthrow the Guatemalan leader, Jacobo Arbenz Guzman . The cultural, socio-political context is important to understand the seriousness of this crisis .
 President Truman authorized shipment of weapons and money to anti-Arbenz groups . Truman authorized the shipment of arms and money . President Truman approved the shipment .
 The operation to topple Arbenz quickly fizzled when representatives loyal to the president uncovered the plot and took steps to solidify their power . But, within five weeks, the operation fizzed .
 Eisenhower sought to defend American interests abroad with an increase in funds for nuclear weapons and covert operations . Later Eisenhower sought the increase of funds for covert operations and nuclear weapons .
 Eisenhower approved the first-ever clandestine military action in Latin America . After that, convinced that Arbenz threatened U.S. national security because of his alleged Communist sympathies, he approved the action .
 The Bay Of Pigs Operation is the United States final measure in preventing the spread of communism into the western hemisphere . The Bay of Pigs Operation was the U.S. final measure .
 For years the CIA and other intelligence agencies have taken interest in Cuba, following the overthrow of United States backed Cuban Leader Fulgencio Batista by rebel leader Fidel Castro .
 The Soviet Union was supplying materials and constructing nuclear missile sites on the island of Cuba . It was brought to the attention of the administration by way of a U-2 spy plane that the Soviets were building sites .
 The Cuba was an area that was significant to the Cold War and for the two great powers to balance with each other . Knowing the lack of respect that Khrushchev had for Fidel and the amount of effort that the U.S. put in attempting the invasion of Cuba, twice,
 Around 1945, tensions began arising between the United States and the USSR, which lead to the Cold War . The amount of effort it took to solve the problem shows that the problem wasn’t as great since it was easy to resolve .
 During a 40 year time period, each nation tried to spread their political and economic systems . During the 40 years period each nation was trying to spread its political, economic systems.
 Both the United States and the USSR wanted to spread their ideologies across the world . Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union were keen on spreading their ideologies around the world.
 The origin of the Cold War was distrust; in “fighting’s this war, political and military tactics were the most effective . Political, military and political tactics were most effective, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 An embargo is when there is a ban against a trade from a particular country . The embargo is usually followed by an embargo against trade from that country . It is not a trade embargo .
 The U.S. placed an embargo on Cuba except for food and medicine . The United States placed it on Cuba in 1953 . The embargo was imposed on Cuba .
 Starting around 1947, the United States entered a war-like situation against the Soviet Union .
 The two nations competed on gigantic scales, trying to achieve more in terms of invention, creativity, and efficiency . The two countries competed on enormous scales .
 The president wanted to ease the audience and the rest of the country into the new exploration age that the United States was headed towards . Because space was considered uncharted territory, which is still true in some cases .
 John F Kennedy appeals to the peoples’ pathos by speaking of conquering wary circumstances . Containment was used by the United States so they could prevent communism spreading .
 In which was successful in stopping communism from spreading but did require people being killed or be put in jail which is bad because they got punished for something they believed on . In which people were punished for believing on. In which is good because they were punished .
 This happened around 1954 because at that time they were fighting the cold war so they had to come with a quick and effective way to stop communism from spreading . Containment was the solution to the problem .
 Containment was a big step for the Unites states, they were to intimidate the Soviet Union . The U.S. states were to 'intimidate' the USSR .
 Those people were terrified of a nuclear missile attack during the Cold War time period . Those people would be terrified of an attack on a nuclear weapon .
 This would hopefully alleviate some of the fear of the citizens of the U.S. The U.K. citizens of America would be relieved of their fear of terrorism .
 He shows pathos by continuing to ease the citizens’ fear of a missile attack by showing compassion towards the people, writes CNN.com .