 He was the older brother of United States Attorney General and United States Senator Robert F ""Bobby"" Kennedy and Senator Edward M ""Ted"" Kennedy . He was also the brother of U.S. Attorney General Robert F "Bobby" Kennedy .
 He was the youngest elected U.S. President and first of the Catholic faith to hold the office . He was also the first elected United States President .
 He was born into a life of privilege but suffered from a variety of health ailments including whooping cough, appendicitis and scarlet fever . The second son of wealthy businessman Joseph Patrick Kennedy and Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy .
 Joseph Patrick Kennedy taught his children to be competitive in every aspect of life, but stressed the role of public service . Kennedy: "I'm not going to be afraid of competition, but I'm going to serve my country."
 Jack was educated at private schools and after his father was appointed U.S. Ambassador to England, he studied at the London School of Economics .
 He acquired experience while working as a secretary for his father in England . He later acquired experience in England while working in the UK .
 After World War II, he enlisted with the United States Navy . He served in the U.S. Navy during the war .
 During a patrol off the Solomon Island, the boat was rammed in two by a Japanese destroyer resulting in the deaths of two crewmen . Two crewmen were killed in the attack .
 Kennedy swam for four hours to a nearby island while towing an injured sailor by his lifejacket . Kennedy was towing the injured sailor to an island by lifejackets . Kennedy's rescue mission took place in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Kennedy decided to swim out on his own in order to find help . After several hours in the water, he reached another island where he came in contact with local fishermen .
 He carved a message on a coconut and gave it to fishermen who in turn forwarded it to the allies . The message was sent to the fishermen and the allies who forwarded it on to them .
 The ordeal further damaged Kennedy's already weakened back, which hindered him for the rest of his life . The ordeal however, further damaged his already weakened body, which he had to deal with .
 During the war, Kennedy's older brother Joseph ""Joe"" was killed in a plane crash . Kennedy's brother was killed during the war .
 With Joe now gone, attention shifted to Jack to be groomed for a political career and the ultimate goal, the presidency . Jack's ultimate goal is to be the president .
 Recognized as a war hero, Kennedy ran for a local Democratic Congressional seat and won . Kennedy won a Congressional seat in a Democratic district .
 In 1952, he was elected United States Senator from Massachusetts . In 1953 he married the beautiful Jacqueline Lee Bouvier, the daughter of a wealthy stockbroker, 12 years Kennedy's junior .
 Kennedy's popularity in the Senate grew to the point where he was strongly considered to be a running mate for 1956 Democratic Presidential Nominee Adlai Stevenson . Kennedy was a strong supporter of the 1956 Democratic presidential nominee Adlau Stevenson .
 Kennedy suffered from Addison's disease which often sapped his strength and vigor . Kennedy was diagnosed with the disease in 2003 .
 For his chronic back pain, he received regular injections of cortisone . For his back pain he had regular injections to treat it .
 In 1960, he launched his presidential campaign and promised a new chapter in America for a younger generation born in the 20th Century . In 1960 he launched a presidential campaign . He promised to be a president for a generation born born in America .
 While Nixon looked uncomfortable and unsure, Kennedy came off as confident and focused . Kennedy was confident and confident throughout the interview .
 It is widely believed that the debate influenced many to be in favor of Kennedy . The debate was widely believed to have influenced many of the voters .
 The 1960 Presidential Election was decided by the narrowest of margins with Kennedy the winner . Kennedy won the 1960 election by a narrow margin .
 In April of 1961 tensions with Cuba's dictator Fidel Castro reached a breaking point . In April 1961 tensions between Castro and Castro broke out in Cuba .
 The following year during October of 1962 a second situation with Cuba arose . He learned from his mistakes and the following year he learned from him .
 Soviet Union had begun to establish missile sites within Cuba directed towards the U.S. The Soviet Union began to establish sites in Cuba directed at the United States .
 The country faced a strong possibility of nuclear war with the Soviets . The country was faced with the possibility of a nuclear war . The Soviet Union was defeated by the Soviet Union .
 Several messages would go back and forth between Kennedy and Khrushchev over the next few days . The messages would be exchanged over the course of the day .
 Kennedy made a televised speech for implementing a quarantine on Cuba until the bases were dismantled . Kennedy called for a quarantine until Cuba was dismantled . The quarantine was implemented in Cuba until Cuba had been dismantled .
 Kennedy advanced the U.S. space program in order to compete with the Soviets . Kennedy's space program advanced the American space program to compete .
 Fear of losing southern support in the South because of his policies towards Civil Rights led Kennedy to go on a trip to Dallas, Texas, Texas .
 During a motorcade in Downtown, Dallas, Dallas on November 22, 1963 accompanied by Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy Kennedy . Mrs. Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Kennedy was fatally shot in the back of the neck and head and head . Kennedy was shot by Texas Governor John B Connally in Texas in 1968 .
 His flag draped casket would lie in state at the U.S. capital for two days . Over the next two days, the casket will lay in state in Washington .
 He was laid to rest at Arlington National Cemetery on November 25, 1963 . His funeral was held in 1963 .
 In the years since his death, details of alleged extramarital affairs surfaced including encounters with movie star Marilyn Monroe .
 It is widely believed that Lee Harvey Oswald, the alleged assassin did not act alone . Oswald is believed to have acted alone in the assassination .
 Dallas nightclub owner Jack Ruby shot Oswald to death on live television two days after Kennedy's death . Ruby was the nightclub owner who shot Oswald in Dallas nightclub . Ruby shot JFK's assassin to death in Dallas on live TV .
 Kennedy remains as one of the most popular presidents in American history . 35th President of the United States, United States Senator, . United States Congressman, Pulitzer Prize Winning Author .
 In spite of this, Kennedy remains as one of the most popular presidents in U.S. history . Kennedy remains a popular president .
 Photo Request Fulfill Photo Request for John Fitzgerald Kennedy has been fulfilled . Add photos to your Facebook page .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy memorials are available for purchase . The memorial will be held at Kennedy's home in Washington, DC .
 All photos uploaded successfully to the gallery . Click on the <b>Done button to see the photos in the gallery.
 Flower and Note is the world's largest flower collection of flowers .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy's memorial is found on Findagrave.com . Kennedy was a member of the Kennedy family . Kennedy died in 2008 at age 60 .
 This flower has been reported and will not be visible while under review . This flower is not visible during the time of review .
 There was an error deleting this problem . There was a problem deleting this issue .
 Visit the new Find a Grave Memorial Page . Use this page to view the original version of this article .
 Start Tour or don't show this again—I am good at figuring things out . Quickly see who the memorial is for and when they lived and died and where they are buried . Start Tour .
 For memorials with more than one photo, additional photos will appear here or on the photos tab . For more photos, visit the memorial page .
 All photos appear on this tab to update the sort order of photos on memorials you manage . The memorials on this page are sorted by order of memorials .
 To view a photo in more detail or edit captions for photos you added, click the photo to open the photo viewer . Click the photo in a photo to view it more detail .
 Flowers added to the memorial appear on the bottom of the memorial or here on the Flowers tab . Flowers added will appear at bottom of memorial or on the top of memorial .
 Family members linked to this person will appear here . Family members will appear in the weekly Newsquiz .
 Use the links under “See more…” to quickly search for other people with the same last name in the same cemetery, city, county, etc. etc. Use this search tool to help people search for others with same last names in same city, city or county .
 Remove advertising from a memorial by sponsoring it for just $5 . Sponsor This Memorial .
 Previously sponsored memorials or famous memorials will not have this option . Previously sponsored Memorials will also be available for free use .
 Share a memorial using social media sites or email. Share it with us on Facebook, Twitter or Facebook .
 Ancestry Tree, a virtual cemetery, is a virtual burial ground . Ancestry tree is a 'virtual cemetery' for people who search for their ancestors .
 PreviousNext Edit or Suggest Edit a memorial you manage or suggest changes to the memorial manager . Suggest changes to your memorial manager.
 Find a Grave is the latest episode of the popular television series, "Find a Grave" You can follow the rest of the series on Facebook and Twitter .
 We have 2 volunteers within ten miles of your requested photo location . Please submit your photo to a photo location in order to be photographed .
 We have a volunteer within fifty miles of your requested photo location . Please submit a photo of yourself to the photo gallery below .
 We have 2 volunteers within fifty miles of your requested photo location . We have two volunteers within 50 miles of our requested photo locations .
 We do not have any photo volunteers within fifty miles of your requested photo location . Please submit your request for a photo of yourself and your location .
 If a new volunteer signs up in your requested photo location, they may see your existing request and take the photo . If you want a photo of yourself, the photo will be taken by a volunteer .
 You have chosen this person to be their own family member . Enter numeric value Enter memorial Id Year should not be greater than current year Invalid memorial .
 Find a Grave doesn't work properly without JavaScript enabled . We're sorry, but find a Grave requires that you have the ability to read more .
 Use the feedback button at the bottom right corner of any page to send us your thoughts .
 You can use the ""Back to the old site"" link in the yellow bar at the top of each page to return to the former site for now .
 Watch tutorial videos Continue Sign in or Register . Find a Find a Grave account to continue .
 There is a problem with your email/password . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Visit CNN.com/Newsquiz .
 Your account has been locked for 30 minutes due to too many failed sign in attempts . Sign in at least 30 times a day to sign in .
 Please contact Find a Grave at if you need help reset your password . Please contact us for help reset the password .
 Email not found. Please complete the captcha to let us know you are a real person . If you have questions, please contact Email Not Found Email not Found .
 There is a problem with your email/password . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 We have sent you an activation email to sign up for the weekly Newsquiz . Please email us at a new email address to sign in to our new Facebook post .
 Password Reset Please enter your email address and we will send you a reset password code . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 This account already exists, but the email address still needs to be confirmed . Sign up New Member Register . Email and Password are mandatory .
 Place the pin on the map to continue. Plot Cemetery using Map Plot Memorial . Use Map Plot to create a map of the cemetery . Map Plot Cemetery .
 Use this map to help with navigation navigation . Use the map to navigate through the world's most populous counties . The map is based on latitude latitude and longitude . latitude latitude is Latitude Longitude .
 "There was a problem getting your location. To use this feature, use a newer browser." "LocationError" is a sign of support for this feature .
 Find a Grave is unable to get a precise Current Location for this device . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com .
 "You may have added sensitive information to this bio. Try again later" "PII" is the name of a person who added "sensitive information"
 We encourage you not to include information such as tax, social security, other ID numbers, or information about living people without their consent .
 "If you keep seeing this error please email us" "EmailUs" "BackToSearchPage" is "Back to the search page" "Our search page is a search page. Please email us."
 It is calculated based on information added to the related person&#39;s memorial . The memorials are based on the memorials of those who died .
 "Server error occurred while getting Memorial" "Only include what is on a grave marker." "FailedCancel" is "Error canceling edit" "FieldLocked"    "Locked due to pending edit suggestion" "ServerErrorOccurredWhileGettingMemorial
 "Server error occurred while processing Edits. Try again later" "CancelSuggestion"    "Current"  "Cols" is "cols" "Rows" "View"" "Current": "Current:" "Current: "Current," "Col
 "You have suggested a lot of edits. Please try again." "TooManyEdits" is a response to a suggestion of an edit request . "Please try again" is the first word "refresh"
 The memorial has been modified outside this session . Please complete the captcha to prove that you are not a bot .
 We are working on updates to the edit process . We are testing some changes on memorials managed by Find a Grave . We're working on changes to the editing process and testing .
 "Cenotaphs can only be merged with memorials in the same cemetery or with no burial information" "MergeIsMemorial" is marked as a memorial site, so it cannot be merged""MergeDeclined" is a suggestion previously reviewed and was declined
 This memorial is currently managed by Find a Grave . Please review these memorials before submitting .
 As a memorial manager, you will be expected to transfer management to you . "I agree, transfer the memorial" is a reference to the memorial .
 "You have sent several suggested edit emails. Try again later." "TooManyEmails" is the name of an email message .
 We ask for your location so that we can know what photo requests are near you . When you choose to be a photo volunteer, we ask for the location of the photo requests .
 'Custom Flowers' can then be added to memorials, just like the standard virtual flowers . It lets you upload 'Custom flowers' to a memorial .
 "My Scrapbook" feature lets you collect and store the flowers and graphics you use most often in one convenient place . "When you click to add flowers to a Find a Grave Memorial, your default flower category will be presented to you first."
 You can download your records for a favorite cemetery or virtual cemetery by choosing it from the list below . To set your default category, choose it from a pop up list then click 'Save Changes'
 Add or remove cemeteries from your list by clicking the <b>Add Favorite or <b >Favorited button on the cemetery page . Add or add a favorite or favorite cemetery to the cemetery list .
 Default Language Translation on Find a Grave is an ongoing project . Default language Translation is a language translation project . Use this tutorial to help you understand more about the world .
 If you notice a translation problem, please send a message to and include a link to the page and details about the problem .
 We have set our language to based on information from the user's browser . Use the language below to view the language you speak in the English .