 Tony Judt’s Postwar A History of Europe Since 1945 is cause for celebration . Judt's Postwar is a history of Europe since 1945 .
 The product of a decade’s labor, it is sweeping narrative history in the grand tradition . It is a deeply learned and absorbing chronicle of Europe since the fall of Berlin, weaving East and West, North and South .
 Tony Judt has drawn on forty years of reading and writing about modem Europe to craft this account of the continent's remarkable journey out of the devastation of history’s most savage war .
 Postwar is the very opposite of the dutiful plod, Postwar . While his range is vast, there is no country, no vital theme, no crucial individual, no watershed event fails to get its moment in the narrative sun .
 Animated and propelled by the celebrated force of its author’s point of view, it is never less than brilliant . It is an animated and brilliant film that never fails to be lost .
 Postwar is a rare joy for lovers of history and lovers of Europe alike . It's a show from which one exits, dazzl ed, into the present moment, with much mental furniture rearranged .
 Twas bom in London in 1948 . With 9 MAPS AND 77 PHOTOGRAPHS 1005 TONY JUD .
 Postwar is the story of Europe’s transformation from lethal division and devastating war to a peaceful, prosperous pancontinental union .
 It is hard to imagine how a better—and more readable—history of the emergence of today’s Europe from the ashes of 1945 could ever be written . "An epically important subject has, to the benefit of us all, found the author it deserves"
 Tony Judt, long one of the wisest heads and clearest voices around, has produced a magisterial history and a solid foundation for clear thinking about the future . Judt is long regarded as one of Britain's wisiest heads and brightest voices .
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the publisher of this
 The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law .
 Do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrightable materials . Please purchase only authorized electronic editions and do not .
 It is not really even a continent -- just a subcontinental annexe to Asia . It's not really a continent—just a subcontinent annex to Asia, it's a sub-continental annex .
 It is dwarfed by Russia, which covers seventeen million square kilometers . Russia is the largest country in the world .
 In the intensity of its internal differences and contrasts, Europe is unique, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Europe has a unique set of contrasts, he says .
 Most of these consist of states and nations with their own languages; quite a few incorporate additional nations and languages without states . All have their distinct and overlapping histories, politics, cultures and memories; and every one of them has been studied .
 Even for the brief, sixty-year period of Europe’s history since the end of the Second World War, the secondary literature in English alone is inexhaustible . For this period above all above all, for this period, the . period above . all . The secondary literature
 No one can aspire to write a fully comprehensive or definitive history of contemporary Europe . No one, therefore, can write a definitive history .
 Historians often struggle to find the dispassionate disengagement of the historian . But I do know that it can sometimes render it difficult to find . The historian says he hopes the historian will be able to make a difference .
 Postwar offers an avowedly personal interpretation of the recent European past . Without, I hope, abandoning objectivity and fairness, Postwar .
 In a word that has acquired undeservedly pejorative connotations, it is opinionated . The word "opinionated" is a word for opinionated opinionated.
 Some of its judgments will perhaps be controversial, some will surely prove mistaken . Some will perhaps prove mistaken, some may prove mistaken. Some of the judgments are perhaps controversial .
 For good and ill they are my own—as are any mistakes which are bound to have crept into a work of this length and scope . For good or ill, they are all the words and opinions of the author .
 If the errors are contained, and at least some of the assessments and conclusions in this book prove durable, then I owe this in large measure to the many scholars and friends on whom I have relied in the course of researching and writing it .
 "A book of this kind rests, in the first instance, on the shoulders of other books," says the author . "It's not a book that rests on other people's shoulders, it rests on them," she says .
 A full apparatus of references is not provided here . To avoid adding to what is already a very long book addressed to a general readership, the book is not available .
 The classics of modern history writing to which I have looked for inspiration include Eric Hobsbawm's The Age of Extremes, George Lichtheim’s Europe in the Twentieth Century . A J P Taylor's English History 1914-1945 and the late Francois F
 These books and their authors share an assurance born of wide learning and the sort of intellectual self-confidence rarely found among their successors . As well as a clarity of style, these books should be a model for every historian, they should be an example for all .
 Harold James, Mark Mazower and Andrew Moravcsik are among those scholars who have learned the most from their own writings on recent European history .
 Alan Milward's studies of the postwar economy have left a special debt for his iconoclastic studies of postwar Europe . I—along with everyone who studies modern Europe—owe a special . debt to Milward .
 To the extent that I can claim familiarity with the history of central and eastern Europe, I owe this to the work of a gifted cohort of younger scholars, including Brad Abrams, Catherine Merridale, Marci Shore and Timothy Snyder .
 Timothy Garton Ash has written a book about central Europe . He has also written about the two Germanies in the era of Ostpolitik . The book is published by Timothy Ash at the University of Cambridge .
 Jan Gross has written with matchless insight and humanity, says Jan Gross . Gross: "I have learned not only some Polish history but also how to understand the social consequences of war" Gross: Gross' work on the social impact of war is "matchless insight"
 The sections on Italy in this book owe a transparent debt to the work of Paul Ginsborg, just as the chapters dealing with Spain reflect what I have learned from reading and listening to the remarkable Victor Perez-Diaz .
 Anne-Marie Slaughter's work on ‘disaggregated states’ argues forcefully for the EU form of international governance not because it is inherently better or because it represents an ideal model but because in the world in which we find ourselves, nothing else will work . The EU form
 All across Europe, friends, colleagues and audiences have taught me far more about the continent’s recent past and its present than I could ever have gleaned from books and archives . All over Europe has taught me much more about Europe's recent past than I've gleaned .
 I am especially grateful to Krzysztof Czyzewski, Peter Kellner, Ivan Krastev and Denis Lacorne . Mircea Mihaes, Berti Musliu, Susan Neiman and David Travis for their hospitality and help .
 I am indebted to Istvan Rev for his invaluable insistence that—however distasteful the experience—I must visit Budapest’s House of Terror .
 Dino Buturovic kindly scrutinized my account of the Yugoslav linguistic imbroglio . Dino Buturvic kindly critiqued me for my account . The Yugoslav language was a linguistic issue .
 I could not have developed the Remarque Institute without the generous support and patronage of Yves-Andre Istel . The Institute hosted many of the workshops and lectures from which I have learned so much, he says .
 Like so many, I am deeply beholden for friendship and advice to my agents Andrew Wylie and Sarah Chalfant . They have been unfailingly supportive of the project that took longer—and grew larger—than they can have anticipated .
 Some of the evaluations and opinions that surface in Chapters 12 and 14 were first published in essay form in the remarkable arts pages that he cultivates at the back of The New Republic .
 Others—Jessica Cooperman and Avi Patt—did invaluable work as research assistants for the study . The study was published in the New York Review of Science .
 Alex Molot diligently identified and accumulated the published and unpublished statistical reports and data series on which a book of this sort inevitably and very properly depends . Molot: "Alex Molot meticulously collected and accumulated" the data series .
 "My family has lived with postwar Europe for a very long time," she says of her family . Her children have lived with the post-war Europe for the whole of their young lives, she says .
 They have been tolerant of the absences, travels and obsessions to which it has given rise, but have made distinctive contributions to its content . Not only have they been tolerant, they have also contributed to the creation of the world's most famous books .
 To Daniel, the book owes its title; to Nicholas, the reminder that not all good stories get a happy ending . Daniel, Nicholas, is a reminder of the fact that not every good story gets a good ending .
 To his wife Jennifer the book also owes a lot to his wife, he says . "To my wife Jennifer," he says, "to be careful and constructive readings"
 Postwar is dedicated to her. xv Postwar . Shortly after Germany’s defeat in 1945, a child walks past the corpses of hundreds of former inmates ofBergenBelsen .
 German soldiers publicly hanged in Kiev in 1946 following their conviction for war crimes . German soldiers were executed in 1946 .
 The appalling crimes committed by the German army, the SS and their local collaborators were real enough . However mixed the Soviet motivation in staging post-war trials and executions was real enough.
 Draza Mihailovic, wartime leader of Yugoslavia’s Chetnik resistance, before a military court in June 1946 . He was the leader of the resistance in Yugoslavia .
 For Communist partisans the Chetniks posed almost as great a threat as the foreign occupiers . After the war Tito suppressed them ruthlessly . After Tito's defeat they were suppressed .
 Frenchwoman is shaved and paraded around town of Laval after liberation by American troops in August 1944 . Accused of ‘horizontal collaboration with the German occupiers’
 Thousands of women in France, Belgium and the Netherlands suffered similar retribution . Thousands in France and Belgium were targeted in the same way .
 Women queued for coal in London at the height of the bitter winter of February 1947 . Women queuing for coal at the peak of the winter in London .
 The fuel shortage was so acute that most of these women had to wait all day to collect their weekly ration . Most of the women were forced to wait for their weekly fuel ration all day .
 A mother and her children drawing their family allowance in Stratford, east London, on August 6th 1946— the day the allowances were first introduced .
 Europe’s post-war welfare states wrought an authentic social revolution, dramatically improving the life-chances of middle and working classes alike . The welfare states are now a major source of social change in Europe .
 Bread made from Marshall Plan flour’ being distributed to Greek orphans . Bread is being distributed in the hope of saving the lives of the Greek orphans.
 Even in impoverished Greece the Plan’s morale-boosting functions were at least as important as its material contribution to economic recovery . The Plan's morale boosting function was at the heart of its economic recovery in Greece, says the author .
 The USSR's Western supporters are marching under a French banner . Note that the USSR’s Western supporters were marching under the French banner.
 Czechs assemble in Prague’s Wenceslas Square on February 25 th 1948 to hear Klement Gottwald announce the formation of a new government . Czechs gather in Prague's Wencesla Square to hear Gottwald speak .
 The Communist coup was by no means greeted with universal dismay . Note the range of contrasting emotions among the spectators in the crowd .
 Stalin broke with Communist Yugoslavia in the spring of 1948 not because of its policies but in irritation at Tito’s insubordination, his personality cult and his growing challenge to Moscow's monopoly of Communist authority . Tito's personality cult, personality cult meant he was challenging Moscow
 Dean Acheson, Ernest Bevin, Robert Schuman and Robert Schumum proposed a European Coal & Steel Community .
 The option of ‘dissolving the people and electing another one’proved unattainable, though not for want of trying . ‘Dissolving’ the people was not a success, but it was a failure .
 As Communist Interior Minister, Rajk had himself been responsible for the death of many innocents . But his trial and subsequent execution turned him into a martyr for future generations .
 Jean-Paul Sartre admiring rare books in the Leningrad National Library, June 23rd 1954 . Jean-Sartre was a French citizen of the 1950s .
 Sartre's indulgence for Communism in these years derived from romantic illusions (and anti-Americanism ) rather than ideology . In subsequent decades it was to sully his international reputation and dim his post-war reputation .
 Imre Nagy following his appeal to the UN, November ist 1956 . Nagy's appeal was rejected by the UN in 1956 .
 Nagy paid dearly for his role in the doomed Hungarian revolt . Moscow paid the higher price, extinguishing the illusions of its own followers . Nagy's role in Hungary's doomed revolt cost Moscow dearly .
 Western governments were not sorry to see the perennial crisis over Berlin resolved by the Soviet Unions decision to erect a physical barrier between the two halves of the occupied city . Despite their protests to the contrary Western governments did not want to see this resolved .
 His contributions to deStalinization (notably the ‘Secret Speech’ of February 1956) were invaluable . However, the consequences exceeded his wishes .
 Rainer Fassbinder’s acid dissection of the shortcomings of the post-war Federal Republic . The Marriage of Maria Braun is a film about the relationship between Maria Braun and Maria Braun . The film is based on the marriage of the late Federal Republic in 1945 .
 To its youthful critics, West Germany’s obsession with prosperity, political demobilization and collective forgetting were just the old German defects in a new guise . To its young critics, it was just a new German defect in a guise . West Germany was obsessed with prosperity .
 In reality Konrad Adenauer (who hailed from the Catholic Rhineland) heartily disliked Prussian Berlin . Adenauer was a Catholic who hated the Prussian capital .
 He was not above wielding the divided city as a lever to extract concessions from his Western Allies . But he was also not above using it to force concessions from the West .
 Dien Bien Phu was captured by Vietminh forces in May 1954 . French soldiers were taken into captivity after the battle of the same year .
 France’s humiliating expulsion from Vietnam contributed to a disastrous reluctance, particularly on the part of the army, to relinquish the country's remaining holdings in North Africa . The French army is reluctant to give up its remaining North Africa holdings .
 Egyptians demanding the withdrawal of AngloFrench forces, December 1956 . Egyptians demanding withdrawal of troops from Egypt in 1956 .
 Charles de Gaulle seized power in May 1958 in a virtual coup; but he re-established France as a presence in world affairs . The Fifth Republic has proven more stable than its predecessors .
 OAS waged a bloody war of vengeful terror against those it held responsible for the loss of Algeria . The OAS was responsible for Algeria's defeat in 1962 .
 Dean Acheson's famous 1962 quip about Britain’s post-imperial discomfiture prompted the cartoonist Vicky to depict British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan’�s humiliating and obsequious ‘special relationship’ with Washington .
 A Czechmade Tatra-603 on display at the Brno Trade Fair, September 1959 . Czech made from scratch .
 Although modern consumer durables — cars, fridges, washing machines — were now within reach of many west European households, vast distinctions of wealth and class remained .
 Fun in the sun is now a realistic aspiration for a growing number of European holidaymakers . Fun in sun was now a reality aspiration for many European travellers, say experts .
 Bardot remained for a while on the Cote d’Azur she had made famous but many of her friends moved away, fleeing the onslaught of mass tourism . Bardot: "I'm not afraid to go back to France, but I'm glad to see you back"
 Four decades later they remain the outstanding—perhaps the only — common reference point for Sixties-generation memories worldwide . Four decades after they were released, they remain an outstanding — perhaps the only . reference point .
 The 1950s’ ‘lost generation’ was caught between their Depressionera parents and the baby-boomers to follow . The 'lost generation' lacked entertainment or recreation facilities .
 Many blouson noirs, Halbstarker or skinknuttar, turned to gang violence . Many turned to gangs after being caught in gang violence. Gang violence is still a problem today .
 Workers from automobile plants and tire factories demonstrating in Turin’s Piazza San Carlo, September 25 th 1969 . Workers from car factories and tire plants demonstrate .
 In Italy as in France, mass strikes and workers’ protests posed a greater threat to the authorities than the transient radicalism of the universities . Mass strikes and strikes were a threat to Italy as well as France as in Italy, says the author .
 Mao, Stalin, Engels and Marx atop a flag with hammer and sickle were not notably doctrinaire . Despite the Marxian iconography, the rebels of 1968 were not notable doctrinaires .
 The Soviet invasion extinguished the Prague Spring, and any remaining illusions about Communism itself . The Prague Spring was the spring's first uprising against Communism .
 ETA gunmen killed an average of 34 people through the Eighties in Basquia . ETA was inspired by a desire to escape the threat of violence .
 IRA gunmen, Protestant gunmen and British Army killed nearly two thousand in 30-year-long three-way confrontation between IRA gunmen and the British Army . Nearly two thousand people were killed in the conflict .
 In West Germany there were nearly three million ‘guest workers’, mostly from Mediterranean countries . The majority of those were from the Mediterranean region .
 Europe’s ‘economic miracle’ depended heavily on the contribution of these migrants, and the remittances they sent home . Europe's 'economic miracle' depends heavily on these migrants’ contribution, writes David Cameron .
 West European welfare legislation chiefly benefitted employed workers and families . Post-war west European welfare laws were mainly aimed at employed workers .
 Francisco Franco and his anointed successor, Prince Juan Carlos, took over in 1971 . Francisco Franco was the Spanish president of the Francoist state .
 In retrospect the transition to parliamentary democracy in Mediterranean Europe appears smooth, even inevitable . In retrospect, the transition appears smooth and even inevitable. In retrospect it appears to be a smooth transition to democracy in the region .
 Many on Left and Right alike expected something else and were surprised at the outcome . At the time, however, many on left and right alike were surprised .
 Chancellor Willy Brandt and GDR premier Willi Stoph met in Erfurt, Germany, in March 1970 . Brandt was Chancellor Willi Brandt's first German-East German premier .
 Brandt’s Ostpolitik opened contacts and eased tensions in central Europe . But to some West Germany seemed to be legitimizing and even propping up its Communist neighbours . West Germany was legitimizing itself as a Communist state .
 Thatcher’s success in extracting a huge EEC budget rebate for Britain owed much to her skill at seducing and browbeating not just the British electorate but even seasoned cynics like Francois Mitterrand .
 Karol Wojtyla did not single-handedly bring down Communism as many fondly believed . His contribution to the discrediting of the regime in Poland was immense .
 Michnik was one of the most courageous and original critics of Communism in eastern Europe . Michnik's work was published in 1989 and 1990 . He was awarded a Nobel Prize for his work on Communism in Russia .
 His emphasis was on eroding Communist power from within, rather than seeking to confront or overthrow it . Notably influential was his emphasis upon non-violence and eroding communist power from inside .
 The last Soviet leader was never as popular at home as he was abroad . Success abroad encouraged him to pursue reform at home, perhaps beyond his initial intentions .
 East German refugees in a sealed train, heading through Prague to the West, November 1989 . East Germany refugees in sealed train heading through Czech Republic .
 The Bolshevik Revolution began with Lenin crossing Germany in a sealed train, so sending Communist citizens to freedom this way was altogether fitting . Lenin crossed Germany in the sealed train .
 Outside Romania the transitions of 1989 saw little serious violence . Perhaps because many Communist cadres understood better than critics that these regimes were doomed .
 The scandals of Yeltsin's presidency should not obscure his achievements, says Vladimir Putin . Yeltsins' achievements should not be forgotten, he says . Putin's achievements should be remembered for his achievements in Russia, says Putin .
 He was much quicker than Gorbachev to understand what was happening and to adapt . He was quicker to adapt to the re-emergence of national states in the wake of empire .
 Thirty thousand people died as a result of the Chernobyl explosion in 1986 . 30,000 people were killed in the blast . Chernobyl was the site of a massive nuclear reactor explosion .
 Chernobyl was not the first nuclear disaster in Soviet history — merely the worst . Nor was Chernobyl the first Soviet nuclear disaster . It was the worst of all Soviet nuclear disasters .
 Communist industrial policy coupled economic dysfunction with environmental irresponsibility . The result of the Communist Party's industrial policy is to blame for environmental problems . The U.S. has a history of economic and environmental failures .
 The death of the Aral Sea, like the poisoning of Lake Baikal, was an ecological catastrophe and a huge mortgage on the future, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: The death is an ecological disaster and a massive mortgage on future .
 Demonstrators in Kiev in September 1991 (one week after Ukrainian independence) holding photos ofNKVD victims . Demonstrations in Kiev one week after independence from Soviet Union .
 The memory of Soviet repression was especially strong in Ukraine, subjected by Stalin to an induced, punitive famine that amounted to neargenocide . Ukraine was subjected to a famine by Stalin, which amounted to nearlygenocide.
 An estimated five million Gypsies live in Europe, at least two million in Romania alone . An estimated 5 million people are believed to be part of the Gypsy population .
 Criminal syndicates tricked or abducted girls from Romania and the former USSR into prostitution in western Europe and the Balkans . Girls were lured into prostitution by criminal syndicates in the former Soviet Union .
 While awaiting entry to the EU, Hungary joined NATO as a second best —and was promptly committed to the war in Kosovo . The country is now in the midst of a crisis in the Balkans .
 Serb irregulars under Ratko Mladic marched 7,400 Bosnian men and boys out of the town and shot them . UN peacekeeping contingent of armed Dutch soldiers stood by as the massacre unfolded .
 In the final act of the Yugoslav wars, Milosevic sought to terrorize the Albanian community into departing . In the past, the Albanians were terrorized into leaving the country .
 NATO intervention was its first ever ever . This blatant exercise in ethnic cleansing belatedly triggered armed intervention by NATO . NATO intervention is the first ever .
 France—an EU founding member—rejected the proposed ‘European Constitution’ in a national referendum, May 2005 . France is one of the EU's founding members . Erdogan's supporters waved flags of Turkey and EU flags as he returned to Ankara in December 2004 .
 French voters feared too little European regulation; some feared too much European regulation . Some French voters fear too little EU regulation; others fear too much EU regulation .
 Even in Scandinavia the new populism prompted mainstream parties to show their own ‘firmness’ by restricting asylum and foreigners’ rights . In Scandinavia, mainstream parties have shown their own 'firmeness’
 Tony Blair’s ‘Third Way’ between the European ‘model’ and the unrestricted market had limited success . Tony Blair tried to triangulate between the EU and London's ‘special relationship’ with Washington .
 When offered the chance, many Brits sought medical care on the Continent . Many Brits seek medical care in Europe .
 Moroccans in Andalucian city of Almeria protest against Spanish racism . Moroccasans in the Andaluans protested against Spanish racist treatment of them .
 The incidence of prejudice and tension remained high along the EU’s porous Mediterranean frontier . While much of western Europe had become increasingly multicultural, prejudice remained high . The EU's porous Mediterranean border is the source of tension .
 Islam was Europe’s fastest growing religion, an ironic legacy of the imperial past . Islam is Europe's fastest-growing religion, a legacy of Christian Europe's imperial past. Islam is the world's fastest growing faith .
 German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder spoke on the sixtieth anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz . He spoke at a ceremony in Berlin to mark the 50th anniversary .
 World history is not the soil in which happiness grows, says Edmund Burke . Edmund Burke ‘Events, dear boy, events’ Harold Macmillan . Harold MacMillan: ‘The world is not a soil that makes happiness grow’
 I first decided to write this book while changing trains at the Westbahnhof, Vienna’s main railway terminus . Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel was the German philosopher of the Enlightenment .
 Playwrights and historians of Vaclav Havel’s Civic Forum were dislodging a Communist police state and tumbling forty years of ‘real existing Socialism’ into the dustbin of history .
 Austrian radio carried the first reports of an uprising against the nepotistic dictatorship of Nicolae Ceau§escu in Romania . And in the taxi on the way to the railway station Austrian radio .
 A political earthquake was shattering the frozen topography of post-World War II Europe . A political quake was shattering a political earthquake in post-WWII Europe .
 With the passing of the old order many longstanding assumptions would be called into question . But with the passing, the new order would be questioned by some .
 What had once seemed permanent and somehow inevitable would take on a more transient air . What had been seemed permanent, somehow inevitable, would now take on an air of transientity .
 Since 1945 satellites to its east: all these could no longer be understood as the products of ideological necessity or the iron logic of politics . satellites to Europe's east: 'Satellites to the east' are no longer understood as ideological necessity .
 They were the accidental outcomes of history, and history was thrusting them aside . They were an accidental outcome of history—and history thrusts them aside.
 The familiar, tidy story of what had gone before had changed for ever . Whatever shape Europe was to take in the years to come, Europe had changed .
 It seemed obvious to me, in that icy central-European December, that the history of post-war Europe would need to be rewritten . But it seemed obvious that it was obvious to him that it would need a new history .
 Vienna in 1989 was a palimpsest of Europe’s complicated, overlapping pasts . Vienna in Austria was the site of the first World War II air raid on the city .
 Vienna has been forced to exorcise its past . Vienna was forced to accept responsibility for its role in World War II . Vienna is now a city of its own . Vienna will be a tourist destination for the first time .
 Austrian capital was a ‘Western’ city surrounded by Soviet ‘eastern’ Europe . It acquired a new identity as outrider and exemplar of the free world .
 In Communism’s dying years the city was to become a sort of listening post of liberty, a rejuvenated site of encounters and departures for eastern Europeans escaping West and Westerners building bridges to the East .
 Across the Leitha and Danube rivers just a few kilometres to the east, there lay the ‘other’ Europe of bleak poverty and secret policemen . Meanwhile, across the Danube, there was a 'other' Europe of . bleak poverty .
 Vienna's two principal railway stations involuntarily acknowledged the geographical schism of Europe . One facing optimistically, profitably west, the other negligently conceding Vienna’s eastern vocation . The streets of the Austrian capital bore witness to the chasm of silence separating Europe’
 The imposing buildings lining the great Ringstrasse were a reminder of Vienna’s one-time imperial vocation . The city was justifiably proud of its public edifices and civic spaces .
 Jews once occupied many of the inner city’s buildings and contributed decisively to the art, music, theatre, literature, journalism and ideas that were Vienna in its heyday . Vienna was most reticent of all. And of the Jews who had once occupied much of the city�
 The violence with which the Jews of Vienna had been expelled from their homes, shipped east from the city and stamped out of its memory helped account for the guilty calm of Vienna’s present . The very violence with . which the . Jews of . Vienna had expelled from . their homes
 Post-war Vienna was an imposing edifice resting atop an unspeakable past . Vienna was a post-WWII-era Vienna . Vienna is now a city of its own .
 After 1989 nothing would ever be the same after 1989 . "After 1989 nothing—not the future, not the present and above all not the past --would ever be a different," he says .
 The book did not get written for many years to come. Although it was in December 1989 that I decided to undertake a history of postwar Europe . The book was published in 1989, but it was not written for years .
 The inevitable confusions attendant upon a revolutionary transformation have sorted themselves out . At least some of the longer-term consequences of the upheaval of 1989 are now intelligible . The inevitable confusion attendant to a revolutionary revolution has sorted itself out .
 Vienna is struggling to house tens of thousands of refugees from neighbouring Croatia and Bosnia . The next time I was in Vienna the city was struggling to cope with the influx of refugees . Vienna is now struggling to deal with the problem .
 Austria abandoned its carefully-cultivated post-war autonomy and joined the European Union . The EU's emergence as a force in European affairs was a direct consequence of the east-European revolutions . Three years after that Austria joined the EU, it joined the continent's largest bloc .
 In 1914, the European continent embarked upon its descent into catastrophe . But like everything else in the twentieth-century its story is back-shadowed by the thirty-year war that began .
 Half of Serbia’s male population between 18 and 55 died in the fighting . The First World War itself was a traumatic killing field for all the participants . But it resolved nothing.
 The cost of victory to the Allies exceeded the cost of defeat to Germany, which thus emerged relatively stronger than in 1913 . Germany didn’t pay its First World War debts the Allies .
 The 'German problem' that had surfaced in Europe with the rise of Prussia a generation before remained unsolved . The ‘German problem’ that had emerged in Europe .
 The little countries that emerged from the collapse of the old land empires in 1918 were poor, unstable, insecure—and resentful of their neighbours .
 Russia, Germany, Austria, Hungary and Bulgaria had all been defeated in the Great War and awaited an occasion for territorial redress . Bulgaria, Hungary, Bulgaria and Bulgaria were among the nations defeated .
 It metamorphosed instead into domestic affairs—into nationalist polemics, racial prejudice, class confrontation and civil war .
 Europe in the Twenties and especially the Thirties entered a twilight zone between the afterlife of one war and the looming anticipation of another . Europe's first war was in the early years of the 20s and 30s .
 The internal conflicts and inter-state antagonisms of the years between the world wars were exacerbated—and in some measure provoked—by the accompanying collapse of the European economy . Europe's internal conflicts were exacerbated by the collapse of its economies, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Economic life in Europe was struck a triple blow in those years . Economic life was struck by the triple blow, including the collapse of the economy .
 The First World War distorted domestic employment, destroyed trade and devastated whole regions . It also bankrupted whole regions and bankrupted states as a result .
 Many countries, including central Europe, never recovered from its effects . Central Europe never recovered after the war .
 Between 1929 and 1936 Franco-German commerce fell by 83 percent, accompanied by bitter inter-state competition and resentment . Those that did were then brought low again in the Slump of the Thirties, when deflation, business failures and desperate efforts to erect protective tariffs against foreign competition resulted
 The scale of the disaster that Europe had brought upon itself was perfectly clear to contemporaries even as it was happening . The scale was clearly visible to contemporaries in the 1930s and 1940s, when it happened .
 Some saw the self-immolation of bourgeois Europe as an opportunity to fight for something better . Some, on the far Left and far Right alike, saw the far left and far right alike as a chance to fight .
 The Thirties were Auden’s ‘low, dishonest decade’; but they were also an age of commitment and political faith, culminating in the civil war in Spain . Auden's 'low-dish decade' was also a time of commitment to political
 On the eve of the continent’s final descent into the abyss the prospect for Europe appeared hopeless . The prospect for the continent appeared hopeless.
 Whatever it was that had been lost in the course of the implosion of European civilization would never be recaptured . The implications had long since been intuited by Karl Kraus and Franz Kafka in Zweig’s own Vienna .
 The Grand Illusion of the age was the resort to war and its accompanying myths of honour, caste and class . In Jean Renoir’s eponymous film classic of 1937, the film was a classic of war and caste myths of the era .
 By 1940, to observant Europeans, the grandest of all Europe’s illusions—now discredited beyond recovery—was ‘European civilisation’ itself . But by 1940, it was 'European civilisation' itself .
 In the light of what had gone before it is understandably tempting to narrate the story of Europe’s unexpected recovery after 1945 in a self-congratulatory, even lyrical key . The story of the recovery in 1945 is recounted in the following days .
 Post-war Europe has been the dominant underlying theme of post-war histories of Europe, above all those written before 1989 . The tone adopted by European statesmen when reflecting upon their own achievements in these decades was adopted by them .
 An irenic, pacific continent had risen, ‘Phoenix-like’ from the ashes of its murderous—suicidal-past .
 Like many myths, this rather agreeable account of Europe in the second half of the twentieth century contains a kernel of truth, says the author .
 Eastern Europe, from the Austrian border to the Ural Mountains, doesn't fit . Eastern Europe doesn’t fit, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Russia imposed ‘fraternal’ institutions and exchanges upon them by force . The Soviet bloc's satellite countries engaged in international cooperation superficially comparable to developments further west . But this was only because Moscow imposed 'fraternal' institutions on them .
 The history of the two halves of post-war Europe cannot be told in isolation from one another . The two sides of the continent's history cannot be separated from each other, says historian .
 Communism may have been the wrong solution, but the dilemma to which it was responding was real enough . Communism may be wrong solution to the problem, but it's real enough to be a solution to it .
 In the decades that followed, the uncertainties of the immediate post-war years were forgotten . And so, in the decades after the war, they were forgotten. And so were the uncertainties .
 The possibility that things might take a different turn in 1945 seemed very real in 1945 . It was to head off a return of the old demons (unemployment, Fascism, German militarism, war, revolution) that western Europe took the new path .
 Post-national, welfare-state, cooperative, pacific Europe was not born of the optimistic, ambitious, forward-looking project imagined in fond retrospect by today’s Euro-idealists . Euro-Europe is not a post-national welfare state, cooperative and pacific
 Shadowed by history, leaders implemented social reforms and built new institutions as a prophylactic, to keep the past at bay .
 Authorities in the Soviet bloc were in essence engaged in the same project . This becomes easier to grasp when we recall that authorities in the . Soviet . bloc were engaged in . the . project .
 Communist rule was to be secured not so much by social progress as through the application of physical force . They, too, were also concerned to install a barrier against political backsliding .
 Recent history was re-written in accordance with the assertion that a Communist-led social revolution had definitively erased not just the shortcomings of the past but also the conditions that had made them possible . Citizens were encouraged to forget it, and citizens were encouraged .
 The Communist myth bears unintended witness to the importance (and the difficulty) in both halves of Europe of managing a burdensome inheritance . But the Communist myth is not the only reason for the difficulty of managing the burdensome legacy .
 World War One destroyed old Europe; World War Two created the conditions for a new Europe . World War II created the . conditions for the new Europe. World War I destroyed old . Europe .
 The whole of Europe lived for many decades after 1945 in the long shadow cast by dictators and wars in its immediate past . But the whole of the continent lived in the shadow of the dictators and warlords .
 Europeans of the post-war generation have in common with one another and which separates them from Americans, for whom the twentieth century taught rather different and altogether more optimistic lessons . That is one of the experiences that Europeans of . one another have common with each other and that separates them . from
 It is the necessary point of departure for anyone seeking to understand European history before 1989 . And it is also necessary to appreciate how much it changed afterwards, says historian .
 In Berlin’s terms this book is decidedly not a ‘hedgehog’ I have no big theory of contemporary European history to propose in these pages . No one overarching theme to expound; no single, all-embracing story to tell .
 It does not follow from this, however, that I think the post-World War Two history of Europe has no thematic shape . I think it does not mean that post-WWII history of the continent has no shape . It does mean that Europe's post-war history has
 The constituent states of Europe could no longer aspire, after 1945, to international or imperial status . After 1945, they were no longer able to aspire to international status . The post-war state of Europe was abolished in 1945 .
 The Soviet Union and, in part, Great Britain, were both only half-European in their own eyes . By the end of the period recounted here, they too were much reduced .
 Most of the rest of continental Europe had been humiliated by defeat and occupation . The rest of the continent had been devastated by the fall of the Great Depression .
 It had not been able to liberate itself from Fascism by its own efforts; nor was it able, unassisted, to keep Communism at bay .
 Only with considerable effort and across long decades did Europeans recover control of their own destiny . Only with much effort and over long decades, Europeans were able to reclaim control of the world .
 Europe’s erstwhile seaborne empires were all shrunk back in the course of these years to their European nuclei, their attention was re-directed to Europe itself .
 For a brief moment in the 1980s, it seemed as though the intellectual Right might stage a revival around the equally nineteenth-century project of dismantling ‘society’ and abandoning public affairs to the untrammelled market and the minimalist state . But the spasm passed .
 After 1989 there was no overarching ideological project of Left or Right on offer in Europe . The prospect of liberty, which for most Europeans was a promise now fulfilled, was now fulfilled . After 1989, there were no ideological projects of left or right on offer .
 This decidedly unanticipated transformation of Europe from a geographical expression into a role-model and magnet for individuals and countries alike was a slow, cumulative process . Europe has been transformed into a global role model for individuals, countries alike .
 Its emergence in this capacity could certainly not have been predicted from the circumstances of 1945, or even 1975 .
 After 1992, Europe's relations with the United States in particular took on a different aspect . But once it became clear, after 1992, that Europe did occupy this novel place in the international scheme of things, relations with U.S. took on an important aspect .
 Western Europeans wanted the U.S. to involve itself in European affairs after 1945 . But they also resented that involvement and what it implied about Europe’s decline .
 Despite the U.S. presence in Europe, the two sides of the ‘West’ remained very different places .
 The Cold War was perceived quite differently in western Europe from the rather alarmist response it aroused in the US . The subsequent 'Americanisation' of Europe in the Fifties and Sixties is often exaggerated, as we shall see .
 Eastern Europe, of course, saw America and its attributes rather differently . Eastern Europe saw America as a model for Europe .
 It would be misleading to overstate the exemplary influence of the U.S. on eastern Europeans before and after 1989 . But there, too, it's misleading to say, "the United States" on eastern Europe .
 Dissident critics in both halves of Europe were careful to emphasize that they did not regard America as any sort of model or example for their own societies . Dissidents in both Europe and America were careful not to regard the U.S. as a model for their societies .
 Eastern Europeans aspire for a while to liberalize their countries on the American model, with limited public services, low taxes and a free market . But the fashion has not caught on .
 The future of eastern Europe’s ‘little Americas’ lay squarely in Europe, says the author . Europe is the key to the future of the Americas, he says .
 Europe's post-war history is a story shadowed by silences; by absence . Europe’s post-WWII history is also a story of silences, absence .
 The continent of Europe was once an intricate, interwoven tapestry of overlapping languages, religions, communities and nations . The continent was once a mosaic of languages, cultures and cultures .
 Trieste, Sarajevo, Salonika, Cernovitz, Odessa or Vilna were truly multicultural societies avant le mot . Catholics, Orthodox, Muslims, Jews and others lived in familiar juxtaposition .
 The Polish writer Tadeusz Borowski called ‘the incredible, almost comical melting-pot of peoples and nationalities sizzling dangerously in the very heart of Europe’ was periodically rent with riots, massacres and pogroms .
 The tidier Europe that emerged, blinking, into the second half of the twentieth century had fewer loose ends . Europe's tidier European history was littered with loose ends, but not all of them .
 Almost everybody now lived in their own country, among their own people . Thanks to war, occupation, boundary adjustments, expulsions and genocide, almost everybody now lives in the country .
 For forty years after World War Two Europeans in both halves of Europe lived in hermetic national enclaves . Surviving religious or ethnic minorities represented a tiny percentage of the population at large and were thoroughly integrated into its cultural and political mainstream .
 Only Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union stood aside from this new, serially homogenous Europe . The Soviet Union was an empire, not a country, and anyway only part-European .
 Since the 1980s, and above all since the fall of the Soviet Union and the enlargement of the EU, Europe is facing a multicultural future . Europe's multicultural future will be defined by its diversity, says David Frum .
 Between them refugees, guest-workers, and the denizens of Europe’s former colonies, migrants have turned London, Paris, Antwerp, Amsterdam, Berlin, Berlin and a dozen other places into cosmopolitan world cities .
 There are perhaps fifteen million Muslims in the EU as currently constituted, with a further eighty million awaiting admission in Bulgaria and Turkey . This new presence of Europe's living ‘others’ has thrown into relief not just Europe’s current discomfort at the prospect of ever greater variety
 Since 1989 it has become clearer than it was before just how much the stability of post-war Europe rested upon the accomplishments of Josef Stalin and Adolf Hitler . Since 1989, it has been clearer than ever before that the stability in Europe rested on Stalin and Hitler's achievements .
 The dictators blasted flat the demographic heath upon which the foundations of a new and less complicated continent were then laid . Between them, and assisted by wartime collaborators, the dictators blasted .
 This disconcerting kink in the smooth narrative of Europe’s progress was left largely unmentioned in both halves of postwar Europe—at least until the Sixties . After which it was usually invoked uniquely in reference to the extermination of Jews by Germans by Germans .
 With only the occasional controversial exception, the record of other perpetrators—and other victims—was kept closed . With the exception of occasional controversial exceptions, other perpetrators were kept closed.
 Anti-Fascists against Fascists, Resisters against Collaborators and so forth. Good versus Evil, Anti- Fascists vs. Fascists. Resisters vs. Collaborators is a battle of good versus evil. Good vs. Evil is a war of good vs. evil
 Poles, French, Swiss, Italians, Italians and others are now better placed to know what really happened in their country just a few short decades ago .
 Even Germans, too, are revisiting the received history of their country, with paradoxical consequences . Even Germans too, also revisiting their received history with paradoxal consequences .
 For the first time in many decades, German suffering and German victimhood are receiving attention . Now, for the first reason, it is German suffering .
 Whether these discussions are a good or a bad thing is a matter of debate . Whether it's a good thing or bad thing, debate is over whether it's good or bad .
 Europe is not re-entering its troubled wartime past—on the contrary, it is leaving it . Europe is leaving its troubled past, writes David Frum . Europe will be leaving it, he writes .
 Germany today, like the rest of Europe, is more conscious of its twentiethcentury history than at any time in the past fifty years . Germany today is more aware of its history than ever before .
 The long shadow of World War Two lay heavy across postwar Europe . As this book tries to show, this book attempts to show that the shadow of the war still hangs over Europe .
 Silence over Europe’s recent past was the necessary condition for the construction of a European future . Silence is needed for Europe's recent past to build a future, says the EU's leader .
 Germans should be able to openly question the canons of well-intentioned memory . Germany is one of the few countries in the world to have its own history of memory .
 We may not be very comfortable with this; it may not even be a good portent . It may be a bad portent, but it may be even a good sign of the future .
 60 years after Hitler’s death, his war and its consequences are entering history . Sixty years after his death, Hitler's war is entering history, entering its first phase .
 Postwar in Europe lasted a very long time, but it is finally coming to a close . Post war in Europe has been a very difficult period, but is now coming to an end .
 ‘The human problem the war will leave behind it has not yet been imagined, much less faced by anybody,' Wells said . Wells, War in the Air, is published by The World War I, published by the U.S.
 ‘Everywhere there is a craving for miracles and cures,' says Anne O’Hare McCormick . McCormick: 'Everywhere in the world is craving for cures and cures'
 Europe in the aftermath of the Second World War offered a prospect of utter misery and desolation . Norman Lewis, of Naples, Naples, was the author of the novel .
 Photographs and documentary films of the time show pitiful streams of helpless civilians trekking through the blasted landscape of broken cities and barren fields .
 Orphaned children wander forlornly past groups of worn out women picking over heaps of masonry . Orphans are often orphaned and abandoned in the streets of London .
 Shaven-headed deportees and concentration camp inmates in striped pyjamas stare listlessly at the camera, starving and diseased . The film stars the deportees as well as concentration camp convicts .
 Even the trams, propelled uncertainly along damaged tracks by intermittently available electric current, appear shell-shocked . The trams were propelled along by intermittent electric current .
 Everyone and everything, including the well-fed Allied occupation forces, seems worn out, exhausted . The occupation forces are exhausted and exhausted .
 This image will need to be nuanced if we are to understand how that same shattered continent was able to recover so rapidly in years to come . This image must be nuanced and nuanced to understand why it was so quickly recovered .
 It conveys an essential truth about the European condition in the wake of Germany’s defeat . But it conveys a fundamental truth about Europe in the aftermath of the defeat .
 The European war that began with Hitler’s invasion of Poland in September 1939 was a total war . The war that ended in 1945 was a complete war, with Germany's unconditional surrender in 1945 .
 World War Two was primarily a civilian experience in many of the countries occupied by Nazi Germany, from France to the Ukraine, from Norway to Greece . World War II was primarily an experience in those occupied countries .
 Formal military combat was confined to the beginning and end of the conflict . Formal combat was limited to the start and end .
 In some countries the occupation lasted most of the war; everywhere it brought fear and deprivation . The occupation brought fear, deprivation and fear, but everywhere it also brought fear .
 Unlike World War One, then, the Second War was a nearuniversal experience . The Second War, Hitler’s War, was a nearly universal experience .
 It lasted nearly six years for countries that were engaged in it from beginning to end . And it lasted a long time—nearly six years .
 In Czechoslovakia it began earlier still still, with the Nazi occupation of the Sudetenland in October 1938 . The occupation began in 1938 with the fall of the Czech Republic .
 In eastern Europe and the Balkans it did not even end with the defeat of Hitler . Occupation and civil war continued long after the dismemberment of Germany . Civil war and occupation of eastern Europe did not end with defeat .
 Folk memories of the Thirty Years War in seventeenth-century Germany were preserved three centuries later in local myths and in fairy tales . The Thirty years War was during which foreign armies lived off the land and terrorized the local population .
 Well into the nineteen-thirties Spanish grandmothers were chastening wayward children with the threat of Napoleon . Well into . the . nineteen-century Spain . grandmothers . chastened wayward . children with . threat of . Napoleon .
 There was a peculiar intensity to the experience of occupation in World War Two . But there was a unique intensity to occupation in Germany .
 In part this was because of the distinctive Nazi attitude towards subject populations . The Nazi attitude to subject populations was part of the reason for the Nazi policy .
 Previous occupying armies lived off the land and assaulted and killed local civilians . The Swedes in seventeenth-century Germany, the Prussians in France after 1815, were among them .
 The peoples who fell under German rule after 1939 were either put to the service of the Reich or or else were scheduled for destruction .
 Overseas, in their colonies, European states habitually indentured or enslaved indigenous populations for their own benefit . European states had habitually enslaved or enslaved their indigenous populations .
 They had not been above the use of torture, mutilation or mass murder to coerce their victims into obedience . They had used torture or murder methods to get people to comply with orders .
 Since the eighteenth century these practices were largely unknown among Europeans themselves . But since the 17th century they have been largely unknown to Europeans west of the Bug and Prut rivers .
 It was in the Second World War, then, that the full force of the modern European state was mobilized for the first time, for the primary purpose of conquering and exploiting other Europeans . The full force was mobilized in the First World War .
 Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium, Bohemia-Moravia and, especially, France made significant involuntary contributions to the German war effort .
 The Nazis lived for as long as they could off the wealth of their victims . It was not until 1944 that German civilians began to feel the impact of wartime restrictions and shortages .
 By then, however, the military conflict was closing in on them, first through bombing campaigns, then with the simultaneous advance of Allied armies from east and west .
 Much of the worst physical destruction took place in the final year of the war, during the relatively brief period of active campaigning west .
 War's impact was measured not in terms of industrial profit and loss, or the net value of national assets in 1945 when compared to 1938, but in the visible damage to their immediate environment and their communities .
 It is with these that we must begin if we are to understand the trauma that lay behind the images of desolation and hopelessness in 1945 .
 Few European towns and cities of any size had survived the war unscathed . Very few European towns or cities had survived .
 The ancient and early-modern centers of a few celebrated European cities were never targeted . Rome, Venice, Prague, Paris, Oxford, Oxford were never attacked .
 In the first year of the war German bombers had flattened Rotterdam and gone on to destroy Coventry .
 Whole districts of central London, notably in the poorer quarters around the docklands in the East End, had fallen victim to the Luftwaffe .
 The greatest material damage was done by the unprecedented bombing campaigns of the Western Allies in 1944 and 1945, and the relentless advance of the Red Army from Stalingrad .
 The French coastal towns of Royan, Le Havre and Caen were eviscerated by the U.S. Air Force . Royan was the last town to be destroyed by the United States Air Force in 1944 .
 Hamburg, Cologne, Dusseldorf, Dresden and dozens of other German cities were laid waste by carpet-bombing from British and American planes . Hamburg was one of the most bombed cities in the world .
 80 percent of the Byelorussian city of Minsk was destroyed by the end of the war . Warsaw was systematically torched and dynamited, house by house, street by street, by the retreating German army in the autumn of 1944 .
 When Berlin fell to the Red Army in May 1945, much of the German capital was reduced to smoking hillocks of rubble and twisted metal . The Red Army took 40,000 tons of shells in the final 14 days of the war in Europe .
 Ruined cities were the most obvious—and photogenic—evidence of the devastation of the war . They came to serve as a universal visual shorthand for the pity of war . Ruined cities served as the universal visual shorthand for war .
 An estimated 25 million people were homeless in the Soviet Union, a further 20 million in Germany . The rubble-strewn urban landscape was the most immediate reminder of the war that had just ended .
 Many roads, rail tracks and bridges had been blown up by the retreating Germans, the advancing Allies or the French Resistance . Many roads and rail tracks were blown up, including bridges, bridges .
 The French lost 219,000 hectares of land flooded by the Germans and were reduced by 1945 to 40 percent of their pre-war rail, road and canal transport . But the British, the Belgians, the Dutch, the Danes and Norwegians were comparatively fortunate .
 The Nazis treated western Europeans with some respect, if only the better to exploit them . Western Europeans returned the compliment by doing relatively little to disrupt or oppose the German war effort .
 In eastern and south-eastern Europe the occupying Germans were merciless . Local partisans, in Greece, Yugoslavia and Ukraine especially, fought a relentless if hopeless battle against them .
 The material consequences in the East of the German occupation, the Soviet advance and the partisan struggles were thus of an altogether different order from the experience of war in the West . The material .
 In the Soviet Union, 70,000 villages and 1,700 towns were destroyed in the course of the war, along with 32,000 factories and 40,000 miles of rail track . The Soviet Union also lost more than 1,800,000 homes and factories .
 In Greece, two-thirds of the country’s vital merchant marine fleet was lost . One-third of its forests were ruined and a thousand villages were obliterated . Two thirds of Greece's vital merchant fleet was . lost .
 The German policy of setting occupation-cost payments according to German military needs rather than the Greek capacity to pay generated hyperinflation . Meanwhile the German policy set to pay for the Greek military needs generated hyper inflation .
 Yugoslavia lost 25 percent of its vineyards, 50 percent of livestock, 60 percent of the country’s roads, 75 percent of all its ploughs and railway bridges . One in five of its pre-war dwellings and a third of its limited industrial wealth were lost . Yugoslavia
 In Poland three-quarters of standard gauge rail tracks were unusable and one farm in six was out of operation . One in six of Poland's farms were out of operations .
 Material damage suffered by Europeans in the course of the war, terrible though it had been, was insignificant when set against the human losses . Yet the material damage suffered in the war was insignificant .
 It dwarfs the mortality figures for the Great War of 1914-18, obscene as those were . The mortality figures dwarfs those of the Great Wars of 1914/18 .
 No other conflict in recorded history killed so many people in so short a time . No other history has seen so many deaths in so many years .
 The numbers of civilian dead exceeded military losses in the USSR, Hungary, Poland, Yugoslavia, Greece, France, the Netherlands, Belgium and Norway .
 Only in the UK and Germany did military losses significantly outnumber civilian ones . Only in Germany and the UK, military losses were higher than civilian losses .
 Civilian deaths on the territory of pre-war Poland approached 5 million . In Yugoslavia 1. million; in Greece 430,000, in France 350,000; in Hungary 270,000 . In the Netherlands 204,000 died in the Netherlands; in Romania 200,000 in the
 The greatest military losses were incurred by the Soviet Union, Germany, Italy and Romania . The Soviet Union thought to have lost 8. million men and women under arms; Germany, 4 million casualties .
 Austrians, Hungarians, Albanians and Yugoslavs suffered the greatest military losses . In proportion to their populations, however, the Austrians and Hungarians had the greatest losses .
 Poland, Yugoslavia, the USSR and Greece were the worst affected . Taking all deaths—civilian and military alike, the deaths were all accounted for . Poland and Yugoslavia were worst affected by the war .
 Poland lost about one in five of her pre-war population, including a far higher percentage of the educated population, deliberately targeted for destruction by the Nazis . Poland lost a far greater percentage of its educated population .
 Yugoslavia lost one person in eight of the country’s pre-war population, the USSR one in 11, Greece one in 14 . Yugoslavia also lost one in eight people in the USSR, one in eleven in Greece and one in 12 in Yugoslavia .
 Germany suffered a rate of loss of 1/15; France 1/77; Britain 1/125 . To point up the contrast, Germany suffered an average loss rate of 1.15, France 1.77, Britain 1.125 .
 The Germans captured some 5. million Soviet soldiers in the course of the war, three quarters of them in the first seven months following the attack on the USSR in June 1941 .
 More Russians died in German prisoner-of-war camps in 1941-45 than in all of World War One . Of these, 3. million died from starvation, exposure and mistreatment in German camps .
 Of the 750,000 Soviet soldiers captured when the Germans took Kiev in September 1941, just 22,000 lived to see Germany defeated . Of the 1,500,000 captured Soviet soldiers who died in the war, 22,00 were killed or wounded .
 The Soviets in their turn took 3. million prisoners of war (German, Austrian, Romanian and Hungarian for the most part) Most of them returned home after the war .
 In view of these figures, it is hardly surprising that post-war Europe, especially central and eastern Europe, suffered an acute shortage of men . Central and eastern European countries suffered from a shortage in men .
 In the Soviet Union, the number of women exceeded men by 20 million . The imbalance would take more than a generation to correct . The Soviet Union had 20 million women in the workforce .
 In Yugoslavia, there were many villages with no adult men left at all . All males over 15 were shot by German reprisal actions in Yugoslavia .
 Much has been made of this over-representation of women in post-war Germany especially . Much of this is due to be made of women being overrepresented in the military .
 Fassbinder's Maria carries the burden of a later generation’s resentful disillusion, but the real women of 1945 Germany faced more immediate difficulties . The real women faced the difficulties of life in 1945 Germany .
 Millions of civilians fled as Soviet armies pushed west into central Europe and eastern Prussia . Most of them were German, most of them fleeing the Soviet invasion .
 A slightly larger number of women in Berlin were raped in the Soviet march on the city, most of them in the week of May 2nd-7th, immediately preceding the German surrender . Most of the women were raped during the march .
 Both of these figures are surely an underestimate, and they do not include the uncounted number of assaults on women in villages and towns .
 Milovan Djilas, Tito’s close collaborator in the Yugoslav partisan army and at the time a fervent Communist, raised the matter with Stalin himself . Tito's close collaborator raised the issue with Stalin, even raising the matter .
 Many of its infantry and tank crews had fought their way back for three terrible years in the western USSR, through Russia and Ukraine . Many of the infantry, tank crews fought their . way back in the unbroken series of battles and marches across the western . USSR, Russia, Ukraine and
 In the course of their advance they saw and heard copious evidence of German atrocities . In the . course of . the advance, they saw . copious . evidence of . German atrocities, they said . In . the . past .
 The Wehrmacht’s treatment of war prisoners, civilians, partisans and indeed of anyone who got in its way had left its mark on the face of the land and in the soul of the people . The treatment of prisoners, of civilians, of partisans and even of anyone
 When the Red Army finally reached central Europe, its exhausted soldiers encountered another world . Red Army's exhausted soldiers faced another world.
 The contrast between Russia and the West was always great . Czar Alexander I had long ago regretted allowing Russians to see how Westerners lived . The contrast grew sharper during the war .
 While German soldiers wreaked devastation and mass murder in the East, Germany itself remained prosperous . Germany's civilian population had very little sense of the material cost of war until quite late in the conflict .
 Wartime Germany was a world of towns, of electricity, of food and clothing and shops and consumer goods, of reasonably well-fed women and children . It was the world of cities, towns, electricity and clothing, of shops and shops .
 The contrast with his own devastated homeland must have seemed unfathomable to the common Soviet soldier . The contrast between his homeland and the Soviet Union was unimaginable to him .
 The Germans had done terrible things to Russia; now it's their turn to suffer . The Germans did terrible things . Now it's the Russians' turn to suffering. The Russians are suffering .
 The Red Army was turned loose on the civilian population of the newlyconquered German lands . With the tacit consent of its commanders, the Red Army turned loose . The Soviet Union was defeated in 1945 .
 On its route west the Red Army raped and pillaged women in Hungary, Romania, Slovakia and Yugoslavia . But German women suffered by far the worst, with the worst .
 Between 150,000 and 200,000 ‘Russian babies’ were born in the Soviet-occupied zone of Germany in 1945-46 . Many women died along with their unwanted foetuses .
 In Berlin alone, there were some 53,000 lost children by the end of 1945 . In Berlin, 53,00 children were lost in the war .
 The Quirinale gardens in Rome became notorious as a gathering place for thousands of Italy’s mutilated, disfigured and unclaimed children .
 In liberated Czechoslovakia there were 49,000 orphaned children; in the Netherlands, 60,000; in Poland it was estimated that there were about 200,000 orphans, in Yugoslavia perhaps 300,000 . In the Netherlands there were 60,00 orphans; in . Poland it
 Jewish children survived the pogroms and exterminations of the war years were mostly adolescent boys . Few of the younger children were Jewish, few survived the Holocaust .
 The Asian ’flu that swept through Europe in the wake of the First World War was still fresh . Thanks to early and effective intervention by the newly formed United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, large-scale epidemics and the uncontrolled spread of contagious diseases were avoided .
 During the Dutch 'hunger winter' of 1944-45 (when parts of the country had already been liberated) the weekly calorie ration in some regions fell below the daily allocation recommended by the Allied Expeditionary Force . 16,000 Dutch citizens died, mostly old people and children .
 In Germany, the average adult adult intake had been 2,445 calories per day in 1940-41 and was 2,078 calories a day in 1943 . In 1945-46, it had fallen to 1,412 calories for the year 1945-47 . The average adult intake of
 The situation was not much better in most of Italy and some districts of Yugoslavia and Greece . But the situation was somewhat worse in some areas of Greece and Yugoslavia .
 The problem lay partly in destroyed farms, partly in disrupted communications and mostly in the sheer numbers of helpless, unproductive mouths needing to be fed .
 Where Europe’s farmers could grow food they were reluctant to supply it to the towns . The towns are reluctant to provide food to the people they live in .
 Most European currencies were worthless; and even if there had been the wherewithal to pay peasants for their food in some hard currency, the latter held little attraction for them—there was nothing to buy . Most European currency was worthless; .
 One third of the population of Piraeus, in Greece, suffered from trachoma in 1945 due to acute vitamin deficiency .
 U.S. political adviser for Germany reported in October 1945 that an average of ten people daily were dying at the Lehrter railway station in Berlin from exhaustion, malnutrition and illness .
 In December 1945, the death rate of children under one year was one in four . During that same month there were 1,023 new cases of typhoid and 2,193 cases of diphtheria . In the British Zone of Berlin, in 1945, in December 1945 the death
 For many weeks after the end of the war, in the summer of 1945, there was a serious risk, in Berlin especially, of disease from rotting corpses .
 Czechoslovak authorities in 1946 reported that half of the 700,000 needy children in the country were infected with the disease . Half of the children were reported to have been infected .
 Millions of head of European cattle were slaughtered in the battles across southern and eastern Europe in 1944-45 . Most children were chronically undernourished and died of milk shortages .
 Infant mortality in Vienna during the summer of 1945 was nearly four times the rate in 1938 . Infant deaths in Vienna in 1945 were four times that of 1938 .
 Even in the relatively prosperous streets of western cities children went hungry and food was strictly rationed . Food was rationed in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The problem of feeding, housing, clothing and caring for Europe’s battered civilians was complicated and magnified by the unique scale of the refugee crisis .
 In World War Two it was state policies rather than armed conflict that did the worst damage . State policies were responsible for most of the damage in the war's first decade .
 Stalin had continued his pre-war practice of transferring whole peoples across the Soviet empire . Stalin continued to transfer whole peoples from the Soviet Empire .
 Well over a million people were deported east from Sovietoccupied Poland and the western Ukraine and Baltic lands between 1939-41 . Over a million were deported between 1939 and 1941 .
 In the same years the Nazis expelled 750,000 Polish peasants eastwards from western Poland, offering the vacated land to Volksdeutsche . Ethnic Germans from occupied eastern Europe were invited to ‘come home’ to the newly-expanded Reich .
 This offer attracted 120,000 Baltic Germans, a further 136,000 from Sovietoccupied Poland, 200,000 Romanian and others besides . All of whom would in turn be expelled a few years later would in their turn be expulsed .
 Hitler's policy of racial transfers and genocide in Germany’s conquered eastern lands must be understood in direct relation to the Nazis’ project of returning to the Reich (and settling in the Reich) all the far-flung settlements of Germans dating back to medieval times .
 The Germans removed Slavs, exterminated Jews and imported slave workers from west and east alike . The Germans took over Slavs and exterminated Jewish Jews . They also removed Jews and brought in slaves from the east and west .
 Between them Stalin and Hitler uprooted, transplanted, expelled, deported and dispersed some 30 million people in the years 1939-43 . Between them they uprooted and uprooted some 30million people in three decades .
 Newly-resettled Germans joined millions of established German communities throughout eastern Europe in headlong flight from the Red Army .
 Those who made it safely into Germany were joined there by a pullulating throng of other displaced persons .
 Women and men lost husbands and children, men who had lost their wives . Men and women lost their homes and children . Families lost vast farms and estates, distilleries, factories, flour-mills, mansions .
 There were also little children who were alone, carrying some small bundles, with a pathetic label attached to them . The children were also carrying small bundles with pathetic labels .
 From the Balkans came not just ethnic Germans but more than 100,000 Croats from the fallen wartime fascist regime of Ante Pavelic, fleeing the wrath of Tito .
 Men and women recruited by the Nazis recruited to work in Germany . Then there were the newly-released men and women who had been recruited .
 Many millions of migrants were brought into German farms and factories from all across the continent . They numbered many millions, spread across Germany .
 280,000 Italians were removed by Germany after Italy’s capitulation to the Allies in September 1943 . Involuntary economic migration was the primary social experience of World War Two for many European civilians .
 Most of Germany’s foreign workers had been brought there against their will, but not all were brought there . Most of the foreign workers were brought to Germany by the state of Germany under the will .
 Some foreign workers caught in the slipstream of German defeat in 1945 had come of their own free will . Dutchmen who accepted offers of work in Nazi Germany before 1939 and stayed on stayed on .
 Even at the derisory wages paid by wartime German employers, men and women from eastern Europe, the Balkans, France and the Benelux countries were often better off there than staying at home .
 The survivors of the concentration camps felt rather differently . Another group of displaced persons, the survivors of concentration camps, felt differently differently . The concentration camp survivors felt differently .
 Their ‘crimes’ had been various—political or religious opposition to Nazism or Fascism, armed resistance, collective punishment for attacks on Wehrmacht soldiers or installations, minor transgressions of Occupation regulations .
 Even survivors were better off than the Jews, since they had not been systematically and collectively scheduled for extermination . But even these survivors of the Holocaust were not systematically scheduled to be exterminated . Even these survivors are better off .
 Of those who were liberated 4 out of 10 died within a few weeks of the arrival of Allied armies . Their condition was beyond the experience of Western medicine . Of those liberated, four out of ten died within weeks .
 Surviving Jews, like most of Europe’s other homeless millions, found their way into Germany . The surviving Jews were forced to leave Europe in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Germany was where the Allied agencies and camps were to be situated . Eastern Europe was still not safe for Jews. Germany was the place where the camps were located .
 What was taking place in 1945, and had been underway for at least a year, was an unprecedented exercise in ethnic cleansing and population transfer .
 During the Depression years anyone who refused a proffered work contract from Germany risked losing his Dutch unemployment benefits . Jewish survivors leaving a Poland where they were unsafe and unwanted, for example, or Italians departing 4 4 days .
 Ethnic minorities who had collaborated with occupying forces fled with retreating Wehrmacht to avoid retribution from the local majority or the advancing Red Army . Many ethnic minorities who collaborated with the occupying forces now returned to Romanian rule .
 Their departure may not have been legally mandated or enforced by local authorities, but they had little option . The departure may have been illegal, but it was not legally mandated by authorities, officials say .
 Official policy was at work well before the end of the war . Elsewhere, official policy was also in place .
 The Germans of course began this, with the removal and genocide of the Jews, and the mass expulsions of Poles and other Slav nations . The Germans also removed and exterminated the Jews and the Poles from their homes .
 Romanians and Hungarians shunted back and forth across new frontier lines in disputed Transylvania . Under German aegis between 1939 and 1943 Romanians, Hungarians and Romanians shunted across frontier lines .
 The Soviet authorities in their turn engineered a series of forced population exchanges between Ukraine and Poland . One million Poles fled or were expelled from their homes in what was now western Ukraine, while half a million Ukrainians left Poland for the Soviet Union .
 In the course of a few months what had once been an intermixed region of different faiths, languages and communities became two distinct, mono-ethnic territories . The region was once an inter-religious region .
 Czechoslovakia exchanged 120,000 Slovaks living in Hungary for an equivalent number of Hungarians from communities north of the Danube, in Slovakia . Bulgaria transferred 160,000 Turks to Turkey under a February 1946 agreement with Hungary . Czechoslovakoslovakia, in 1946, exchanged 120
 400,000 people from southern Yugoslavia were moved to land in the north to take the place of 600,000 departed Germans and Italians . Other transfers of this kind took place between Poland and Lithuania and between Czechoslovakia and Soviet Union .
 German-speaking communities of Yugoslavia, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland, the Baltic region and the western Soviet Union were doomed and they knew it . Between a genuine popular desire to punish local Germans for the ravages of war and occupation, and the exploitation of this mood by post-
 As early as 1942 the British had privately acceded to Czech requests for a post-war removal of the Sudeten German population . The Russians and Americans fell into line the following year .
 In June 1945 their land was expropriated and on August 2nd of that year they lost their Czechoslovak citizenship . The land expropriation occurred in June 1945 .
 Nearly three million Germans, most of them from the Czech Sudetenland, were expelled into Germany in the course of the following eighteen months . Most of the Germans were most likely to be expelled from the Sudetensland, Czech Republic .
 Germans had comprised 29 percent of the population of Bohemia and Moravia in 1930, by the census of 1950 they were just 1.1 percent . Germans had been at 29 percent in Bohemia in 1930 .
 From Hungary a further 623,000 Germans were expelled, from Romania 786,000, from Yugoslavia about half a million and from Poland 1. million . From Poland 1 million people were expelled from their homes .
 In part this merely recognized what had already taken place, but it also represented a formal acknowledgement of the implications of shifting Poland’s frontiers westwards . Poland's frontiers have already been shifted westwards.
 Some seven million Germans would now find themselves in Poland, and the Polish authorities (and the occupying Soviet forces) wanted them removed . Poles and others who lost land in the eastern regions now absorbed into the USSR could in turn be resettled in the new lands .
 In the Potsdam Declaration it was agreed ‘that any transfers that take place should be effected in an orderly and humane manner’ But under the circumstances this was hardly likely .
 Some Western observers were shocked at the treatment of the German communities . The West was shocked by the treatment by the German authorities .
 13 million expellees were settled and integrated into West German society with remarkable success . However, memories remain and in Bavaria the subject can still provoke intense feeling .
 To contemporary ears it is perhaps a little jarring to hear the German expulsions described as a ‘crime against humanity’ a few months after the revelation of crimes committed in the name of those same Germans .
 But then the Germans were alive and present, while their victims were mostly dead and gone . The Germans were still present, but their victims, Jews above all, are mostly dead, gone .
 At the end of the First World War it was borders that were invented and adjusted, while people were on the whole left in place .
 There was a feeling among Western policymakers that the League of Nations, and the minority clauses in the Versailles Treaties, had failed and that it would be a mistake even to try to resurrect them .
 For this reason they acquiesced readily enough in the population transfers . The population transfers were carried out in order to protect their interests .
 If the surviving minorities of central and eastern Europe could not be afforded effective international protection, then it was as well that they be dispatched to more accommodating locations .
 The term ‘ethnic cleansing 5 did not yet exist, but the reality surely did—and it was far from arousing wholesale disapproval or embarrassment . ‘Ethnic cleansing 5’ was not yet known, but it was the reality of ethnic cleansing .
 Poland lost 69,000 square miles of its eastern borderlands to the Soviet Union . It was compensated with 40,000 sq miles of better land from German territories east of the Oder-Neisse rivers . Poles, Ukrainians and Germans in the affected lands were affected .
 Tito was able to hold on to part of formerly Italian territory around Trieste and in Venezia Giulia . Bulgaria recovered a sliver of land from Romania in the Dobrudja region . Czechoslovaks obtained from Hungary three villages on the right bank of the Danube
 Land seized by force between 1938 and 1945 was returned and the status quo ante restored . Otherwise land seized between 1938-1945 was returned to the land seized during that period .
 The outcome was a Europe of nation states more ethnically homogenous than ever before . With certain exceptions, the outcome was the outcome of the European Union . The EU is now a more homogenous Europe, with more than half of its population .
 Romania still had a sizeable Hungarian minority in Transylvania and uncounted numbers—millions—of gypsies . Romania still has a sizeable number of Hungarian minorities in the country .
 Poland's population was just 68 percent Polish in 1938, but it was overwhelmingly populated by Poles in 1946 . Poland was home to 68 percent of Poles in 1938 .
 The ancient diasporas of Europe—Greeks and Turks in the south Balkans and around the Black Sea, Italians in Dalmatia, Hungarians in Transylvania and the north Balkans, Poles in Volhynia , Lithuania and the Bukovina, Germans
 Most of the initial management of the displaced persons and refugees was undertaken by the Allied armies occupying Germany, the United States Army especially . The U.S. Army especially. established camps for them .
 There was no other authority in Germany but also in Austria and northern Italy, the other areas where refugees congregated .
 Only the army had the resources and the organizational capacity to administer the demographic equivalent of a medium-sized country . Only army has the resources to administer a nation equivalent to a medium sized country .
 This was an unprecedented charge for a huge military machine that, just a few weeks before, had been devoted almost exclusively to the business of fighting the Wehrmacht . Just weeks earlier, the British military machine had been dedicated to fighting the Germans .
 U.N. responsibility for repatriation or resettlement of displaced millions fell increasingly on the United Nations . The system of camps had been set in place, but responsibility for the care and eventual repatriation of the millions fell on the UN .
 UNRRA was founded in November 9th 1943 at a Washington meeting of representatives from 44 future UN members . The meeting was held in anticipation of likely post-war needs, and went on to play a vital role .
 The agency spent $10 billion between July 1945 and June 1947 . Almost all of it was furnished by the governments of the USA, Canada and the United Kingdom .
 A lot of that aid went directly to former allies in eastern Europe, Poland, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia . The aid also went to the administration of displaced persons in Germany and elsewhere .
 Of the former Axis countries only Hungary received UNRRA assistance . Only Hungary received assistance from the UNRA .
 At its peak, in September 1945, the number of liberated U.N. civilians being cared for or repatriated by UNRRA and other Allied agencies was 6,795,000 . A further 7 million under Soviet authority and many millions of displaced Germans should be added to the liberated
 2 million French (prisoners of war, labourers and deportees), 1. million Poles, 700,000 Italians, 350,000 Czechs, more than 300,000 Dutch, 300,00 Belgians and countless others . Then came 1 million French prisoners of war (prison
 In Poland UNRRA helped maintain food consumption at 60 percent of pre-war levels . In Czechoslovakia it was 80 percent . In Poland it was 60 percent pre-WWII levels .
 In Germany and Austria it shared responsibility for handling displaced persons and refugees with the International Refugee Organisation . The organisation was approved by the General Assembly of the UN in December 1946 .
 In its first budget the United States’ share was 46 percent, rising to 60 percent by 1949 . The United Kingdom contributed 15 percent, France 4 percent, Britain 15 percent .
 Because of disagreement between the Western allies and the Soviet Union over the issue of forced repatriations, the IRO was always regarded by the USSR (and later by the Soviet bloc) as a purely Western instrument . Its services were thus confined to refugees in areas controlled by Western armies of occupation
 Since it was devoted to servicing the needs of refugees, German displaced persons were also debarred from its benefits . Moreover, since it was . devoted to . servicing the . needs of refugee, German refugees were also barred from the benefits .
 This distinction between displaced persons (assumed to have, somewhere, home to go to) and refugees was just one of many nuances that were introduced in these years . This distinction is one of several nuances that have been introduced in this years .
 This distinction was also invoked when establishing priorities for the repatriation of refugees . This distinction is also invoked .
 The first to be processed and sent home were UN nationals liberated from concentration camps . Then came UN nationals who had been prisoners of war, then displaced persons from Italy and finally the nationals of former enemy states . UN nationals were displaced persons (former forced labourers)
 Italians had to wait longer, as former enemy nationals and because the Italian government had no coordinated plan to repatriate its citizens . Italians waited longer because of their status as former enemies .
 Some displaced persons from eastern Europe were technically stateless and had no country to which to return . Some of the displaced persons in eastern Europe had no place to return to their homeland .
 Under an agreement signed at Halle, in May 1945, all former prisoners of war and other citizens of the Soviet Union were to return home . It was assumed that they would wish to do so, and it was assumed they would .
 A large number of former Soviet, Polish, Romanian and Yugoslav citizens preferred to remain in temporary camps in Germany rather than return to their countries .
 Soviet citizens often fear reprisals against anyone who had spent time in the West, even if that time had been passed in a prison camp . In the case of Soviet citizens this reluctance arose from a well-founded fear of reprisal .
 Soviet and other east European citizens were forced to return home, sometimes by force . Western authorities preferred to ignore such feelings on the whole and oblige Soviet citizens to return .
 Refugees from the East sought to convince bemused French, American or British officials that they did not want to return ‘home’ and would rather stay in Germany .
 At the end of May 1945 the British Army turned over to Yugoslav authorities 10,000 Slovenian soldiers and civilians who had fled to Austria . By 1953 a total of five and a half million So7 Slovenian refugees had fled the country .
 Most of them were trucked south to the Kocevje forests and summarily shot . Most of the victims were taken to Koceva forests and then shot .
 Many were sent directly into Siberian exile or else assigned to labour battalions . Many more were sent into Siberia exile or sent to work in Siberia . Others were sent to Siberia or assigned to work as labourers .
 Poles, Hungarians, Bulgarians, Romanians, Yugoslavs, Soviet nationals and Jews successfully resisted repatriation . A total of one and a half million Poles and Hungarians were successful in resisting repatriation efforts .
 Together with Balts these formed the overwhelming majority of displaced persons left in the western zones of Germany and Austria, and in Italy, and the rest of Italy . The majority of the displaced persons were left in Germany, Austria and Italy .
 In 1951 the European Convention on Human Rights would codify the protection to which such displaced aliens were entitled, and finally guarantee them against forcible return to persecution . In 1951, the Convention would codified the protection of those displaced aliens .
 West European states, short of labour and in the midst of economic and material reconstruction, were initially quite open to importing certain categories of stateless person . Stateless persons were initially opened up to importing .
 Belgium, France and Britain especially needed coalminers, construction workers and agricultural labourers . Britain, Belgium and France especially needed workers in the 1930s .
 In 1946-47 Belgium took in 22,000 displaced persons (along with their families) to work in the mines of Wallonia . Belgium took them in and took in their families to work there .
 Britain took 86,000 persons in this way, including many veterans of the Polish army and Ukrainians who had fought in the Waffen SS ‘Halychnya’ Division .
 The criteria for admission was simple: Western European states were interested in strong manual workers . They were not embarrassed to favour Balts, Poles and Ukrainians on those grounds, whatever their wartime record .
 Canadian Labor Department rejected girls and women applying to emigrate to Canada for jobs in domestic service . Single women were welcome as manual workers or domestics . Girls and women were rejected if they had education beyond secondary school .
 Post-war polls in the U.S. and western Europe revealed very little sympathy for refugees . Refugees in general, then, were not met with open arms .
 Most people expressed a desire to see immigration reduced rather than increased . Most people in the U.S. said they wanted to see a reduction in immigration .
 The Halychnya or Galician Division of the Waffen SS was made up of Ukrainians who had been citizens of inter-war Poland . Ukrainians were citizens of Poland and their region of origin was incorporated into the USSR after the war .
 All Jews in the United States Zone were being cared for separately . By the end of September 1945, all Jews were being treated separately .
 There had never been any question of returning Jews to the east—no-one in the Soviet Union, Poland or anywhere else evinced the slightest interest in having them back . There had been no interest in returning Jews back to the East .
 Jews were not particularly welcome in the west, especially if educated or qualified in non-manual professions . Jews were also not welcome in western Europe, especially in the 1930s .
 A further 165,000 eventually left for France, Britain, Australia and North or South America . The majority of those who left the country eventually moved to France and Australia . The population left the UK, France, Australia, France and North America .
 There they would be joined by the remaining displaced persons and refugees from World War Two, to whom should be added a new generation of political refugees from east-central European countries in 1947-49 .
 Overall the United States admitted 400,000 people in these years, with another 185,000 arriving in the course of the years 1953-57 . Overall the U.S. admitted more than a million people .
 Ethnic Germans from Yugoslavia and Romania were left in limbo because the Potsdam agreements did not cover their case . Some people, notably certain categories of ethnic Germans, were left behind .
 In the course of half a dozen years, operating in a scarred, embittered and impoverished continent, the Allied Military Governments and UN civilian agencies succeeded in repatriating, integrating or resettling millions of desperate people .
 By the end of 1951, there were just 177,000 people left in displaced persons camps in Europe . The aged and the infirm were left in camps because no-one wanted them .
 The last DP camp in Germany, at Foehrenwald in Bavaria, closed in 1957 . The last of the DP camps in Germany was Foehrrenwald, Bavaria .
 The displaced persons and refugees of Europe had survived not just a general war but a whole series of local, civil wars . Europe has survived a series of civil wars, including a general, civil war and a whole, local war .
 From 1934 through 1949, Europe saw a sequence of murderous civil conflicts within the boundaries of existing states . Europe saw an unprecedented sequence of bloody civil conflicts between existing states.
 In many cases subsequent foreign occupation—whether by Germans, Italians or Russians, served above all to facilitate and legitimize the pursuit of pre-war political agendas .
 Typically they joined forces with factions within the occupied nation to fight a common foe . Typically they join forces with other factions in fighting for a common enemy .
 Ethnic minorities were able to exploit the altered circumstances to settle local scores . In this way, a political tendency or ethnic minority that had been at a disadvantage in peacetime politics was able to use the situation to exploit it .
 Since 1945 the term ‘collaborators’ has acquired a distinctive and pejorative moral connotation . The term has been used as a derogatory term for collaborationists since 1945 .
 wartime divisions and affiliations often carried local implications altogether more complicated and ambiguous than the simple post-war attributions—of ‘collaboration’ and ‘resistance’—would imply . But wartime divisions often carry local implications .
 Some Flemish-speakers were tempted by the promise of autonomy and a chance to break the French-speaking elite’s hold on the Belgian state, and welcomed German rule . The Flemisis were repeating a mistake they had already made in the First World War .
 Flemish-speaking Belgian prisoners of war were released in 1940 when hostilities ceased, whereas French-speaking Walloons remained in p-o-w camps throughout the war . Here as elsewhere the Nazis willingly played the communal card .
 In France and Belgium, as also in Norway, resistance against the Germans was real . In the last two years of the occupation, Nazi efforts to pressgang young men into forced labour in Germany drove many to opt for the maquis .
 In France it has been estimated that the likely numbers of fully engaged men and women was about the same on both sides, between 160,000-170,000 at most . Not until the very end of the occupation did the number of active resisters exceed the numbers of those who collaborated
 Mussolini was overthrown in a palace coup in July 1943 . Fascists had been in power for twenty years when they were overthrown . The Fascists ruled Italy for more than 20 years .
 There was little local resistance to the regime; most active anti-Fascists were in exile . Perhaps for this reason, there was little resistance .
 After September 1943, when the country officially became a ‘co-belligerent’ on the Allied side, the German-occupied north of the country was torn between a puppet regime and a small but courageous partisan resistance .
 For the years 1943-45, the war was a genuine civil war, with significant numbers of Italians engaged on either side . Both sides were presented by both camps as a majority of right-thinking Italians locked in conflict .
 Anti-Fascist resistance was in reality one side in a struggle among Italians whose memory came to be conveniently occluded in the post-war decades . The anti-fascist resistance was one side of a struggle in Italy's struggle against Fascism .
 Slovaks and Croats took advantage of the German presence to establish notionally independent states in accordance with the cherished projects of pre-war separatist parties .
 In Poland the Germans were not looking for collaborators; in the Baltic States and even Finland . Further north, the Wehrmacht was initially welcomed as an alternative to occupation and absorption by the Soviet Union .
 The lands of eastern Galicia and western Ukraine saw a murderous civil conflict between Ukrainian and Polish partisans under the aegis of both antiNazi and anti-Soviet partisan warfare . Ukrainians especially did their best to capitalize on German occupation after 1941 to secure their independence .
 Poles and Ukrainians fought with or against the Wehrmacht, the Red Army and each other according to the moment and the place . Poles, Ukrainians fought against or against each other at the time and place of the war .
 In Poland this conflict, which after 1944 transmuted into guerilla warfare against the Communist state, took the lives of some 30,000 Poles in the years 1945-48 .
 In the Soviet-occupied Ukraine, the last partisan commander, Roman Shukhevych, was killed near Lviv in 1950 . In Estonia, anti-Soviet activity persisted for a few years more in Ukraine and Estonia in particular .
 The Second World War was experienced above all as a civil war, and a uniquely murderous one at that . It was in the Balkans, however, that the war was experienced as a war of civil war . The Balkans was the only place in the world to see the war as civil war
 In Yugoslavia, the meaning of conventional labels—collaborator, resister, was particularly opaque . The meaning of these labels is particularly opaque in Yugoslavia . In Yugoslavia it was particularly difficult to define .
 Ante Pavelics Ustase regime in the Croatian puppet state murdered Serbs and Muslims . Ante Pavelics Ustase regime in Croatia murdered Serb and Muslims in the puppet state of Croatia .
 Muslims of Bosnia sometimes cooperated with the German armies in their own defence . For this reason if no other the Muslims of Bosnian Arabians cooperated with the German army forces .
 Titos Communist partisans, despite their strategic goal of ridding Yugoslavia of German and Italian forces, devoted time and resources to destroying the Chetniks first . The wartime ‘Chetnik’ partisans were named after upland guerilla bands who had fought against Serbia�
 World War Two saw five weeks of clashes in Athens between Communists and royalist-backed British forces in December 1944 . An armistice was agreed upon in February 1945 . Further south, Greece—like Yugoslavia—experienced World War II as a cycle of invasion, occupation, resistance,
 Fighting broke out again in 1946, and lasted three more years, ending with the rout of the Communists from their strongholds in the mountainous north . In 1946, the Soviet Union was defeated by the Communists .
 The Greek resistance to the Italians and the Germans was more effective than the better known resistance movements in France or Italy . In 1943-44 alone alone alone it killed or wounded over 6,000 German soldiers . The harm it brought to Greeks themselves was greater still by far .
 The KKE guerillas and the Athens-based and western-backed government of the king terrorized villages, destroyed communications and divided the country for decades to come .
 By the time the fighting was over, in September 1949, 10 percent of the population was homeless . By the end of the war, 10 per cent of the country's population had been homeless .
 The Greek civil war lacked many of the ethnic complexities of the fighting in Yugoslavia and Ukraine, 10 but in human terms it was costlier still . The post-war impact of these European civil wars was immense . The civil war in Greece was the costliest still, 10 years after the
 Nazi and Soviet occupations corroded the very fabric of the European state . Together with the unprecedented brutality of the Nazi and, later, Soviet occupations, they corroded European state. Together with unprecedented brutality, the brutalities of the . Nazi and the Soviet occupations . corroded . the very
 World War Two was Hitler's war into a social revolution . Hitler’s war was a war in the truest sense of a much-abused term, they transformed the war into social revolution.
 The serial occupation of territory by foreign powers inevitably eroded the authority and legitimacy of local rulers . To begin with, the serial occupation by foreign power inevitably eroded local authority, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The Vichy regime in France was a dependent agent of Hitler and most people knew it . Father Jozef Tiso’s Slovak state or Pavelic's Ustase regime in Zagreb was also dependent on Hitler . The French state was declared autonomous in name
 Further east the Nazis and later the Soviets replaced pree-existing institutions with men and machinery of their own, except where it suited them to exploit local divisions and ambitions for their own advantage .
 It was only in those countries allied with the Nazis that a degree of real local independence was preserved . Finland, Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary were among those left to rule themselves .
 Poland, Baltic states, Greece, Yugoslavia were occupied three times in five years . Yugoslavia occupied three countries three times during that period . Some countries, including Poland and the Baltic states were occupied .
 With each succeeding invasion the previous regime was destroyed, its authority was dismantled, its elites reduced . The previous regime's authority has been dismantled, the elites reduced. With each successive invasion, the authority was destroyed .
 The result in some places was a clean slate, with all the old hierarchies discredited and their representatives compromised . The result of the new elections was a 'clean slate'
 In Greece, the pre-war dictator Metaxas had swept aside the old parliamentary class . In Britain, the former prime minister had swept away the old parliamentarians .
 Germans too were pushed out in their turn, and those who had collaborated with them stood vulnerable and disgraced . Then the Germans too was pushed out of their turn . Those who collaborated with the Nazis stood vulnerable, disgraced, and then stood vulnerable .
 The liquidation of old social and economic elites was perhaps the most dramatic change in the world's history . "Liquidation" of old elites is perhaps the biggest change in American history .
 The Nazis’ extermination of Europe’s Jews was not only devastating in its own right, it was also devastating in their own right . The Holocaust was a form of genocide that left Europe's Jews dead and dying .
 Later, often in the very same towns, another important part of the local bourgeoisie—the Germans—was also removed, as we have seen . The Germans were also removed from the local bourgeois, as well as the German bourgeoisie .
 Poles, Balts, Ukrainians, Slovaks, Hungarians and others moved up into the jobs of the departed . The outcome was a radical transformation of the social landscape . Poles and Balts were among those who moved up to the jobs .
 The native populations of central and eastern Europe took the place of the banished minorities . This leveling process was Hitler’s most enduring contribution to European social history . Hitler's greatest contribution to social history was the leveling process .
 The German plan had been to destroy the Jews and the educated local intelligentsia in Poland and the western Soviet Union . The rest of the Slav peoples were reduced to neo-serfdom and place the land and the government in the hands of resettled Germans .
 With the arrival of the Red Army and the expulsion of the Germans, the new situation proved uniquely well adapted to the more radicalizing projects of the Soviets . The new situation was particularly well adapted for the Soviets' radicalization projects .
 The occupation years had seen rapid and bloodily-enforced upward social mobility but also the utter collapse of law and the habits of life in a legal state . One reason for this was that the occupation years .
 It is misleading to think of the German occupation of continental Europe as a time of pacification and order under the eye of an omniscient and ubiquitous power .
 Most common people who did not have access to farm produce were obliged to resort to the black market or illegal barter just to feed their families .
 Theft was so widespread that in the eyes of many people it ceased to be a crime . Theft of the state, from a fellow citizen or from a looted Jewish store, was not a crime. Theft was widespread in the 1930s and '50s .
 The ultimate authority of the modern state rests on its monopoly of violence and its willingness to deploy force if necessary . Modern state has always relied heavily on its ability to use force in extremis .
 In occupied Europe, authority was a function of force alone, deployed without inhibition . But in occupied Europe authority was functioned solely by force alone . This was the case in the 1930s and 1940s .
 It was precisely in these circumstances that the state lost its monopoly of violence . Curiously enough, it was precisely the state losing its monopoly on violence . The state is no longer able to use violence in order to protect itself from violence .
 The authority of modern states had never been very firm in some of the world's most remote regions . This was most obviously true in the more remote regions of Greece, Montenegro and the eastern marches of Poland .
 By the end of World War Two it also applied in parts of France and Italy . It also applied to parts of Italy and France .
 As occupying forces, both Nazis and Soviets precipitated a war of all against all . Both Nazi and Soviet forces precipitated an all-against-all war . Both Nazis and Soviet leaders precipitated the war against all in 1945 .
 They discouraged allegiance to the defunct authority of the previous regime or state, but any sense of civility or bond between individuals, and on the whole they were successful. They discouraged not just allegiance to a defunct authority, but also allegiance to individuals .
 It was often prudent to go further and curry pre-emptive favour with the authorities by getting your neighbour in trouble . Indeed, it was also prudent to get your neighbour into trouble .
 Throughout German-occupied Europe until the very end, the incidence of anonymous reports, personal accusations and plain rumours was strikingly high .
 Between 1940 and 1944 there were huge numbers of denunciations to the SS, the Gestapo and local police in Hungary, Norway, the Netherlands and France .
 Jacobin-style encouragement of informers flourished unrestrained under Soviet rule . In Soviet-occupied eastern Poland from 1939-41, informers thrived unrestrained .
 For most Europeans in the years i939~45 rights —civil, legal, political, political —no longer existed . For most Europe in the past, rights -- civil, legal and political -- no longer existed. For most European citizens, they were not allowed to have rights .
 Under Hitler’s New Order government was itself the leading predator . The state ceased to be the repository of law and justice, writes David Frum . Hitler's New Order was itself a leading predator, he says .
 The Nazis’ attitude to life and limb is justifiably notorious . But their treatment of property may actually have been their most important practical legacy to the shape of the post-war world .
 Europe's Jews were simply stripped of money, goods, homes, shops and businesses . Europe’s Jews were stripped of their money and goods by the Nazis in the 1930s .
 Their property was divided up among Nazis, collaborators and their friends . The residue was made available for looting and theft by the local community .
 The right’s of possession was shown to be fragile, often meaningless, resting exclusively on the goodwill, interests or whim of those in power .
 There were winners as well as losers in this radical series of involuntary property transactions . "There were winners and losers," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There are winners, losers"
 With Jews and other ethnic victims gone, their shops and apartments could be occupied by local people . Their tools, furniture and clothes were confiscated or stolen by new owners .
 Returning concentration camp survivors in Paris or Prague often found their home occupied by wartime 'squatters' who angrily asserted their own claim and refused to leave . This process went furthest in the ‘killing zone’ from Odessa to the Baltic, but it happened everywhere .
 In this way hundreds of thousands of ordinary Hungarians, Poles, Czechs, Czech, Dutch, French and others became complicit in the Nazi genocide .
 In occupied countries factories, vehicles, land, machinery and finished goods were expropriated without compensation for the benefit of the new rulers in what amounted to wholesale de facto nationalization .
 In central and eastern Europe especially, substantial private holdings and a number of financial institutions were taken over by the Nazis for their war economy . The Nazis took over many of the country's financial institutions .
 The disastrous turn to autarky in the region after 1931 entailed a high level of state intervention and manipulation . In Poland, Hungary and Romania the state-owned business sector had expanded considerably in the immediate pre-war and early war years, as a pre-emptive defense against
 State-direction of the economy in eastern Europe did not begin in 1945 . State-directed economic policy began in 1945, but did not start in 1945. State- direction of eastern Europe's economy began in 1946 .
 The post-war dispossession of the German populations from Poland to Yugoslavia completed the radical transformation that had begun with the Germans' own removal of the Jews .
 Ethnic Germans in the Sudetenland, Silesia, Transylvania and northern Yugoslavia owned significant holdings in land . Many ethnic Germans owned significant land holdings .
 When these were taken into state hands for redistribution, the impact was immediate . The impact was 'immediate' when they were taken in by the government .
 In Czechoslova. kia, goods and property seized from the Germans and their collaborators amounted to one-quarter of the national wealth . The redistribution of farmland alone directly benefited over 300,000 peasants, agricultural labourers and their families .
 Like the war itself, they represented both a radical caesura, a clear break with the past, and a preparation for even bigger changes still to come . The war was a radical change in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 In liberated western Europe there was little German-owned property to redistribute . The war had not been experienced as a cataclysm that it was further east .
 There, too, the legitimacy of constituted authorities was cast into question . But there, also, there, was a question of the legitimacy in question .
 Local administrations in France, Norway and the Benelux countries had not covered themselves in glory . The local administrations in the French, Norwegian and Benelsux countries did not .
 On the contrary, they had on the whole performed with alacrity the occupiers’ bidding. The occupiers' bidding was not their fault, but their actions were the result .
 A mere 6,000 German civil and military police were assigned to ensure the compliance of a nation of 35 million . So confident were they of the reliability of the French police and militias that they assigned (in addition to their administrative staff) a mere six,000 .
 In postwar testimony the head of German security in Amsterdam averred that ‘the main support of the German forces in the police sector and beyond was the Dutch police,’ he said .
 Yugoslavia required unflagging attention of entire German military divisions just to contain the armed partisans . Contrast Yugoslavia, which required the unflagging . It required entire German divisions to contain armed partisans.
 After September 1943, the Italians were humiliated and exploited . The Norwegians, Danes, Dutch, Belgians, French and French were humiliated . The Italians, the Norweigians and Danes were humiliated, exploited and humiliated .
 Unless they were Jews, or Communists or resisters of one kind or another they were, on the whole, left alone . But unless they were Jewish or Communists they were left alone, they were never left alone.
 In consequence, the liberated peoples of western Europe could imagine a return to something resembling the past . In Europe, they could imagine something resembling past .
 Even the parliamentary democracies of the inter-war years now looked a bit less shabby thanks to the Nazi interlude . Hitler had successfully discredited at least one radical alternative to political pluralism and the rule of law .
 The exhausted populations of continental western Europe aspired above all to recover the trappings of normal life in a properly regulated state . Europe's exhausted populations aspired to recover .
 The situation in the newly liberated states of western Europe, then, was bad enough . The situation was not as bad enough.
 McCloy was speaking of Germany, where the Alu Note though that the Protectorate of Bohemia was run in 1942 by just 1,900 German bureaucrats . Note though though though that that was run by just a handful of bureaucrats .
 Hitler, Stalin, drove a wedge into the continent and divided it . Hitler, at least as much as Stalin, who drove wedge into continent, divided it. Hitler was Hitler, as well as Stalin .
 The history of central Europe has always been different in degree from that of the nation states of the West . Central Europe's history has been very different from the modern West, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Hungarians, Romanians, Czechs, Poles, Croats and Balts might look enviously upon the more fortunate inhabitants of France or the Low Countries . Before 1939 Hungarians and Romanians were likely to look envious of France .
 They saw no reason not to aspire to similar prosperity and stability in their own right . But they said they wanted to emulate the success of their own country .
 Czech economy in 1937 outperformed its Austrian neighbour and was competitive with Belgium . Czech economy outperformed Austria and Austria in the 1930s .
 The Soviets inherited a sub-continent where a radical break with the past had already taken place . East of the Elbe, the Soviets and their local representatives inherited a . radical break from the past .
 Exiled governments from Oslo, Brussels or the Hague could return from London . They hope to take up the legitimate authority they had relinquished in 1940 .
 It remained only to decide the political shape of the new order that must now replace the unrecoverable past . The new order must now be replaced by the unrecovered past .
 In order for the governments of liberated Europe to be legitimate, to claim for themselves, they had first to deal with the legacy of the discredited wartime regimes . Father JozefTiso was killed by Czechoslovak resistance organizations in 1946 .
 The Nazis and their friends had been defeated, but in view of the scale of their crimes this was obviously not enough . The Nazis were defeated in 1945, but their crimes were not enough, writes David Cameron .
 It was important to define the latter’s activities as crimes and punish them accordingly . It was also important to punish the latter's activities accordingly .
 For most Europeans World War Two was experienced not as a war of movement and battle but as a daily degradation . Men and women were betrayed and humiliated, humiliated, forced into daily acts of petty crime and self-abasement .
 There was in 1945 little of which to be proud and much about which to feel embarrassed and more than a little guilty . Moreover, and in marked contrast to the still living memory of the Great War in many places, there was little of . which to . be proud of . in 1945
 Most Europeans experienced the war passively—defeated and occupied by one set of foreigners and then liberated by another . As we have seen, most Europeans experienced war passively . Most Europeans saw war passively, but then experienced it passively, and were liberated .
 The only source of national pride were the armed partisan resistance movements that had fought the invader . Real resistance had actually been least in evidence in western Europe, where real resistance had been least evident .
 In liberated Poland, the Soviet authorities did not welcome public praise for armed partisans whose sentiments were as much anticommunist as anti-Nazi . The Soviet authorities were wary of public praise of armed partisans who were anti-Nazis .
 In post-war Yugoslavia, as we have seen, some resisters were more equal than others . Marshall Tito and his victorious Communist fighters .
 In Greece, as in Ukraine, the local authorities in 1945 were rounding up, imprisoning or shooting every armed partisan they could find . In 1945, the Greek authorities in Greece were imprisoning, shooting or shooting all armed partisans .
 They were men and women who worked or slept with the occupier, who threw in their lot with Nazis or Fascists, who opportunistically pursued political or economic advantage under cover of war . They included men who worked, slept with, or worked with, Nazi occupiers .
 ‘Collaboration’ was not a pre-existing crime with legal definitions and stated penalties, but collaborators could plausibly be charged with treason, a real crime carrying satisfactorily severe punishment . Sometimes they were a religious or national or linguistic minority and thus despised or feared for
 It had been going on throughout the war, on an individual basis or under instructions from underground resistance organizations . Indeed, it had been . going on during the war .
 In the interval between the retreat of the German armies and the establishment of effective control by Allied governments, popular frustrations and personal vendettas led to a brief but bloody cycle of score-settling .
 In France some 10,000 people were killed in ‘extrajudicial’ proceedings, many of them by armed resistance groups . The Milices Patriotiques rounded up suspected collaborators and shot them out of hand .
 About a third of those executed were dispatched before the Normandy landings of June 6th 1944 . Most of the others fell victim during the next four months of fighting on French soil .
 The same sentiment was felt in Italy, where reprisals and unofficial retribution resulted in death tolls approaching 15,000 in the course of the last months of the war .
 The frequency with which women were charged, often by other women, with consorting with Germans is revealing . The frequency of women being charged—often by others, with consorting with German is revealing .
 For men and women alike the occupation was experienced above all as a humiliation . But the popularity of the charge and the vindictive pleasure taken in the punishment is a reminder that for men, women alike, it was experienced as a humiliating humiliation .
 Jean-Paul Sartre would later describe collaboration in distinctly sexual terms, as ‘submission to the power of the occupier’ in more than one French novel .
 Wreaking revenge on fallen women was one way to overcome the discomforting memory of personal and collective powerlessness . Wreaked revenge was a way of overcoming the discomforted memory of powerlessness, she says .
 Anarchic acts of retributive violence in liberated eastern Europe were also widespread but took different forms . Anarchic violence in eastern Europe was also widespread .
 In the West the Germans had actively sought collaborators; in occupied Slav lands they ruled directly and by force . In occupied Slavs, the Germans ruled directly by force, not by the West . The West sought collaborators in the West, but in Slavs the Germans sought collaborators .
 The only collaboration they encouraged on a sustained basis was that of local separatists . Even then only so long as it served German ends, it was only for the sake of German ends .
 Once the Germans retreated, the first victims of spontaneous retribution in the East were ethnic minorities . As a result, once the Germans retreat, the victims of reprisals were ethnic minority groups . The Germans retreated from the East .
 The Soviet forces and their local allies did nothing to discourage this. The Soviets and their allies did not discourage this, it was said .
 Spontaneous score-settling contributed towards removing local elites and politicians who might prove an impediment to post-war Communist ambitions . On the contrary, spontaneous score settling contributed towards removal of local elites .
 In Bulgaria, the newly-constituted Fatherland Front encouraged unofficial retribution against wartime collaborators of all colours . Anyone suspected of pro-Western sentiments was accused of being a 'Fascist sympathiser'
 In Poland, the main target of popular vengeance was frequently Jews . 150 Jews were killed in liberated Poland in the first four months of 1945 . In the first month of 1945, Polish Jews were murdered .
 42 Jews were murdered following a rumour of the abduction and ritual murder of a local child . Attacks on a smaller scale took place in Slovakia (at Velke Topolcany in 1945) and in Kunmadaras in May 1946 .
 In the eyes of many Poles Jews were suspected of sympathy for the Soviet occupiers . In a sense these, too, were reprisals against collaborators, for Jews .
 The exact number of people killed in Soviet-occupied eastern Europe, or in Yugoslavia, during ‘unauthorised’ purging and killing is not known .
 The first task of the new authorities was to assert a monopoly of force, legitimacy and the institutions of justice . The new authorities were to assert their monopoly on force and legitimacy, the president says .
 If anyone was to be arrested and charged with crimes committed during the occupation, this was the responsibility of the appropriate authorities . This is not the first time anyone has been charged with such a crime .
 If there were to be trials, they should take place under the rule of law, says David Cameron . The trial should be held in accordance with the law, he says .
 If there was to be bloodletting, then this was the exclusive affair of the state, says David Cameron . The state was responsible for the blood, says Cameron .
 This transition took place as soon as the new powers felt strong enough to disarm erstwhile partisans, impose the authority of their own police and damp down popular demands for harsh penalties .
 The disarming of the resisters proved surprisingly uncontentious in western and central Europe at least . The disarmed of the . resisters . proved surprisingly unfazed by the . disarming .
 New government institutions must take upon themselves to punish the guilty . But it was tacitly understood by all that newly re-constituted institutions of government must take on themselves .
 Any law addressing the actions of collaborators with the Germans would necessarily be retroactive . Before 1939 the crime of ‘collaboration with the occupier’ was unknown .
 There had been previous wars in which occupying armies sought cooperation and assistance from the people whose land they had overrun, but except in very particular instances, this was regarded not as an invitation to crime . This was regarded as part of the collateral damage of war .
 The only crime of collaboration could be said to fall under existing law was when it amounted to treason . As noted, the only sense in which the crime of collaborating could fall under current law was treason .
 Men and women brought before French courts had often worked for the Nazis . They often worked not for Nazis but rather for the regime of Vichy, led and administered by Frenchmen .
 Slovakia, Croatia, the Protectorate of Bohemia, Mussolini’s Social 44 RETRIBUTION Republic at Said, Marshal Ion Antonescu's Romania and in wartime Hungary, collaborators could and did claim in their defence that they had only ever worked for or with the authorities
 In the case of senior police or government officials who were palpably guilty of serving Nazi interests via the puppet regimes that employed them, this defence was at best disingenuous . The defence of Nazi crimes was disingenuous.
 Lesser figures, not to speak of the many thousands charged with accepting employment in these regimes, could point to a genuine confusion .
 The French, Belgian and Norwegian governments-in-exile had tried to anticipate these dilemmas by issuing wartime decrees warning of harsh post-war retribution . The French and Belgian governments in exile had issued decrees .
 These were intended to deter people from cooperating with the Nazis . But they did not address the broader questions of jurisprudence and fairness .
 They could not resolve in anticipation of the problem of weighing individual against collective responsibility, they could not . Above all, they couldn't resolve the issue of balancing individual against individual responsibility .
 Such a procedure would still pass over many individuals whose punishment was widely demanded . It would include people whose chief offence was inertia or cowardice; and above all it would entail a form of collective indictment, something anathema to most .
 It was individuals who were brought to trial, with results that varied greatly with time and place . Instead of individuals being brought to trials, it was individuals bringing to trial .
 The motives of governments, prosecutors and juries were far from unsullied, the author says . There were multiple procedural irregularities and ironies, he says . The author says the motives of those involved in the case were motivated by emotion .
 As we assess the criminal proceedings and associated public catharsis that marked the transition in Europe from war to peace, we need to keep constantly in mind the drama of what had just taken place . But as we assess it, we must also remember the drama .
 In the circumstances of 1945, it is remarkable that the rule of law was re-established at all . Never before, after all, had an entire continent sought to define a new set of crimes .
 The numbers of people punished, and the scale of their punishments, varied enormously from country to country . The scale of the punishments varied enormously, from countries to countries .
 In Norway, the entire membership of the Nasjonal Sammlung, the main organisation of pro-Nazi collaborators, was tried, along with nearly 40,000 others . 17,000 men and women received prison terms and thirty death sentences were handed down .
 In neighbouring Belgium many more death sentences were passed but a smaller percentage carried out . Belgium has a higher death rate than Belgium does .
 The Dutch soon amnestied most of those convicted, but the Belgian state kept them in prison longer . Former collaborators convicted of serious crimes never recovered their full civil rights .
 Flemish population was not disproportionately targeted for punishment, but by effectively repressing the supporters of the wartime New Order . Pre-war Belgian elites— Catholic, Socialist, Liberal — re-established their control of Flanders and Wallonia .
 The contrast between Norway, Belgium, the Netherlands and France is suggestive . For many people, the Vichy regime was the legitimate government, says historian .
 In France, where wartime collaboration was widespread, it was for just that reason punished rather lightly . In France it was punished for its role in the war .
 Three out of four of the judges at the trials of collaborators in France had themselves been employed by the collaborationist state . The state itself was the chief collaborator, it seemed harsh and more than a little divisive to charge lowly citizens with the same crime .
 94 people in every 100,000—less than 0.0 percent of the population—went to prison for wartime offences . In the event, 94 people were in prison for war offences .
 Of the 38,000 imprisoned, most were released under the partial amnesty of 1947 and all but 1,500 of the remainder under an amnesty in 1951 . Most were released in an amnesty of 1951 and most of the rest were released later .
 In the course of the years 1944-51, France sentenced 6,763 people to death for treason and related offences . In the same period, the death penalty for treason was also handed out in France .
 Eleven thousand civil servants (1.1 percent of state employees) were removed or otherwise sanctioned under Vichy . Most of them were re-instated within six years .
 All in all the epuration , as it was known, touched some 350,000 persons, most of whose lives and careers were not dramatically affected . Most of the people were not affected .
 No-one was punished for what we should now describe 46 RETRIBUTION as crimes against humanity . No one should have been punished for the crimes committed by the Nazis in the Nazi regime .
 Responsibility for these crimes, like other war crimes, was imputed to the Germans alone . Responsibility for the crimes was assumed to be Germany alone .
 Although a former Axis power, Italy was authorized by the Allied governments to carry out its own trials and purges . It had switched sides in September 1943, switching sides from the Axis in 1943 .
 There is considerable ambiguity as to what and who should be prosecuted . But there was considerable ambiguity in what and what should be done .
 In Italy most collaborators were by definition tarred with ‘Fascism’ In Italy the term embraced too broad and ambiguous a constituency . In Italy it embraced too much of an ambiguous and broad constituency .
 Italy was governed by its own Fascists from 1922-43 . The country was initially liberated from Mussolini’s rule by one of his own marshals, Pietro Badoglio .
 The only obviously prosecutable Fascist crime was collaboration with the enemy after September 8th 1943 . The only obvious Fascist Crime to be prosecuted was collaboration between the Fascist Party .
 Most of those charged were in the occupied north and were connected to the puppet government installed at Salo on Lake Garda . As a result, most of the charges were against those in occupied north .
 This obscure piece of legislation was designed to get around the difficulty of prosecuting men and women for acts committed while in the employ of recognised national authorities .
 High Court established in September 1944 to try the more important prisoners was staffed by judges and lawyers who were themselves mosdy ex-Fascists . Extraordinary Assize Courts set up to punish minor employees of the collaborationist regime .
 The proceedings were hardly calculated to garner much respect among the population at large . In these circumstances the proceedings hardly . would garner much . respect from the public, it is said .
 By February 1946, 394,000 government employees had been investigated, of whom just 1,580 were dismissed . Just 1,500 were dismissed from the investigation .
 Many of those doing the questioning could just as easily have found themselves on the other side of the table . They were decidedly sympathetic to this line of defense .
 The promised purge of government and administration petered out . Following the highly-publicized trials of a few senior Fascists and generals, the promised purge petered .
 The High Commission assigned the task of administering the purge was shut down in March 1946 . Three months later the first amnesties were announced, including cancellation of all prison sentences under five years .
 At most 50 people were judicially executed for their crimes . That does not include 55 Fascists massacred by partisans in Schio Prison on July 17th 1945 .
 During the Cold War, Italy’s suspiciously painless transition from Axis power to democratic ally was often blamed upon foreign pressure as well as the political influence of the Vatican . During the 1950s and 1960s, the transition was often attributed to foreign pressure .
 Pius XII’s warm relations with Fascism and the pro-actively blind eye he turned to Nazi crimes in Italy and elsewhere . To be sure, the Catholic Church got off very lightly indeed, in view of his warm relations .
 Anglo-American military authorities were reluctant to remove compromised administrators . They were trying to re-establish normal life throughout the peninsula .
 The purge of Fascists was more efficiently carried out in regions where the left-wing Resistance and its political representatives held sway . And on the whole, the purge was more efficient in those areas .
 After two decades in exile and many years as a high-ranking official in the Communist International, Togliatti had few illusions about what was and what was not possible in the aftermath of the European war . He had many years in exile .
 Togliatti saw little advantage in pushing the nation to the brink of civil war . Many millions of people, by no means all of them on the political Right, were compromised .
 Togliatti was a senior figure in the international Communist movement whose strategic perspective reached beyond the shores of Italy . He had the Greek situation in mind as a caution and a warning, he said .
 In Greece, post-war purges were directed not at the Right but the Left . Despite a significant level of wartime collaboration among the bureaucratic and business elites, the purges targeted the Left rather than the Right .
 The civil war of 1944-45 convinced the British that only the firm re-establishment of a conservative regime in Athens would stabilize this small but strategically vital country . The British believed only the re-establishment of a Conservative regime would stabilize Athens .
 To purge or otherwise threaten businessmen or politicians who had worked with Italians or Germans could have radical implications in a country where the revolutionary Left seemed poised to seize power .
 The death penalty was liberally assigned in the war against the Left . Very few people were severely punished for wartime collaboration with the Axis powers .
 Western Europe has a more conventional approach to politics . But so, in a sense, were the more conventional proceedings in western Europe .
 Any judicial process brought about as the direct consequence of a war or a political struggle is political . The process is brought about by war or political struggle, the judge says .
 The mood at the trials of Pierre Laval or Philippe Petain in France, or the police chief Pietro Caruso in Italy, was hardly that of a conventional judicial proceeding . The mood of the trials for police chiefs in Italy and France was hardly the normality of a trial
 Score-settling, blood-letting, revenge and political calculation played a crucial role in these post-war trials and purges .
 This consideration needs to be borne in mind as we turn to official post-war retribution in central and eastern Europe .
 The trials and other punishments of collaborators, Fascists and Germans were always and above all a way of clearing the local political and social landscape of impediments to Communist rule . Stalin and the Soviet occupation authorities throughout the . territories under Red Army control, the . Soviet occupation authority .
 Many men and women were accused of Fascist felonies when their major crime was membership of the wrong national or social group, association with an inconvenient religious community or political party, or simply an awkward visibility or popularity .
 Purges, land expropriation, expulsions, prison sentences and executions aimed at extirpating incriminated political opponents were important staging points in a process of social and political transformation, as we shall see . Land expropriations, expulsion and prison sentences are important staging
 Tito also prosecuted the notorious Cardinal Alois Stepinac of Zagreb, apologist for some of the worst crimes of the Croat JJstase regime, who might well have considered himself fortunate to spend 14 years under house arrest before dying in his bed in i960 .
 Draza Mihajlovic, the Chetnik leader, was tried and executed in July 1946 . He was the leader of the Croatian republic of Yugoslavia .
 In his wake tens of thousands of other non-Communists were killed in the two years following Yugoslavia’s liberation .
 The Yugoslavs executed and deported many ethnic Hungarians for their role in Hungarian military massacres in the Vojvodina during January 1942 . Their land was made over to non-Hungarian supporters of the new regime . The land was given over to those who supported the regime .
 This was a calculated political move, but many of the victims were surely guilty as charged . This was not the first time the victims have been found guilty of wrongdoing . This is not the only time victims have ever been found to be innocent .
 Post-war Peoples’ Courts began by trying actual war criminals, notably activists in pro-German regimes of Dome Sztojay and Ferenc Szalasi during 1944 .
 The ratio of fascists and collaborators condemned condemned in Hungary did not exceed the numbers found guilty in post-war Belgium or the Netherlands . They committed serious crimes, including anticipating and enthusiastically executing German plans to round up and transport to their death hundreds of thousands of Hungarian Jews . The ratio did not
 Hungarian authorities added categories like ‘sabotage’ and ‘conspiracy’ to the list . The overt purpose was to net a broader range of opponents and others likely to resist a Communist takeover .
 The language is redolent of Soviet legalspeak and certainly anticipates Czechoslovakia’s grim future . The language has been redolented by the Soviet-era Soviet language language .
 Father Tiso was hanged on April 18th 1947 in Czechoslovakia . He was one of the traitors, collaborators and Fascists in occupied Czechoslovakia .
 Whether Tiso and others received a fair trial in the atmosphere of the time is a legitimate question . Whether the trial was fair is legitimate question, whether they could have received fair trial, is legitimate .
 The treatment they got was no worse than that accorded to, say, Pierre Laval . But it was no more than that given to Pierre L. Laval, it's said .
 Post-war Czech justice was much preoccupied with the troubling and vague category of ‘crimes against the nation’, a device for visiting collective punishment on Sudeten Germans especially . Czech justice often preoccupied with the vague and troubling category .
 French justice in the 1930s and '90s was justice in France, with perhaps less cause . But the same was true of French justice, with less cause, as it was in France .
 It is hard to judge the success of the post-war trials and anti-Fascist purges in formerly-occupied Europe . The trials and purges were not successful, but they were successful .
 The pattern of sentencing was much criticized at the time . Those who were tried while the war was still going on, or immediately following a country’s liberation, were apt to receive tougher punishments than those prosecuted later .
 Minor offenders dealt with in the spring of 1945 received far longer prison terms than major collaborators whose cases did not come to court for another year or more . As a result, minor offenders received much longer jail terms than those whose cases came to court later .
 In Bohemia and Moravia a very high percentage of death sentences was carried out because of a rule requiring that prisoners be executed within two hours of the passing of judgment . The Domobran was the wartime Croatian Home Guard, the Croatian Army .
 Many of the punishments were passed by judges and juries whose own wartime record was spotty or worse . What caused greater offence, and may ultimately have undercut the value of the proceedings in some places, was the manifest inconsistency of punishments .
 Writers and journalists, having left a written record of their wartime allegiance, came off worst . Writers, journalists and journalists were left worst .
 Albert Camus thought it both unjust and imprudent to condemn and execute men for their opinions, however ghastly these might be . The trials of prominent intellectuals, like that of Robert Brasillach in Paris in 1945, provoked protests from bona fide resisters .
 In contrast, businessmen and high officials who had profited from the occupation suffered little, at least in western Europe . In contrast to the occupation, businessmen profited little, according to European media .
 Allies insisted that men like Vittorio Valletta of FIAT be left in place, despite his notorious engagement with the Fascist authorities . In Italy the Allies insisted on leaving Vallettas despite his involvement with the Fascists .
 In France, prosecutions for economic collaboration were pre-empted by selective nationalization of the Renault factories, for example, in retribution for Louis Renault’s contribution to the German war effort .
 Small businessmen, bankers and officials who had helped administer occupation regimes, build the ‘Atlantic Wall’ against an invasion of France, supply German forces and so forth were left in place to provide continuity and stability .
 The very scale of destruction and moral collapse in 1945 meant that whatever was left in place was likely to be needed as a building block for the future . Whatever was left, it was probably needed to be used to build up a future of the war .
 The provisional governments of the liberation months were almost helpless . The provisional government was almost helpless in the months of liberation .
 The unconditional cooperation of the economic, financial and industrial elites seemed vital if food, clothing and fuel were to be supplied to a helpless and starving population . It was vital to the world's economic and industrial elite to provide food and clothing to the starving population, the author says .
 A price for this was paid in political cynicism and a sharp falling away from the illusions and hopes of the liberation. But a price was paid for this, says David Cameron .
 Giannini's sentiments were widespread in Europe by late 1945 and prepared the way for a rapid shift in mood . But sentiments were not widespread in 1945 and led to a rapid change in mood in Europe .
 The majority of people in the lands recently occupied by the Germans were more interested in putting uncomfortable or unpleasant memories behind them and getting on with their fractured lives . Having assigned blame for the recent past, and punished those whose cases were the most egregious or psychologically satisfying, the majority of Germans were
 In any case, very few men and women at the time were disposed to blame their countrymen for the worst crimes .
 For these, it was universally agreed, the Germans must take full responsibility . For this, it is universally agreed that they must take responsibility for their actions .
 The view that ultimate blame for the horrors of World War Two must fall on German shoulders alone was so widespread that even Austria was held exempt from the blame .
 Austria had been officially declared Hitler’s ‘first victim’ under an Allied agreement of 1943 . Austria was assured different treatment from Germany at the end of the war .
 Winston Churchill insisted on the Prussian origins of Nazism, a view driven by his generation’s obsession with the emergence of the threat to European stability in the course of the last third of the nineteenth century .
 Austria's pivotal geographical position and uncertainty over central Europe’s political future made it seem prudent to detach her fate from that of Germany . But it also suited the other Allies—Austria’�s pivotal geographical . position .
 Austria could hardly be treated as just another Nazi-occupied country whose local Fascists and Nazi-collaborators would need to be punished, after which normal life could be resumed . Nevertheless, Austria should not be treated like another Nazi occupied country, says historian .
 Austrians were disproportionately represented in the SS and in concentration camp administrations . Austrians had been disproportionately represented by the SS .
 0,000 Austrians were investigated for war crimes of which 23,000 were tried, 13,600 condemned, 43 sentenced to death and 30 executed . Just 30 were executed .
 In 1947 the Austrian authorities passed a law distinguishing between ‘more and ‘less’ incriminated Nazis . 0,000 of the latter were amnestied the following year and their voting rights restored .
 Austrians forgot about their involvement with 52 RETRIBUTION Hitler altogether . After that Austrians simply forgot about the involvement with Hitler .
 The Austrian Social Democrats, indisputably anti-Nazi, had to overcome the record of their pre-1933 calls for Anschluss with Germany with Germany .
 All parties were interested in massaging and flattering the votes of exNazis, says historian . Ex-Nazis were a significant electoral constituency that would shape the country's political future, he says .
 There were new configurations shaped by the onset of the Cold War . And then, as we shall see, there were the new .
 Moscow Declaration of October 30th 1943 relieved Austria of responsibility for its Nazi allegiance . Allies warned the Germans that they would be held responsible for their war crimes .
 Allied occupying powers in Germany prosecuted Nazis and their collaborators for crimes of war, crimes against humanity, murder and other common felonies . In a series of trials between 1945 and 1947 the Allies prosecuted Nazi leaders for crimes .
 US, British and French military courts tried lower-level Nazis in their respective zones of occupied Germany and together with the Soviet Union they delivered Nazis to other countries . Poland and France also tried Nazis in the places where their crimes had been committed .
 The numbers were too great and the arguments against collective guilt too compelling . The numbers are too great, the arguments were too compelling.
 In any case, it is not clear what could follow from finding millions of people guilty in this way .
 The responsibilities of the Nazi leaders were clear, however, and there was never any doubt about their likely fate . The responsibility of Nazi leaders was clear, but there was no doubt that they would die .
 From the outset the German War Crimes trials were as much about pedagogy as justice as justice . The trial was as much as a trial for the crimes committed by the Nazis as well as the Nazis .
 The exemplary benefits of trials were not always self-evident . However, the benefits of the trials were often not always obvious . The benefits of trial trials are now more evident than ever .
 In an early series of trials of concentration camp commanders and guards, many escaped punishment altogether . In the early years of the trials, many of the camp guards escaped punishment .
 Their lawyers exploited the Anglo-American system of adversarial justice to their advantage, crossexamining and humiliating witnesses and camp survivors . The camp survivors were humiliated by their lawyers, and their lawyers exploited their advantage .
 It is hard to know how far the trials of Nazis contributed to the political and moral re-education of Germany and the Germans . The trials of the Nazis are not known how far they contributed to Germany's re-educational education of its citizens .
 They were certainly resented by many as ‘victors’ justice’, and that is just what they were . They were seen as 'victors' justice' and that was just what it was. They were resented .
 Real trials of real criminals for demonstrably criminal behaviour set a vital precedent for international jurisprudence in decades to come . But they were also real trials of criminals for clearly criminal behaviour . The trials were also a trial of real criminal behaviour, but they set a crucial precedent .
 The trials and investigations of the years 1945-48 (when the UN War Crimes Commission was disbanded) put an extraordinary amount of documentation and testimony on record at the very moment when Germans and others were most disposed to forget as fast as possible .
 They made clear that crimes committed by individuals for ideological or state purposes were nonetheless the responsibility of individuals and punishable under law . The crimes committed for ideological purposes are still the responsibility for individuals .
 There were, however, two unavoidable shortcomings to the Allied punishment of German war criminals . There were also two unavoidable flaws to the Allies punishment .
 The presence of Soviet prosecutors and Soviet judges was interpreted by many commentators from Germany and Eastern Europe as evidence of hypocrisy . Many commentators interpreted the presence of prosecutors and judges as hypocrisy .
 The behaviour of the Red Army, and Soviet practice in the lands it had ‘liberated’, were no secret . It was perhaps better known and publicized then than in later years than later .
 The purges and massacres of the 1930s were still fresh in many people’s memory . And the purges . of the . 1930s was still fresh . in many . people's memory . The purge and massacres were still . fresh in . many people's memories .
 To have the Soviets sitting in judgment on the Nazis, sometimes for crimes they had themselves committed,devalued the Nuremberg and other trials and made them seem exclusively an exercise in anti-German vengeance .
 The Soviet presence at Nuremberg was the price paid for the wartime alliance and for the Red Army's pre-eminent role in Hitler’s defeat . The Red Army was the most prominent role in the defeat of the German army .
 The second shortcoming of the trials was inherent in the very nature of the judicial process . The trials were held in a series of high-profile events in the United States .
 Many Germans felt licensed to believe that the rest of the nation was innocent, that Germans in the collective were as much passive victims of Nazism as anyone else . Precisely because the personal guilt of the Nazi leadership, beginning with Hitler himself, was so fully and carefully established, many
 There was little genuine appreciation that the occupation was perpetrated by Germans . Kohl was speaking half a century later, but there was little appreciation that he had perpetrated the crimes .
 The U.S. Army in Germany was accompanied by a host of psychologists and other specialists . Their assigned task was to discover just why the Germans had strayed so far .
 The British undertook similar projects, though with greater skepticism and fewer resources, in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Denazification measures were one of the few issues on which Allied Occupation authorities could agree . The Soviets, on the other hand, were initially in full agreement . The Soviet Union was initially in agreement with denazification .
 The real problem with any consistent programme aimed at rooting out Nazism from German life was that it was simply not practicable in the circumstances of 1945, says historian John MacIntosh .
 On May 8th 1945, when the war in Europe ended, there were 8 million Nazis in Germany . The war ended on May 8, 1945, with 8 million Germans in Germany.
 In the shattered city of Cologne, of the 21 specialists in the city waterworks office, 18 had been Nazis . Their skills were vital for the reconstruction of water and sewage systems and the prevention of disease .
 Civil administration, public health, urban reconstruction and private enterprise in post-war Germany would inevitably be undertaken by men like this, albeit under Allied supervision . Civil administration and urban reconstruction in post war Germany would be undertaken under Allied control .
 There could be no question of simply expunging them from German affairs, says German politician .
 16 million Fragebogen were completed in the three western zones of occupied Germany, most of them in the area under American control . Most of the work was completed in Germany's western zones .
 U.S. authorities listed 3. million Germans as ‘chargeable cases’ in 1946 . Many were never brought before the local tribunals, set up in March 1946 .
 German civilians were taken on obligatory visits to concentration camps and made to watch films documenting Nazi atrocities . They were forced to watch Nazi atrocities at concentration camps in Germany .
 Nazi teachers were removed, libraries restocked, newsprint and paper supplies taken under direct Allied control and reassigned to new owners with genuine anti-Nazi credentials .
 On May 5th 1946, the future West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer spoke out against denazification measures in a public speech in Wuppertal, demanding that the 'Nazi fellow travellers' be left in peace .
 In his view, confronting Germans with the crimes of the Nazis was more likely to provoke a nationalist backlash than induce contrition . In Germany, Hitler's crimes would be punishable by death, he says .
 The future Chancellor thought it more prudent to allow and even encourage silence on the subject . Just because Nazism did have such deep roots in his country, he thought it .
 Germans in the 1940s had little sense of the way the rest of the world saw them . Germans in Germany in the 1950s were less aware of how they were perceived by the world .
 They had no grasp of what they and their leaders had done and were more preoccupied with their own post-war difficulties than the sufferings of their victims across occupied Europe . They were more concerned about their own problems than their victims' suffering in occupied Europe, the author says .
 They were more likely to see themselves in the role of victim and thus regarded trials and other confrontations with Nazi crimes as victorious Allies’ revenge on a defunct regime .
 With certain exceptions, Germany’s post-war political and religious authorities offered scant contradiction to this view . Germany's natural leaders, in the liberal professions, the judiciary, the civil service, were the most compromised of all .
 It was one thing to oblige Germans to attend documentary films, quite another to make them watch, much less think about what they were seeing . Germans were forced to watch documentary films at the end of the year .
 The unfortunate people to which I belonged was both sentimental and callous . "The unfortunate people were both callous and sentimental," he says .
 In Bavaria, about half the secondary schoolteachers had been fired by 1946, only to be back in their jobs two years later . The Bavarian state of Bavaria was one of the last bastions of the Nazis .
 In 1949 the newly-established Federal Republic ended all investigations of the past behaviour of civil servants and army officers . In 1949 all investigations were stopped by the Federal Republic .
 In Bavaria in 1951,94 percent of judges and prosecutors, 77 percent of finance min3 In 1946 the West German Landerrat recommended to the Allied authorities that in view of current shortages in Germany, food rations for displaced persons be reduced .
 General Lucius Clay confined his reply to a reminder that the food was provided by other European nations, victims of Germany’s own war of aggression .
 Of the newly-constituted West German Diplomatic Corps, 43 percent were former SS men . Another 17 percent had served in the SD or Gestapo .
 Hans Globke was Chancellor Adenauer's chief aide throughout the 1950s . Globke had been responsible for the official commentary on Hitler’s 1935 Nuremberg Laws . He was the man who had been . responsible for . the official . commentary .
 Wilhelm Hauser was the Obersturmfuhrer responsible for wartime massacres in Byelorussia . He was the chief of police in the Rhineland-Palatinate .
 Universities and the legal profession were the least affected by denazification, despite their sympathy for Hitler’s regime .
 Friedrich Flick, convicted as a war criminal in 1947, was restored to his former eminence as the leading shareholder in Daimler-Benz . Flick was released three years later by the Bonn authorities .
 Farben and Krupp were all released early and re-entered public life little the worse for wear . Farben, Krupp and Farben all re-enter public life early in the 1970s .
 By 1952 Fordwerke, the German branch of Ford Motor Company, had reassembled all its senior management from the Nazi years . By 1952 all senior management had been brought back to Germany .
 Opinion poll data from the immediate post-war years confirm the limited impact of Allied efforts . Opinion polls show limited impact on Allied efforts in the immediate aftermath of WWII .
 In October 1946, when the Nuremberg Trial ended, only 6 percent of Germans were willing to admit that they thought it had been ‘unfair’ Four years later, one in three took this view .
 This is not especially surprising, given that respondents had just emerged from twelve years under an authoritarian government committed to this view, the poll finds .
 Poll taken six years later, 37 percent of West Germans said it was better for Germany to have no Jews on its territory . Poll also found that 37 percent said it would be better for West Germans to be without Jews .
 25 percent of West Germans admitted to having a ‘good opinion’ of Hitler . But then in that same year 25 percent admitted to have a 'good opinion' of the dictator .
 In the Soviet-occupied zone the Nazi legacy was treated a little differently . The Nazi legacy in the Soviet zone was treated differently by locals .
 The main emphasis in denazification in the East was on the collective punishment of Nazis and the extirpation of Nazism from all areas of life . Soviet judges and lawyers took part in the Nuremberg trials .
 The local Communist leadership was under no illusions about what had taken place . Local Communist leadership had no illusions .
 Adenauer or most West German politicians were willing to concede, at least in public . This was more than Adenauer . Adenauer and most West Germans would have been willing to admit, but not publicly .
 Ulbricht, like the Soviet authorities to whom he answered, was less interested in extracting retribution for Nazi crimes than in securing Communist power in Germany and eliminating capitalism . He was more interested in the Soviet Union than the Nazi crimes .
 It was a Marxist commonplace and Soviet official doctrine that Nazism was merely Fascism . Fascism, in turn, was a product of capitalist self-interest in a moment of crisis, he says .
 The Soviet authorities paid little attention to the distinctively racist side of Nazism, and its genocidal outcome . They instead focused their arrests and expropriations on businessmen, tainted officials, teachers and others .
 The Soviet dismantling of the heritage of Nazism in Germany was not fundamentally different from the social transformation that Stalin was bringing about in other parts of central and eastern Europe . In this way the dismantling of Nazi heritage in Germany wasn't fundamentally different .
 The opportunistic dimension of Soviet policy towards ex-Nazis was a function of weakness, says historian . Soviet policy was a result of a weakness, he says . He says .
 The Communists in occupied Germany were not a strong movement . Their arrival in the baggage train of the Red Army was hardly calculated to endear them to voters .
 Their only political prospect, beyond brute force and electoral fraud, lay in appealing to calculated self-interest . Their only prospect is to appeal to the electorate to vote for their own good interests . But they will have to resort to brute force, or electoral fraud .
 Communists encouraged the expulsion of ethnic Germans and offered themselves as guarantor and protector for the new Polish/Slovak/Serb occupants of the Germans’ vacated farms, businesses and apartments . To the east and south Communists did this by encouraging the expulsion . Communists encouraged this by offering
 The two perspectives—doctrine and calculation—were not necessarily in conflict . "Doctrine" and "calculation" doctrine is not necessarily always in conflict, but it's a good thing to say .
 Nazism was not just a trick perpetrated on an innocent German proletariat . But they also understood that Nazism wasn't a trick, it was perpetrated on the innocent .
 The German working class, like the German bourgeoisie, had failed in its responsibilities . The working class had failed to take responsibility for its responsibilities, says the author .
 Soviet occupation forces fired from their jobs huge numbers of ex-Nazis by April 1948 . They appointed ‘anti-Fascists’ to administrative posts in their zone of occupation .
 German Communist leaders actively encouraged former Nazis whose records were not too publicly compromised to join them . On the other hand, they actively encouraged ex-Nazis to join the Communist Party in Germany .
 Ex-Nazis were only too happy to expunge their past by throwing in their lot with the victors . Ex-Nazi ex-Nazis are happy to have their past expunged by the Nazis .
 As party members, local administrators, informers and policemen they proved uniquely well-adapted to the needs of the Communist state . They proved uniquely adapted to the state's needs .
 Ex-Nazis adaptability of ex-Nazis was also a product of their vulnerability to blackmail . But the adaptability is also a result of the vulnerability of blackmail, says the author .
 The Soviet authorities were prepared to conspire with their former enemies in lying about the nature and extent of Nazism in eastern Germany . But they also knew better and had the Nazi files to prove it, should the need arise .
 Black-marketeers, war profiteers and ex-Nazis of all sorts made excellent Communists, for they had every incentive to please . Ex-Nazis and war-profiteers made excellent Communist Communists, he says .
 The newly-formed Stasi took over not just the role and practices of the Nazi Gestapo but many thousands of its employees and informers . Many thousands of thousands of people were employed by the Gestapo .
 Political victims of the incoming Communist regime, often charged in a blanket manner as ‘Nazi criminals’, were arrested by ex-Nazi policemen, tried by . Nazi-era prisons and concentration camps taken over en bloc by the new authorities .
 The ease with which individuals and institutions switched from Nazism or Fascism over to Communism was not unique to East Germany, except perhaps in scale . The ease of switching from Fascism or Nazism to Communism not unique in East Germany .
 In post-war Hungary the Communists openly courted former members of the Fascist Arrow Cross . They offered them support against Jews seeking the return of their property .
 Slovak Communists Vlado Clementis and Eugen Lobl were stalked by Soviet agents recruited from pre-war Czech Fascist parties . Their testimony would be used against them in their show trial a decade later .
 Germans spontaneously ‘denazified’ themselves on May 8th 1945 . If denazification aborted, it was because for political purposes Germans had spontaneously 'enazified' themselves .
 In the East the Communists’ strongest suit was their promise to make a revolutionary new beginning in countries where everyone had something to forget . The Communists' strongest suit in the East was promise of making a revolution .
 This distrust of short-term memory, the search for serviceable myths of anti-Fascism, was the most important invisible legacy of World War Two in Europe . The search for a France of Resisters or a Poland of victims is the most significant legacy of WWII .
 In its positive form it facilitated national recovery by allowing men like Tito, Charles De Gaulle or Konrad Adenauer to offer their own account of themselves .
 Such accounts allowed countries that had suffered war passively, like the Netherlands, to set aside the record of their compromises, and those whose activism had proven misguided, like Croatia, to bury it in a blurred story of competing heroisms . Croatia is one of several countries that have suffered from war
 Without such collective amnesia, Europe’s astonishing post-war recovery would not have been possible . Without such amnesia it would have not been possible, says historian John MacIntuffie .
 Post-war Europe rested on foundation myths that would fracture and shift with the passage of years . But only much later would become clear just how much post-war European myths were true .
 In the circumstances of 1945, in a continent covered with rubble, there was much to be gained by behaving as though the past was indeed dead and buried and a new age about to begin .
 The price paid was a certain amount of selective, collective forgetting, notably in Germany . The price was the price paid for selective and collective forgetting .
 The sheer scale of the European calamity opened new opportunities for Marshall . George C Marshall was in charge of the British government in the aftermath of the war .
 A return to the way things had been before 1939 was out of the question almost everywhere . The war was the first major conflict in the US to break away from the White House in the early 1930s .
 This was naturally the view of the young and the radical, but it was just as evident to perspicacious observers of an older generation . It was also evident to observers of the older generation, as well as those in the youth .
 AntiFascist resisters everywhere saw themselves in battle with an entire political and social system which they held directly responsible for the disasters their countries had undergone . Anti-fascist resisters saw themselves as in battle not just with the wartime occupiers and their local .
 It was the politicians and bankers of the inter-war years who had brought their countries to catastrophe . They had betrayed the sacrifices of the First World War and laid the ground for the Second . The war was the Second World War, writes David Cameron .
 They, and their system, were the target of wartime plans for post-war change . They were the targets of post-WWII plans for change .
 In much of eastern Europe the slate was indeed wiped clean, as we have seen . The slate was wiped clean in many eastern European countries, as well as Russia .
 Post-war politics would be the continuation of their wartime struggle, a natural projection and extension of their clandestine existence . Seen from the point of view of the wartime Resistance movements, post-wartime politics would continue .
 To oppose the authorities, to advocate social change or even political reform, was to place your self beyond the law. To oppose social change, to . oppose [the authorities] was to . place your . self beyond . the law, to oppose [authorities], was to be beyond
 For this new generation, politics was therefore about resistance to authority and conventional social or economic arrangements, resistance to the past, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "Resistance to authority is resistance to conventional social, economic arrangements"
 Claude Bourdet was an activist in the French resistance and a prominent left-wing magazine editor and writer in the post-war years . He captured the mood in his memoirs, Vaventure incertainer .
 From resisting Fascism to resisting a post-war retreat to the errors of the thirties seemed a natural step . From resisting fascism to resisting post-fascism, it was a natural move to resist a retreat .
 Out of this came the oddly optimistic mood upon which many observers remarked in the immediate aftermath of Liberation . The mood of Liberation was oddly optimistic .
 In spite of the destitution all around, something new and better was bound to emerge . "Because of it, it's bound to be better," says the author of the book .
 Our life today is dominated by a sense of stupor and by an instinctive search for a direction . We live in a world dominated by the sense of 'stupor' and 'stupidity' Our life has been dominated by stupsor and a search for direction
 The chief impediment to radical change in the aftermath of Hitler’s defeat was not reactionaries or Fascists, but the legitimate governments-in-exile, most of which had sat out the war in London planning their return .
 Anything less would mean anarchy—or else an indefinite occupation by Allied armies . The U.S. would have to accept the conditions of anarchy, or else else it would be anarchy .
 The wartime resistance groups, organized by 1944-45 into various political movements, were just as suspicious in return . The resistance groups were organized as well as political movements in the war .
 In France and Norway the legislators elected in 1936 were disqualified by their actions in 1940 . In Norway and France the legislators were disqualified from being elected in 1940 by the same act as in 1936 .
 In Belgium and the Netherlands their absence in the intervening five years had cut off governments from any appreciation of local suffering and the change in public mood brought about under Nazi occupation .
 The returning authorities were quite willing to compromise in matters of policy, as well as social and economic reforms, as we shall see . The return of the Soviet Union was a major success in the early years .
 The illusions of the Resistance were soon shattered by the Allied occupying forces . Since this was also the preference of the Allies occupying forces, West and East, it was also their preference . The illusion was soon shattered.
 In eastern Europe it was the Soviets who determined the shape of post-war governments and who directed their actions . The Soviets were responsible for many of eastern Europe's post-WWII governments .
 In western Europe, provisional authorities took office pending new elections . Provisional authorities take office in western Europe pending new election results .
 The resistance movements were encouraged and eventually forced to hand in their weapons and disband their organizations . And in every case, they were encouraged .
 It is striking, retrospect, how little resistance there was to this restoration of the institutional status quo . It's striking, in retrospect, that little resistance was to the reinstatement of the status quo, writes Simon Tisdall .
 In Poland and parts of the western Soviet Union armed partisan groups survived for a few more years . Their struggle was a specifically national and anti-Communist struggle, but theirs was a specific national struggle . In Poland, Poland and the rest of the Soviet Union, the armed groups survived .
 Organized resistance merged peacefully into post-war political parties and unions with only muted protests . In Norway, Belgium, France and Italy the organized resistance merged into political parties . In France, Italy, Belgium and Italy, it merged peacefully .
 In November 1944 armed members of the wartime resistance were given two weeks to hand over their weapons . In Belgium in November 1944, armed resistance members were given a two-week deadline to hand their weapons over to the Nazis .
 Police opened fire at a protest rally in Brussels on November 25th at which the police opened fire, injuring 45 people . This led to a large protest rally where 45 people were injured . The police were involved in the shooting .
 200,000 French resistance fighters were successfully integrated into the regular army when their organization, the Forces Francoises de VInterieur, was disbanded without protest .
 Communist leaders like Maurice Thorez in France and Palmiro Togliatti in Italy played a major role in ensuring the peaceful cooperation of their followers . The Communist Party of Italy was founded in 1903 .
 Many were willing to believe that the energies and ambitions of the . resistance would now be channeled into political projects for national renewal . But many are willing to . believe that . the energies of the resistance will now be . channeled to political projects .
 Parri was no politician and when he fell, six months later, political power shifted definitively into the hands of the traditional parties . But Parri is no politician, and six months after he fell he is no longer a politician .
 De Gaulle, in France, was a far better political strategist but he, too, abandoned office rather than accommodate his wartime ambitions to parliamentary routine . He paid unintended tribute to his own success in re-establishing the Republic .
 Most Europeans in the immediate post-war years instead found themselves ruled by coalitions of left and left-centre politicians rather similar to the Popular Fronts of the 1930s . Instead of being governed by a new, fraternal community of resisters, most Europeans were ruled by left
 The only pre-war political parties able to operate normally in these years were those with anti-Fascist credentials . In Soviet-occupied eastern Europe, those to whom it suited the new authorities to ascribe such credentials at least for the time being .
 In practice this meant Communists, Socialists and a handful of liberal or radical groups . In practice it meant Communists and Socialists .
 These, together with the newlyprominent Christian Democratic parties, thus constituted the parties of government in the first post-war years . They brought with them many policies and men of the Popular Front era .
 Reform programs of post-war European governments echoed and recapitulated the unfinished business of the 1930s . It is not especially odd that the reform programs echoed and recaptitulated what happened in Europe .
 The Resistance and its heirs were rather vague on specifics . It was because they shared a common anti-Fascist ethos and a widespread desire for change, the Resistance .
 Action Programme of the French National Resistance Council had no king to depose, but its ambitions were otherwise similarly imprecise . The Action Programme was a French government programme of the 1930s .
 Resistance units had been too busy fighting, or just surviving, to busy themselves with detailed plans for post-war legislation . Resistance units were too preoccupied fighting or surviving to discuss legislation .
 Among clandestine organizations only the Communists had practical knowledge of politics, and except in the French case not much of that . Among clandestine groups only the Communist Party knew about politics .
 Communists were reluctant to tie their hands with detailed programmatic statements that might alienate future tactical allies . Communist Party was reluctant to make such statements in advance . Communists were wary of tying their hands to specific statements .
 The disasters of the inter-war decades seemed to be connected by the failure to organize society better . The failures of laissez-faire capitalism that had led so many into authoritarian temptation, the brazen indifference of an arrogant ruling elite and the incompetence of an inadequate political class .
 If democracy was to work, if it was to recover its appeal, it would have to be planned . Democracy is to work if it is to recover from its appeal to the public, says David Cameron .
 In post-war western and central Europe only Communists put their faith in Soviet-style Plans . Even they had no notion of how such Plans might be applied to their local circumstances .
 Soviet obsession with numerical targets, production quotas and centralized direction was alien to all but a few of the contemporary western advocates of planning . The Soviet obsession for numerical targets and production quotas is alien to Westerners .
 The latter—and they came in many varieties, were drawing on a very different set of sources . The latter, however, was drawing from a set of different sources .
 Throughout the interwar depression, from Hungary to Great Britain, voices were raised in support of a planned economy of one kind or another . Hungary and Great Britain were among the countries raising support for planned economies .
 Some of the ideas propounded, notably in Austria and among the British Fabians, derived from an older Socialist tradition, but many more had their origins in pre-1914 liberal reformism . Some of these ideas were propounded by the Fabians .
 The nineteenthcentury ‘caretaker’ state, its attention confined to security and policing, was outmoded, so the argument ran . The argument ran. ‘The nineteenthcentury 'caretaker' state, the state's attention confined only to security, was . outmod
 It would be necessary to intervene in economic affairs to regulate imbalances, eliminate inefficiencies and compensate for inequities and injustice of the market . If only on prudential grounds—to forestall political upheavel—it would now be necessary for intervention .
 Before 1914 the main emphasis was on progressive taxation, protection of labour and, occasionally, state ownership of a restricted number of natural monopolies .
 With the collapse of the international economy and the ensuing war, planning took on a greater urgency and ambition . Planning for the future became more urgent and more ambitious in the 1980s .
 Competing proposals for a national Plan circulated widely among young engineers, economists and civil servants in France and Germany .
 For most of the inter-war years, would-be planners and their supporters languished in frustration at the political margins . Planning for the future has been a thorn in the history of American history .
 Until then, capitalism was condemned to suffer and eventually collapse of its own contradictions . Capitalism was condemned by capitalism's own contradictions, says Julian Zelizer . Until then it was condemned and eventually collapsed, says Zelizer.
 The idea that one might ‘plan’ a capitalist economy seemed to both sides a non-sense . The idea of ‘plans’ for the future of capitalism seemed to be a non sense .
 Frustrated advocates of economic planning often found themselves attracted to authoritarian parties of the radical Right . The radical Right is distinctly more hospitable to their approach than economic planners .
 In Belgium Hendrik de Man likewise failed to convince his fellow Socialists of the viability of his ‘Plan’ In Belgium he began propounding more authoritarian solutions .
 Mussolini’s success was achieved through state-led planning and the establishment of umbrella agencies for whole economic sectors . Mussolini saw his success in overcoming Italy's economic disadvantages through state planning and umbrella agencies .
 Albert Speer was much admired abroad for his programme of economic direction and regulation . He was the administrator of Hitler’s New Order, and was admired abroad .
 In September 1943, Speer and Jean Bichelonne, Vichy’s Minister of Industrial Production, worked out a system of tariff reductions based on inter-war ‘plan-ist’ ideas .
 'Jeune Europe' was founded in 1933 for young thinkers and politicians keen to set a new direction in policy making . Paul-Henri Spaak exchanged ideas about an enhanced role for the state with contemporaries from across the continent .
 Many of its advocates got their first experience as civil servants in wartime occupation regimes . Many of the advocates got first experience in wartime occupations, in France, Italy, Belgium and Czechoslovakia .
 In Britain it was the war above all that placed the government at the heart of economic life . Indeed in Britain, the war was the most important factor in the economy .
 Emergency Powers Bill of May 1940 authorised the government to direct anyone to do anything in the national interest, to control any property and assign any industrial plant to any national end it chose .
 Fascism and war were thus the bridge linking heterodox, marginal and often controversial notions of economic planning with mainstream post-war economic policy . Fascism, war were also the bridge between fascism and mainstream economic policy, writes David Frum .
 Planning was not associated with the discredited politics of the inter-war years . Yet this compromised heritage had little impact on planning’s appeal . Planning was quite distinctly not associated .
 In many countries this reflected a well-founded awareness, enhanced by the experience of war, that in the absence of any other agency of regulation or distribution, only the state now stood between the individual and destitution . Only the state stood between individual and . destitution, it is said
 But contemporary enthusiasm for an interventionist state went beyond desperation or self-interest, it says . It's not the only time for a state to intervene in its own interests, it's the time for the U.S.
 There was a great faith in the ability of government to solve large-scale problems by mobilizing and directing people and resources to collectively useful ends .
 The idea that a well-planned economy meant a richer, fairer and better-regulated society was taken up by a very broad constituency, including the Christian Democratic parties then rising to prominence all over Western Europe .
 Taylor exaggerated as always, but he was wrong in the long run . He might have been surprised to learn about the pianist enthusiasms of many New Dealers prominent in the contemporary United States administration of Germany .
 All planners believed in an enhanced role for the state in social and economic affairs . What all planners had in common was belief in the state .
 Beyond this there was great variation, usually a consequence of distinctive national political traditions . Beyond this, great variation was usually the result of national political tradition .
 In Britain, where little actual planning ever took place, the real issue was control of industries and social and economic services through state ownership as an end in itself . The real issue is control —of industries, social and social services—through state ownership .
 In Italy the Fascist institutional legacy was left largely intact after the war . In Italy large swat of the economy was left under state oversight . The Fascist institutions were largely intact in Italy .
 In West Germany, after 1948, the economy would remain mostly in private hands but with detailed, publicly-approved arrangements for factory management, employer-employee relations and conditions of employment and distribution . After 1948, West Germany's economy would be mostly private hands .
 In the Netherlands central planning entailed a mix of predictive and prescriptive edicts for the use of private enterprise . Central planning was a variable mix of pre-planned edicts and predictive edicts .
 Most countries of western Europe had rapidly growing public sectors, when measured by government expenditure or the number of public-sector employees . Most countries had rapid growth in public sector spending, measured by spending and employees .
 Only in France did rhetorical enthusiasm for state planning translate into the real thing . But only in France, the French government has ever been able to get ahead .
 One fifth of France’s total industrial capacity was in state ownership by May 1946 . The French state owned one fifth of the country's industrial capacity by 1946 .
 Monnet was at the head of the Commissariat General du Plan . A month later he was established, Monnet became the president of the Commission .
 Monnet set up Modernization Commissions for various industries (mining, electricity, transportation, building materials, steel and agricultural machinery; oil, chemicals, fertilizers, shipping and synthetic fibres would later be added)
 The Commissariat saw its first national Plan approved by the French Cabinet in 1947 . Exactly one year after its creation, in January 1947, the French government approved the first national plan without discussion .
 France committed itself wholeheartedly to economic growth and modernization as public policy . Under its auspices France became the first western country to commit itself to modernization .
 The first Monnet Plan was largely an emergency measure to address France’s post-war crisis . The first plan was largely a response to the post-WWII crisis .
 After the First World War he was named Secretary General of the new League of Nations . Upon leaving school he spent many years living abroad, notably in London .
 He passed much of the Second World War in the US . He negotiated arms supplies on behalf of the British government and the Free French .
 His devotion to economic planning and his later contribution to the Schuman Plan for European economic cooperation drew upon a familiarity with large-scale organization and inter-state collaboration that was strikingly unusual for a Frenchman of his class .
 Monnet Plan confined itself to providing government with strategy and levers for actively fostering certain favoured objectives . The Monnet plan was intended to provide government with a strategy to actively foster certain objectives .
 In Czechoslovakia a Central Planning Commission with some Monnet-like features and aspirations was established in June 1946 to guide and coordinate the sizeable public sector nationalized by President Benes in 1945 .
 In the year before the Prague Communist coup of February 1948, 93 percent of all those employed in transport and 78 percent of those in industry already worked for the state . In the same year, all transport workers in Czechoslovakia were employed by the government .
 In Czechoslovak case nationalization and state planning of the economy began well in advance of the Communist take-over . Only in 1949, a year after the Communist coup, was the Planning Commission purged and renamed as the ‘State Planning Office .
 Poland’s January 1946 Nationalization Law was the work of coalition governments in which Communists dominated . Elsewhere in the region large-scale nationalizations, like those mandated under Poland's January 1946 nationalization Law, were the work by coalition governments .
 The chief purpose of planning in post-war continental Europe was public investment . Public investment was a key part of the post-WWII planning .
 In eastern Europe the emphasis was inevitably upon basic expenditure—on roads, railways, factories, utilities, utilities . The emphasis on basic expenditure was inevitably on roads and railways .
 Social services left little over for food and housing, much less for medical, educational and other social services . Food, housing, housing and other services were left over for non-essential consumer goods, leaving little for social support .
 This was not a pattern of expenditure likely to endear itself to any electorate, especially in countries that had already suffered years of material deprivation . It was not surprising that this sort of planning under conditions of dire shortage was almost always accompanied, sooner or later, by authoritarian rule and the police
 The British, as we shall see, were constrained to accept years of austerity as the price for economic recovery . The British were constrained by years of ‘austerity’ as a result of economic recovery.
 Monnet Plan skewed towards capital investment in major industries at the expense of domestic consumption, housing and services . In France or Italy, where there was almost no long-term private capital market, all major investments had to be publicly funded .
 Planning drew directly upon the lessons of the 1930s . A successful strategy for post-war recovery must preclude any return to economic stagnation, depression, protectionism and unemployment .
 The same considerations lay behind the creation of the modern European welfare state . The welfare state was created by the same considerations as the modern state .
 The political polarizations of the last inter-war decade were born directly of economic depression and its social costs . In the conventional wisdom of the 1940s, the political polarities of the 1950s were born from economic depression . The social costs of the 1930s and '50s were
 Both Fascism and Communism thrived on social despair, on the huge gulf separating rich and poor . Fascism thrived in the 1930s on a huge gulf between the rich and the poor . Both Fascisms and Communism thrive on the social divide .
 If the democracies were to recover, the condition of the people’ question must be addressed . The question of whether the democracies are to recover is to be addressed, says David Cameron .
 ‘Welfare state’ was more than just a prophylactic against political upheaval . But the ‘welfare state ’—social planning — was more important than just the welfare state . Social planning was a pre-emptive response to political upheaval.
 By 1945 two generations of European doctors, anthropologists, public health officials and political commentators had contributed to widespread debates and polemics about ‘race health’, population growth and environmental well-being .
 There was a broad consensus that the physical and moral condition of the citizenry was a matter of common interest and therefore part of the responsibility of the state . The state is responsible for the condition of its citizens, the government says .
 As a result, rudimentary welfare provisions were already widespread before 1945, although their quality and reach varied widely . As a consequence, welfare provisions of one kind or another were already widely widespread .
 Germany was typically the most advanced country, having instituted pension, accident and medical insurance schemes under Bismarck, between 1883 and 1889 .
 Other countries began to catch up in the years immediately before and after World War One . But other countries also caught up in years before, after and after .
 Embryonic national insurance and pension schemes were introduced in Britain by Asquith’s Liberal governments in the first decade of the century . Both Britain and France established ministries of health after the end of the Great War .
 Romania and Hungary already had accident and sickness insurance schemes in place before World War 72 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE One . The countries of eastern Europe introduced national pension systems .
 Family allowances were a key element in plans to increase the birth rate in war-hit countries . They were introduced first in Belgium, next in France and in Hungary and the Netherlands just before outbreak of war .
 None of these arrangements, not even those of the Nazis, represented comprehensive welfare systems . But none of the arrangements, including those of Nazi Germany, were comprehensive systems .
 Ad hoc reforms were cumulative ad hoc reforms, each addressing a particular social problem or improving upon the demonstrated shortcomings of previous schemes . The reforms were each addressing particular social problems or improving on previous schemes.
 An applicant for public assistance to demonstrate his virtual destitution in order to qualify . This drew on the nineteenth-century Poor Law principle of ‘least eligibility’
 Nowhere was yet any recognition of an obligation upon the state to guarantee a given set of services to all citizens, whether male or female, employed or workless, old or young . Nowhere is there yet any . recognition of a . obligation upon state to . guarantee a . given
 The Second World War transformed the role of the modern state and expectations placed upon it . World War One had precipitated legislation and social provisions in its wake .
 The change was most marked in Britain, where Maynard Keynes correctly anticipated a post-war ‘craving for social and personal security’ The change in security was most pronounced in Britain .
 The post-1945 European welfare states varied considerably in the resources they provided and the way they financed them . The welfare states vary considerably in how they provided resources and how they funded them .
 The provision of social services chiefly concerned education, housing and medical care, as well as urban recreation areas, public transport, publicly-funded art and culture and other indirect benefits of the interventionary state .
 Social security consisted of the state provision of insurance—against illness, unemployment, accident and the perils of old age . Social security was intended to protect people against illness and unemployment .
 Every European state in the post-war years provided or financed most of these resources, some more than others . Every state in Europe has provided or funded most of those resources .
 The important differences lay in the schemes set to pay for the new public provisions, the government says .
 Some countries collected revenue through taxation and provided free or heavily-subsidized care and services . This was the system chosen in Britain, where it reflected the preference for state monopolies .
 In other countries cash benefits were paid to citizens according to socially-determined criteria of eligibility, with the beneficiaries left to purchase services of their own choice . In some countries, the benefits are paid according to criteria, such as eligibility criteria .
 These differences reflected varying systems of national finance and accounting, but also signified a fundamental strategic choice . The differences reflected differing systems of accounting and finance but also a fundamental choice .
 In isolation, social insurance, however generous, was not in principle politically radical . We have seen how relatively early it was introduced in even the most conservative of regimes .
 Comprehensive welfare systems, however, are inherently re-distributive, say experts . Comprehensive welfare . systems, such as welfare programs, can be re-socialized, they say .
 Their universal character and the sheer scale on which they operate require the transfer of resources from the privileged to the less well off . The universal character of these social networks is that they must be transferred resources from rich to poor .
 The welfare state was itself in itself a radical undertaking . The variations among the European welfare states after 1945 reflected not just institutional procedures but also political calculation .
 Communist regimes after 1948 on the whole did not usually favour universal welfare systems . They did not need to, since they were at liberty to redistribute resources by force without spending scarce state funds on public services .
 Peasants were frequently excluded from social insurance and pension arrangements on political grounds . Peasant farmers were excluded from the social insurance system on the political grounds of the 1930s .
 In western Europe only six countries introduced compulsory unemployment insurance after 1945 . Only six countries, including Belgium, Italy, Norway, Austria, Germany and the UK, introduced such insurance .
 Subsidized voluntary schemes remained in the Netherlands until 1949, in France through 1967, in Switzerland until the mid-1970s . Subsidizing voluntary schemes were first introduced in France in 1949 and in Switzerland in 1967 .
 In Catholic Europe long-established local and communal coverage against unemployment against unemployment probably impeded the development of universal systems of insurance by reducing the need for them .
 Welfare spending was driven in part by the desire to maintain full or close to full employment . In countries where inter-war unemployment had been especially traumatic, such as the UK, or Belgium, welfare spending is driven by the fear of full or near full employment.
 Where it had not been so significant, France or Italy, this was reflected in a rather different balance of priorities, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's a very important part of the world's history, but it's not so significant in France, Italy,
 British reformistism came from sources of British reformism . But it also derived from the rather distinctive sources of reformism, it also came from Britain .
 The social legislation of post-war Britain was based on the justly famous wartime report by Sir William Beveridge . The report was published in November 1942 and an immediate best-seller .
 Beveridge was born in 1879, the son of a British judge in imperial India, and his ambitions were those of the great reforming Liberals of Edwardian Britain . Beveridge's ambitions and ambitions are those of a great reforming Liberal .
 His Report was at once an indictment of the social injustices of pre-1939 British society and a policy template for root and branch reform once the war was over . The Report was published in 1939 and was published by the British government .
 The normal situation of a healthy post-war adult was to be in full-time paid work . The last of these was not a welfare provision in itself, but it underpinned everything else .
 On this assumption generous provision could be made for unemployment insurance, pensions, family allowances, medical and other services, since these would be paid for by levies on wage packets, and by progressive taxation of the working population at large .
 Non-working women with no private health insurance of their own got coverage for the first time . The coverage of non-working working women was expanded to include non-paying women in the United States .
 The humiliation and social dependency of the old Poor Law/Means Test system was done away with . On the rare occasion when the citizen of the Welfare State needed public assistance he or she was now entitled to it by right .
 Medical and dental services were provided free of charge at the point of service . Pension provision was made universal, pension provision made universal . Family allowances were introduced for second and subsequent children .
 The main parliamentary Bill legislating these provisions received the Royal Assent in November 1946 . The National Health Service Act was introduced into law on July 5th 1948 . The core of the welfare system, the National Health Services Act, was introduced in July 1948 .
 The British Welfare State was both the completion of an earlier cycle of reforms, with its roots in the mid-nineteenth century Factory Acts, and a genuinely radical departure .
 The contrast between Orwell's Road to Wigan Pier and Macmillan's famous put-down to a heckler twenty years later is a tribute to the National Health Service .
 It is all too easy, looking back today upon the miscalculations of the first post-war reformers, to minimize and even dismiss their achievement . It is too easy to dismiss the achievement of post-WWII reformers .
 Many of the universal provisions of the NHS proved unsustainably expensive . The quality of the services provided has not been maintained across the years . Certain of the fundamental actuarial assumptions were short-sighted or worse .
 Anyone who grew up in post-war Britain has good reason to be grateful for the Welfare State . The welfare state is a vital part of Britain's post-WWII economy .
 Where outside Britain was comprehensive social coverage attempted on so generous a scale and all at once . The same is true for the post-war generation all across the European continent .
 Most Europeans speak first of the safety net of insurance and pension provisions which the state has provided for them . It is not by chance that most Europeans, when asked what they think of their public services, nearly always speak first .
 The December 1948 Federal Old Age and Survivors’ Insurance Act is regarded by many citizens as one of Switzerland’s finest achievements . Switzerland is distinctly under-provisioned by European standards .
 Its cost, to countries not yet recovered from the slump of the thirties and the destruction of the war, was very considerable . Its cost was very much greater than that of the 1930s .
 France devoted just 5 percent of its Gross Domestic Product to social services in 1938 . France committed 8. percent in 1949—a 64 percent increase in social spending . France devoted 5 percent to social service in 1938, a 64 percent rise in 1949 .
 In Britain by 1949 nearly 17 percent of all public expenditure was on social security alone . A 50 percent increase over the 1938 level at a moment of severe strain on the country’s finances .
 Government spending on social services as a share of GDP rose from 3. percent in 1938 to 5.% in 1949 . Even in Italy, the social security costs rose as much as 5.5% in 1950s .
 The postwar welfare systems were a guarantee of a certain minimum of justice, or fairness . The first reason is that, precisely because times were difficult, the welfare systems provided a minimum of fairness, or justice .
 This was not the spiritual and social revolution for which many in the wartime Resistance had dreamed, but it was a first step away from the hopelessness and cynicism of the pre-war years . This was a step from hopelessness to cynicism, but was not a spiritual revolution .
 The welfare states of western Europe were not politically divisive . The welfare state was not politically divorally divided in Europe .
 In many cases they had not previously been eligible for work-related health, unemployment or retirement benefits . They had been obliged to purchase such services and benefits from the private sector .
 The salaried professional and white-collar classes have both a better quality of life and more disposable income . Taken with the state provision of free or subsidized secondary and higher education for their children, this has left them with better quality and disposable incomes .
 European welfare state bound social classes closer together than ever before, with a common interest in its preservation and defense . Far from dividing the social classes against each other, the welfare state has united them together .
 Popular support for state-funded welfare and social service provisions lay in the popular sense that these corresponded to the proper tasks of gov.76 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE ernment .
 The post-war state all across Europe was a ‘social’ state, with implicit responsibility for the well-being of its citizens . Post-war states across Europe were a 'social' state, says Dr. David Cameron .
 It had an obligation to provide institutions and services necessary for a well-regulated, safe and prosperous land, he says . It also had to improve the condition of the population, as measured by a broad and expanding range of indices, he adds .
 It would prove easier to achieve the ideals of the social state, ‘from cradle to grave’ in a wealthy, homogenous country like Sweden than in one like Italy . Sweden is a wealthy country with a homogenous population .
 Faith in the state was at least as marked in poor lands as in rich ones . But faith in state was as marked as in poor places, perhaps more so, since in such places only the state could offer hope or salvation .
 In the aftermath of depression, occupation and civil war, the state was a vital source of community and social cohesion . The state was an agent of welfare, security and fairness in the post-war era . And in the 1930s and 1940s, it was a source of social cohesion
 Many commentators today are disposed to see state-ownership and state-dependency as the European problem, and salvation-from-above as the illusion of the age . But many commentators today see state ownership and state dependency as a problem .
 For the generation of 1945 some workable balance between political freedoms and the rational, equitable distributive function of the administrative state seemed the only sensible route out of the abyss . But for the generation in 1945, 1945 a balance between freedom of speech and the role of the state was the only
 The post-1945 urge for change went well beyond the provision of welfare, it has been said . It is not the first time the country has seen a change in its welfare system .
 The years following World War Two were a sort of foreshortened Age of Reform, during which many long-pressing problems were belatedly addressed . Many of the problems following the war were not solved until after the war .
 Many well-informed contemporaries saw agrarian reform as Europe’s most pressing dilemmas . One of the most important of these was the matter of agratic reform, which many saw as Europe's most pressing dilemma .
 The weight of the past still hung heavily upon the continent’s peasantry . It was not the first time the past had been seen in Europe .
 Only in England, the Low Countries, Denmark, the Alpine lands and parts of France were able to speak of a prosperous, independent class of farmers . Only in the Low . Countries, the . Alpine lands of France and the Alpine . lands of the Alpine Lands .
 Europe's predominantly rural population lived in conditions of indebted penury . The overwhelming majority of Europe’s predominantly rural people lived in . conditions of penury.
 Large tracts of the best arable and, especially, pasture land were still in the hands of a relatively few wealthy landowners, often absent and in many cases opposed to any improvement in the conditions of their land, their tenants or their workers . One reason for this was that large tracts of
 The long decline in agricultural prices relative to industrial ones was exacerbated by the importation of cheap grain and later meat from the Americas and the British Dominions . Another factor was the long decline of agricultural prices .
 By the 1930s European peasants had lived for nearly three generations with this relentless deterioration in their circumstances . European peasants lived for three generations of their lives in poverty .
 Those who stayed behind proved easy prey for nationalist and Fascist demagogues . Those who stay behind proved easily easy prey to nationalist and Fascists .
 The first objective had already been attempted after World War One through a series of land reforms . The aim was to redistribute large holdings, reduce the number of ‘microfundia’
 The newly ‘independent’ landholding peasants were actually more vulnerable than ever . In the disastrous economic circumstances of inter-war Europe, with prices falling even faster than before 1914, they were more vulnerable . But these reforms failed in their goal .
 One million hectares of land were taken out of the hands of ‘kulaks’ and ‘war criminals’ in 1945 . 600,000 hitherto poor or landless peasants were given the land to them .
 In Hungary, one-third of the country’s surface area was expropriated from the previous owners, in accordance with the December 1944 Szeged Programme of the provisional post-war coalition government .
 The wartime Czechoslovak National Front government drew up a similar programme the same year . It duly redistributed significant swathes of land, notably farms seized from Sudeten Germans and Hungarians .
 Between 1944 and 1947 every east European country saw the creation of a large class of smallholders beholden to the new authorities for their land .
 The smallholders were dispossessed by the Communist regimes in their drive for collectivization . A few years later those same smallholders would be dispossed by those same regimes .
 Landed gentry and large farmers disappeared in Poland, East Prussia, Hungary, Romania and Yugoslavia . But in the meantime whole classes of landed gentry disappeared .
 In western Europe only Southern Italy saw anything comparable to the dramatic changes further East . Southern Italy was the only part of the continent that saw a dramatic change in Europe .
 Sweeping reform laws in 1950 announced the redistribution of estate land across Sicily and the Mezzogiorno . The laws followed land seizures and occupations in Basilicata, the Abruzzi and Sicily .
 Much of the land redistributed from the old latifundia lacked water, roads or housing . But for all the fuss, little changed— little changed .
 Of 74,000 hectares redistributed in Sicily after World War Two, 95 percent was ‘marginal’ or inferior land, unsuited to cultivation . 95 percent of the land was 'marginal' or 'inferior' land unsuited .
 The impoverished peasants to whom it was offered had no money and no access to credit; they could do little with their new holdings . They could do nothing with the new holdings.
 New legal rights for tenant farmers in France and elsewhere gave them incentive to invest in their smallholdings . New credit systems and rural banks made it possible for them to do so .
 Statesubsidized farm price support systems helped reverse the decades-long decline in agricultural prices in Europe . Agricultural prices were set up to encourage farmers to produce as much as possible .
 The unprecedented post-war demand for labour in the cities drained off surplus workers from poorer rural districts, leaving a more efficient farming population with fewer mouths to feed .
 The political dimensions of the agrarian problem were indirectly addressed in the broader package of political reforms introduced in the first post-war years . The political dimension of the problem was indirectly addressed .
 Many of these were constitutional in nature, once again completing the unfinished business of 1918 . Many of the most important constitutional laws were passed in 1918 .
 The Greeks voted in September 1946 to retain their monarchy . The Greeks, in contrast, voted in 1947 to retain the monarchy .
 King Leopold III was removed as punishment for his cooperation with the Nazis . Belgians kept theirs, too, but removed the incumbent as punishment . Belgium kept their own king, but replaced him with a new king .
 The French voted in 1946 to replace the disgraced Third Republic with a numerical successor . The French had no monarch on whom to vent their memory of wartime humiliation, and merely voted for a successor .
 The constitution of the Fourth Republic was designed to eliminate so far as possible the risk of any surrender to authoritarian or caesarist sirens . Like the German Basic Law of 1949, the constitution was to prove singularly unsuccessful .
 Provisional or Constituent Assemblies which promulgated these post-war constitutions proposed popular referenda on controversial topics and voted major institutional reforms were mostly canted to the Left .
 Communists did not fare so well in free elections, though better than they would ever manage again . Elsewhere Communists fared better in elections, ranging from 13 percent in Belgium to 0.0 percent in the United Kingdom .
 Communists’ initial political leverage in western Europe came from their association with Socialist parties, most of which before 1947 were reluctant to break with the Popular Front-style alliance that had re-formed itself in the resistance movements .
 Socialist parties in France and Italy did almost as well as the Communists in initial post-war elections and considerably better in Belgium . Socialist parties did better in France, Italy and Belgium than Communists .
 The 'old Left' of Communists and Socialists was never able to govern alone . Nevertheless, outside Britain and the Nordic countries the ‘old Left’s was never . able to . govern alone. Nevertheless, the 'old left’ was not . alone .
 In western Europe the balance was always held, and in many cases dominated by, a new political animal, the Christian Democratic parties . The balance has always been held in western Europe, and was always dominated by the Christian Democrats .
 Catholic parties were familiar in continental Europe—they had long thrived in the Netherlands and Belgium . Catholic parties are familiar in . continental Europe .
 Even ‘Christian Democracy’ itself was not an altogether new idea . Its origins lay in early-twentieth-century Catholic reformism and Catholic movements of the political center that tried without success to make their way .
 After 1945 the situation was quite different and wholly to their advantage . But after 1945, the situation in the world was very different .
 Christian Democratic Union in West Germany, the Christian Democrats in Italy and the Popular Republican Movement in France . In the first place, these parties had a near-monopoly of the Catholic vote .
 Traditional Catholic voters in Italy, France, Belgium, the Netherlands and southern and western Germany would rarely vote Socialist and almost never Communist . Traditional Catholics in Italy and France would often vote Socialist .
 Even conservative Catholics in many countries often had no choice but to vote Christian Democrat . Conventional right-wing parties were either under a shadow or else banned outright .
 Even non-Catholic conservatives turned increasingly to the Christian Democrats, as a bar to the ‘Marxist’ Left .
 A large part of the Christian Democratic parties’ appeal to women lay in their programme . The Christian Democratic Party’s programme is designed to attract women .
 Christian Democracy avoided class-based appeals and emphasized instead social and moral reforms . Christian Democracy was founded in 1960s .
 The needs of single-parent, homeless and destitute families had never been greater . In particular, it insisted upon the importance of the family, a properly Christian theme .
 Christian Democrats of the first post-war years saw ffee-market liberals as their main opponents . Christian Democrats were keen to demonstrate that the modern state could be adapted to nonsocialist forms of benevolent intervention .
 In Italy and West Germany Christian Democrat parties secured a near monopoly of political power for many years to come . As a consequence, in Italy and Germany Christian Democrats secured near monopoly power .
 In France, the MRP did rather less well, thanks to the corrosive effects of two colonial wars, followed in 1958 by De Gaulle’s return to power .
 Catholic parties of a Christian Democrat bent exercised unbroken power in the Benelux countries for more than a generation . In Austria through 1970 through 1970, Catholic parties were in power in Austria until 1970 .
 Konrad Adenauer was born in 1876, Alcide de Gasperi five years later, and Churchill himself in 1874 . Churchill was assassinated in 1872, and his assassination was the first to be carried out .
 This shortfall manifested itself in the generally mediocre quality of younger politicians in these years . Togliatti was an exception to the younger generation .
 At first sight it may seem rather odd that so much of the rehabilitation of postwar Europe was the work of men who reached maturity and entered politics many decades before .
 In the first place such older men were rather unusual in surviving politically and ethically unscathed from thirty years of turmoil . Their political credibility was enhanced, as it were, by their scarcity value .
 Their instincts and interests were very well suited to the post-war mood. Their interests and interests would have been well suited, says historian John MacIntosh .
 Parliaments and democracies were seen by many as decadent, stagnant, corrupt and inadequate to the tasks of the modern state . Fascists and Communists saw democracies as decadently corrupt, and not just Fascists .
 War and occupation dispelled illusions, for voters if not intellectuals, intellectuals . War and invasion dispelled these illusions for voters .
 In the cold light of peace, the dull compromises of constitutional democracy took on a new appeal . The dull compromises took on new appeal in the light of the peace .
 What most people longed for in 1945 was social progress and renewal, to be sure, but combined with the reassurance of stable and familiar political forms . Most people in 1945 were looking for social progress, renewal, and stability .
 Statesmen whose experience reached back beyond the troubled inter-war decades to the more settled and self-confident era before 1914 had a particular attraction . Statesmen who reached back to the pre-war era had a special attraction .
 In the continuity of their person they could facilitate a difficult transition from the over-heated politics of the recent past to a coming era of rapid social transformation . In the future, they could help facilitate the transition of the past to the coming social transformation.
 The elder statesmen of Europe were all, by 1945, skeptical, pragmatic practitioners of the art of the possible . Whatever their party ‘label’, they were skeptical .
 This personal distance from the over-confident dogmas of inter-war politics faithfully reflected the mood of their constituents . The result of the war was a result of a lack of realism in the world's most powerful politicians .
 The prospects for political stability and social reform in post-World War Two Europe all depended on the recovery of the continent’s economy . Europe's post-war economic recovery depends on the strength of the European economy .
 No amount of state planning or political leadership could conjure away the Himalayan task facing Europeans in 1945 . The Himalayan mountain task was a daunting task for Europeans in the Himalayas .
 The damage to London was greater than that wrought by the Great Fire of 1666 . Three and a half million homes in the metropolitan area were destroyed by the fire .
 Only 27 percent of Budapest's residential buildings in 1945 were habitable . Only 27 per cent of the buildings in Budapest were habitable in 1945 .
 Forty percent of German housing stock was gone, 30 percent of British, 20 percent of French . 40 percent of housing stock went from German to 30 percent from British, according to the BBC .
 In Italy 1.million homes were destroyed, mostly in cities of 50,000 or more people . In Italy, 1.m. homes are destroyed . Most of the homes were in cities that had more than 500,000 people .
 The problem of homelessness, as we have seen, was perhaps the most obvious consequence of war in the immediate post-war era . In West Germany and Britain the housing shortage would last well into the mid-1950s .
 There were no bridges across the Seine between Paris and the sea, just one left intact across the Rhine . Just one of the bridges was left intact in the area .
 In almost every European country involved in the Second World War the national economy stagnated or shrunk when compared with the mediocre performance of the inter-war years . And it was true that in almost every . European countries involved in . the Second . World War . the economy stagnate or shrunk
 War is not always an economic disaster, but it can be a powerful stimulus to rapid growth in certain sectors, writes David Frum . War can be an economic stimulus to boost growth in some sectors, he says .
 Thanks to World War Two the United States surged into an unassailable commercial and technological lead, much as Britain had done during the Napoleonic wars . The U.S. had done the same as Britain did in the Napolesonic wars during the wars .
 Allied surveyors soon realized that economic impact of the war against Hitler was not as total as they had first thought . Even in Germany itself, the economic impact was by no means as much as initially thought .
 The bombing campaign, for all its human costs, had wrought less economic damage than its advocates expected . The war's economic impact had been less than expected .
 Little more than 20 percent of German industrial plant had been destroyed by May 1945 . Even in the Ruhr, two thirds of all plant and machinery had survived intact .
 Industry thrived under the German occupation and emerged virtually unscathed . Elsewhere, in the Czech lands for example, industry and agriculture thrived . Slovakia, like parts of Hungary, saw accelerated industrialization during the war years .
 The dramatically skewed nature of much of the damage contributed to the recovery after 1945 of core economic sectors . People and places that suffered terribly suffered terribly while factories and goods were relatively spared .
 The UK, the USSR, France, Italy and Germany all emerged with a larger stock of machine tools than they started with .
 In Italy only the aeronautautautic and shipbuilding industries suffered serious damage . In Italy, only the Aeronautics and Shipbuilding industries were affected by the disaster .
 Engineering firms situated in the North, out of reach of the heaviest fighting during the Italian campaign, did rather well . Their wartime output and investment more than compensated for any harm they suffered .
 The machine tool industry in West Germany lost just 6.6 percent of its equipment through war damage . The machine tools industry in what became West Germany suffered only 6.7 percent of damage .
 Ireland, Spain, Portugal, Switzerland and Sweden all remained neutral throughout the conflict . Sweden and Ireland remained neutral during the war .
 Most of the European neutrals were intimately engaged, albeit indirectly, in the Nazi war effort . On the contrary, most of the Europeans were intimately involved in the war effort against the Nazis .
 Germany depended heavily on Franco’s Spain for its wartime supply of manganese . Franco's Spain was responsible for the majority of the country's supplies of the material .
 In 1941-42 60 percent of Switzerland’s munitions industry was producing for Germany, remunerated in gold . 50 percent of its optical industry and 40 percent its engineering output was produced for Germany . The war in the early years of the war was a major source of gold for
 The Btihrle-Oerlikon small arms firm was still selling rapid-fire guns to the Wehrmacht in April 1945 .
 All told, the German Reichsbank deposited the gold equivalent of 1,638,000,000 Swiss francs in Switzerland during the Second World War .
 Swiss authorities asked that German passports indicate whether their holders were Jewish, the better to restrict unwanted arrivals . And it was Swiss authorities before the outbreak of the conflict .
 The Swiss authorities, in their defence, had good reason to keep the Nazis friendly .
 The experience of Belgium and the Netherlands was a grim reminder of the fate awaiting neutral states that got in Hitler’s way .
 For similar reasons the Swedes also extended their cooperation to Berlin, on whom they were historically dependent for coal . The Swedes were also extending their cooperation .
 Even before the war half of German iron-ore imports came across the Baltic, and three-quarters of all Swedish exports went to Germany . Selling iron ore to Germany was something Sweden had been doing for years .
 Swedish neutrality had long been slanted toward Germany out of fear of Russian ambitions . In any case, Swedish neutrality has long been skewed toward Germany .
 Co-operation with the Nazis was not a departure from habit . 14,700 Wehrmacht troops at the start of Operation Barbarossa, as well as German soldiers on leave from Norway passing through .
 Before the war neither Switzerland nor Sweden had been especially prosperous . Switzerland and Sweden had significant regions of rural poverty .
 Even in Eastern Europe the economic infrastructure was repaired with remarkable speed . But even Eastern Europe was hit hard by the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Despite the worst efforts of the retreating Wehrmacht and the advancing Red Army, the bridges, roads, railways and cities of Hungary, Poland and Yugoslavia were rebuilt .
 Transportation networks and rolling stock in central Europe had been brought up to or surpassed their pre-war levels . By 1947, transportation networks and . rolling . stock in . central . Europe had brought up 84% of its pre-WWII transport networks to . or surpassed pre-War levels
 In Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Albania and Romania, where there was less war-related destruction, this process took less time than in Yugoslavia or Poland . The process was less difficult in Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Romania .
 Poland's western territories seized from Germany were more fertile and better supplied with industrial towns and factories . But even the Polish economy recovered quite rapidly—in part because the western territories were better supplied by the Germans .
 Material damage was repaired in Belgium, France, Italy and Norway, slowest in the Netherlands . The worst harm (to farms, dykes, roads, roads and people) had all come in the last months of the war . In western Europe, the worst harm came in last months
 Antwerp’s privileged status as the only major European port more or less intact at the end of the war . The Belgians benefited from the high concentration of Allied troops in their country, pumping a steady flow of hard cash into their economy .
 Half of the nation’s vital fishing and merchant fleet was lost in the war . Half the nation's vital fishing, merchant fleets were lost during the conflict .
 Norway's industrial output in 1945 was just 57 per cent that of its 1938 level . Nearly a fifth of the country’s capital stock had been destroyed by the Germans .
 In later years, the contrast with Sweden was not lost on embittered Norwegians . Sweden was a major source of tension between the two countries in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Even Norway was able to restore most of its rail and road network by the end of 1946 . Fuel shortages and inadequate communications were no longer an impediment to economic recovery .
 To contemporary observers, it was Germany’s capacity to recover which seemed to be the most remarkable of all . To contemporary . observers, however, it . seemed to seem remarkable to them .
 This was a tribute to the efforts of the local population who worked with a striking singularity of purpose to rebuild their shattered country . This was the work of the locals, who helped rebuild the shattered country.
 The day Hitler died, 10 percent of German railways were operational and the country was at a literal standstill . Hitler died . The day he died was the day 10 per cent of German trains were operational .
 In May 1945 German coal production was barely one-tenth that of 1939; a year later it had quintupled in output . German coal output quintalized in a year .
 In April 1945, Saul K Padover, a psychologist with the advancing U.S. Army in western Germany, said it would surely take the flattened city of Aachen 20 years to rebuild .
 Within a few weeks he was already recording the re-opening of the city’s tyre and textile factories and the beginnings of economic life .
 The speed of Germany’s initial recovery was that once the workers’ houses had been rebuilt, the transport networks put back in place, industry was more than ready to deliver the goods .
 At the Volkswagen works 91 percent of the machinery had survived wartime bombing and post-war looting, and by 1948 the factory was equipped to produce one in every two cars made in western Germany . By 1948, the factory had been able to produce 1 in every 2 of every 2 cars made
 One-third of German industrial equipment was less than five years old in 1945, compared to just 9 percent in 1939 . Thanks to wartime investment, one third of Germany's industrial equipment had been less than 5 years old .
 By early 1947 the chief impediment to a German recovery was no longer war damage, but rather raw material and other shortages . uncertainty over the country’s political future was also a problem .
 The year 1947 was to prove crucial, the hinge on which was suspended the fate of the continent . It was the year 1947 that proved crucial for the European continent .
 Until then Europeans had been consumed with repairs and reconstruction, or else were busy putting in place the institutional infrastructure for long-term recovery . Until now Europeans were consumed with repair and reconstruction .
 In the course of the first eighteen months following the Allied victory the mood of the continent swung from relief at the mere prospect of peace and a fresh start, to stony resignation and disillusion .
 By the beginning of 1947 it was clear that the hardest decisions had not yet been taken and that they could not be postponed much longer . The hardest decisions were still to be taken, and they were not taken until 1947 .
 To begin with, the fundamental problem of food supply was not yet overcome, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Only UNRRA supplies built up in the spring of 1946 kept Austrians from starving in the twelve months that followed . Only UNRA supplies kept Austrian from starving .
 Caloric provision in British Zone of Germany fell from 1,500 per day per adult in mid-1946 to 1,050 in early 1947 . Calorie provision in the British zone of Germany was 1,000 per adult per adult .
 Italians suffered two consecutive years of hunger in 1945 and 1946 . Italians had the lowest average food levels of all the west European populations in the spring of 1947 . Italians suffered the lowest levels of food levels in all of Europe .
 In French opinion polls taken in the course of 1946 ‘food’, ‘bread’ and ‘meat’ consistently outpaced everything else as the public’s number one preoccupation . ‘Food’ was the most important issue in French opinion
 In Romania the 1945 harvest failed, through mismanaged land reforms and bad weather . The 1945 harvest was the worst in Romania . In Romania, the harvest failed through mismanagement of land reforms .
 Poor harvests and drought led to near-famine conditions in the autumn of 1946 . Aid agencies describe one-year old children weighing just three kilograms and sending back reports of cannibalism .
 Canals froze, roads were impassable for weeks at a time, frozen points paralyzed whole rail networks . Frozen points paralyzed entire rail networks in Europe in 2013 .
 Coal, still in short supply, could not keep up with domestic demand and anyway could not be moved . Coal was not enough to be moved. Coal was still short supply and could not meet domestic demand .
 Industrial production slumped as steel output fell back by 40 percent over the previous year . Steel output, having just begun to recover, promptly fell back 40 percent .
 The continent entered one of the hottest, driest summers since records began in 1947 . A few months later, in June 1947, the continent entered into one of its hottest summers ever recorded .
 All imports had to be paid for in hard currency, usually dollars . But all these imports were paid for by the government .
 Germany has been eliminated from the European economy for years . One of the reasons for this is the absence of Germany from the continent . Germany's economic success has been seen as a major factor in economic success .
 Until its political future was resolved, Germany’s economy remained frozen, effectively blocking the economic recovery of the rest of the continent . Germany's political future has not yet been resolved, but until it is resolved, the economy will not be able to grow .
 The second problem concerned not Germany but the USA, though the two were connected . The problem was not the only problem, but it was the USA .
 In 1938,44 percent of Britain’s machinery imports by value came from the USA, 25 percent from Germany . In 1938 the UK had the largest share of its machinery imports of that year .
 To buy American products or materials required American dollars . This sharply increased demand for American goods was, ironically, an indication of an upswing in European activity .
 Europeans had nothing to sell to the rest of the world; but without hard currency they could not buy food to stop millions from starving . Europeans could not import the raw materials and machinery needed to move forward their own production .
 In 1947 the UK was buying nearly half its total imports from the USA and running out of cash . The UK's national debt had increased fourfold since 1939, its national debt was fourfold .
 France, the world’s largest importer of coal, was running an annual payments deficit with the U.S. of $2,049 million . France is running a payments deficit of $3,000 million with the United States .
 Most other European countries did not even have currencies in which to trade . Most of Europe did not have currencies to trade in .
 In Hungary, inflation peaked at 5 quintillion paper pengos to the dollar . By the time the pengo was replaced by the forint in August 1946, the dollar value of all Hungarian banknotes in circulation was just one-thousandth of one cent .
 Soviet cooperation was one of their main reasons for pressing forward with a solution to the problem of Germany with or without Soviet cooperation . As we shall see, it was also one of the main reasons why they pressed forward with the solution .
 Europe in the spring of 1947 was teetering on the edge . In the opinion of well-informed Presidential counselors like George Kennan, Europe in 1945 was on the verge of collapse .
 The frustrations of western Europeans and the hopelessness of Germans and other central Europeans, compounded by the unanticipated subsistence crisis of 1947, could only strengthen the appeal of Communism or else the risk of an anarchy .
 Communist parties of Italy, France and Belgium remained in governing coalitions until May 1947 . Through their trade union affiliates and popular demonstrations they were able to mobilize popular anger and capitalize on their own governments .
 The electoral successes of local Communists, combined with the aura of the invincible Red Army, made an Italian (or French, or Czech) ‘road to Socialism’ seem plausible and seductive . The electoral success of local Communist parties combined with an aura of . the . aura of
 In Italy the figure was two and a quarter million, far more than in Poland or even Yugoslavia . In Italy, the figure is far more common than Poland or Yugoslavia .
 Even in Denmark and Norway, one voter in eight initially attracted to the promise of a Communist alternative . One in eight voters in Denmark were initially attracted by the promise .
 Allied authorities feared nostalgia for the better days of Nazism could yet turn to neo-Nazi or even Soviet advantage . In the western zones of Germany the Allied authorities worried that nostalgia for better days could turn to nostalgia .
 The west European states were perhaps fortunate that their Communist parties in the spring of 1947 were still pursuing the moderate, democratic path adopted in 1944 .
 In Italy the British ambassador described Togliatti as a moderating influence on his more ‘hotheaded’ Socialist allies .
 Stalin was not yet encouraging his many supporters in central and western Europe to exploit popular anger and frustration . For his own reasons Stalin did not yet encourage his supporters to exploit their anger . Stalin's own reasons were not yet .
 But even so, the spectre of civil war and revolution was never far away . The British Empire was founded in the 1930s .
 In France the economic hardships of the winter of 1947 were already leading to popular disillusion with the new post-war Republic . In 1947 the French Republic was experiencing a wave of disillusion .
 The European continent, as she had noted a few months before, was slowly entering a new ice age . She had noted that the European continent had been slowly entering an ice age. The continent, she said, had entered a new age .
 In a Policy Planning Staff paper six weeks later he suggested that the real problem was not Communism, or if so then only indirectly . He suggested that if so, only indirectly, it was Communism .
 The hurdles the continent faced seemed too great, now that the initial burst of post-war hope and rebuilding had drained away . The hurdles were too great now, and the European Union faced too great .
 The reforms and plans of the years 1945-47 laid the groundwork for Europe’s future well being . It is widely believed by scholars today that for all the contemporary gloom the initial post-war recovery and the reforms and . reforms of the . years 1945 and . 1947 laid the
 For western Europe at least 1947 would indeed prove the turning point in the continent’s recovery . And to be sure, for western Europe, it would indeed be turning point .
 World War Two and its uncertain aftermath might have precipitated Europe’s terminal decline . World War II and uncertain aftermath may well have precipitate Europe's terminal decline, says historian .
 To Konrad Adenauer like many others, the scale of European chaos seemed worse even than in 1918 . Adenauer: "To many, European chaos seems worse even in 1918"
 With the precedent of the post-World War One mistakes uppermost in their thoughts, many European and American observers indeed feared the worst . The British Prime Minister of the Netherlands was assassinated in 1945 .
 At best, they calculated, the continent was in for decades of poverty and struggle . The continent was at best for decades, they said, but at best, for decades .
 German residents of the American Zone expected it to be at least twenty years before their country recovered . The American Zone was located in the U.S. Zone of Germany .
 In October 1945 Charles de Gaulle had imperiously informed the French people that it would take twenty-five years of ‘furious work’ before France would be resuscitated . The French people were told they would have to work hard to revive France .
 U.S. Secretary of State George C Marshall was disappointed at Soviet unwillingness to collaborate in a solution for Germany . Marshall was clear in his own mind that something rather dramatic would have to be done, and very soon .
 The initiative would have to come from Washington, Paris, Rome, Berlin and Berlin . And judging from the resigned, doomladen mood in Paris and Rome, it's not surprising .
 Between the end of the war and the announcement of the Marshall Plan, the U.S. had already spent many billions of dollars in grants and loans to Europe .
 The chief beneficiaries by far had been the UK and France, which had received $4. billion and $1. billion in loans . No country had been excluded—loans to Italy exceeded $513 million by mid-1947 . Poland, Denmark, Greece and many other countries were
 American aid hitherto was not used for reconstruction or long-term investment but for essential supplies, services and repairs . U.S. aid hitherto used to be used only for supplies and services, not long term investment .
 The loans, especially those to the major western European states, came with strings attached . Furthermore, the loans were often accompanied by strings attached.
 Keynes negotiated a substantial American loan agreement to supply the dollars that Britain would need to buy goods no longer available under Lend-Lease . The American terms were unrealistically restrictive—notably in their requirement that Britain give up imperial preferences for its overseas dominions, abandon exchange controls and
 Keynes and others predicted the first of many post-war runs on the British pound . The result was the rapid disappearance of Britain’s dollar reserves and an even more serious crisis the following year .
 The terms of the loan negotiated in Washington in May 1946 between the U.S. and France were only slightly less restrictive . The loan was only slightly more restrictive than the original agreement .
 In addition to the write-off of $2.25 billion of wartime loans, the French got hundreds of millions of dollars in credits and the promise of low-interest loans to come . The French were able to write off $2 billion of their wartime loans .
 Paris pledged to abandon protectionist import quotas, allowing freer entry to U.S. and other foreign products . In return, Paris promised to abandon import quotas in return for free entry to American products .
 Like the British loan, this agreement was designed to advance the U.S. agenda of freer international trade, open and stable currency exchanges and closer international cooperation .
 In practice, however, the money was gone within a year 90 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE . The only medium-term legacy was increased popular resentment (much played upon by the Left)
 Washington's bilateral approaches to Europe's economic troubles had manifestly failed . By the spring of 1947, then, Washington’s bilateral approaches had manifestedly failed.
 The trading deficit between Europe and the U.S. in 1947 would reach $4,742 million . That figure is more than double the figure for 1946 . In 1947, the deficit would be more than $4 million .
 If this was a ‘hiccup of growth’, as later commentators have suggested, then Europe was close to choking . Europe's economic growth has been hit by a recessionary slowdown in recent years .
 Ernest Bevin described Marshall’s Commencement Address as ‘one of the greatest speeches in world history’ and he was not wrong .
 American advisers and specialists would play a prominent role in the administration of the funds . It was to be left to the Europeans to decide whether to take American aid .
 The assistance was to be spread across a period of years and was thus from the start a strategic programme of recovery and growth rather than a disaster fund . Secondly, the assistance was . to be . spread across an . period of . years .
 By the time Marshall Aid came to an end, in 1952, the United States had spent some $13 billion . Marshall Aid was more than all previous U.S. overseas aid combined .
 Foreign ministers of Britain, France and the USSR met in Paris to consider their response . Bevin’s suggestion led to a meeting of foreign ministers in Paris .
 Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov walked out of talks on July 2nd . Britain and France formally invited representatives of 22 European countries to discuss the proposals .
 Britain, France, Italy, Belgium, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Greece, Turkey, Ireland, Iceland, Austria and Portugal would be among the eventual beneficiaries .
 Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, Bulgaria and Albania did not take part in the Marshall Programme . It is worth pausing to consider the implications of this decision in the future . No future Communist state took part in Marshall aid .
 The ERP was to be confined to the West (with Greece and Turkey as honorary west Europeans) The fact that the money was to stay in the West made it easier for Truman to secure passage of the ERP through Congress .
 In June 1947, the offer of aid through Marshall’s new programme was made to all European countries without distinction . Marshall's new programme offered aid to all without distinction.
 Stalin and Molotov were of course suspicious of American motives . But their sentiments were not widely shared elsewhere in eastern Europe, in what was not yet a bloc . Marshall was proposing were incompatible with the closed Soviet economy .
 Jan Masaryk, Czechoslovakia’s non-Communist Foreign Minister, enthusiastically accepted the joint Franco-British invitation of July 4th . Czechoslovakian Foreign Minister accepted the invitation of the French and British .
 Gottwald was told to withdraw his country’s acceptance of the invitation to Paris . Gottwald has been told to pull out of the Paris trip .
 Stalin met with a delegation from the Czech government, including Masaryk . Stalin advised the Czechs that ‘e consider this matter to be a fundamental question on which friendship with the USSR depends’
 Czech coalition government decides not to send a delegation to Paris . Czech government says it will not be sending a delegation for Paris visit . Czechs will not send any delegation to France .
 The Red Army had long since left Czechoslovakia and the Communists did not yet have a monopoly of power . But the Red Army was still in charge of the country .
 Yet Masaryk and his colleagues buckled at the first display of Stalin’s displeasure . Yet, he said, “I’m not going to be afraid. I’ll be afraid of Stalin,” he said .
 Had the Czech parties insisted on accepting Marshall Aid they would have carried the overwhelming majority of their fellow citizens with them, making it that much harder for Stalin to justify enforcing his will .
 Czech decision to favour the Soviet embrace was understandable; but it almost certainly paved the way for the Communists’ successful coup in Prague seven months later .
 Czechoslovakia’s exclusion from the Marshall Aid programme was an economic and political catastrophe for the country . The country was excluded from the aid programme for the first time in the 1960s .
 The same is true of the ‘choice’ imposed on every other country in the region, and above all, perhaps, for the Soviet Union itself, perhaps . The Soviet Union was forced to take part in the 'choice' imposed on other countries .
 Stalin's decision to stand aside from the European Recovery Program was one of his greatest strategic mistakes . Stalin’s decision to withdraw from the program was a strategic mistake . Stalin stood aside from Europe's Recovery Program in 1953 .
 The Amer92 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE icans would have had no choice but to include eastern Europe in the ERP . The consequences for the future would have been immeasurable, the authors say .
 The aid was confined to the West and marked a parting of the ways between the two halves of the continent . Instead of the aid, the aid was sent to the East .
 Rather than merely offering aid in cash it proposed the provision of goods, free of charge, delivered to European countries on the basis of annual requests . Each recipient state would have a four-year plan by each recipient state .
 Sales of goods in each country generate so-called ‘counterpart funds’ in the local currency . These funds could be used according to bilateral agreements reached between Washington and each national government .
 Some countries used the funds to purchase more imports . Others transferred them into their national reserves in anticipation of future foreign exchange needs . Some countries, like Italy, transferred the funds into reserves .
 This unusual way of furnishing assistance carried innovative implications . This unusual approach to furnishing aid had innovative implications. This unusual method of helping people in need of assistance .
 The programme obliged European governments to plan ahead and calculate future investment needs . European governments were forced to calculate future investments needs .
 It laid upon them a requirement to negotiate and confer not just with the United States but with each other . The trading and exchanges implied in the programme were intended to move from the bilateral to the multilateral .
 It constrained governments, businesses and unions to collaborate in planning increased rates of output and the conditions likely to facilitate them, it says . The conditions were likely to have led to increased productivity, it adds .
 Administrators of the Plan left it to Europeans to take responsibility for determining the level of aid and the manner of its distribution .
 European politicians were surprised by the blunt self-interest of the U.S. in earlier bilateral loan negotiations . European politicians are not accustomed to the bluntness of the United States in previous bilateral loans negotiations .
 Idealists in the New Deal mould saw an opportunity to reconstruct Europe in the American image . Idealists emphasized modernization, infrastructural investment, industrial productivity, economic growth and labour-capital cooperation . Idealistists in post-war U.S. saw opportunity to rebuild Europe in
 ‘productivity missions’, funded by the Marshall Plan, brought to the U.S. many thousands of managers, technicians and trade unionists to study the American way of business . Five thousand from France alone (one in four of the overall total) between 1948 and 1952
 One hundred and forty-five ‘European productivity teams’ arrived in the U.S. between March and July 1951 . Most of the teams consisted of men who had never before set foot outside Europe .
 These American urgings met, it must be said, with limited immediate success . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in the world's first major city .
 Most European politicians and planners were not yet ready to contemplate grand projects of international economic integration . Most European politician and planners are still not ready to consider grand projects .
 The Marshall Planners’ greatest achievement was perhaps the European Payments Union, proposed in December 1949 and inaugurated a year later . The European Payment Union was inaugurated in January 1949 .
 Its limited objective was to ‘multilateralize’ European trade by establishing a sort of clearing-house for debits and credits in European currencies .
 This was designed to overcome the risk that each European country might try to save badly needed dollars by restricting imports from other European countries, to everyone's eventual disadvantage .
 European states were encouraged to secure credit lines proportional to their trading requirements . Using the Bank of International Settlements as their agent, European states secured credit lines . The credit lines were used to secure European states' credit lines for their trading needs .
 Instead of using scarce dollars they could settle their obligations through an intra-European transfer of credits . Then, instead of using up scarce dollars, they could use the credits to pay for their debts .
 All that mattered was not whom you traded with but the overall balance of credits and debits in European currencies . All that matters is the overall credit and debit balance in Europe's currencies .
 The Payments Union contributed to the steady expansion of intra-European trade but to an unprecedented degree of mutually advantageous collaboration . By the time it was wound up in 1958, the Payments Union had quietly contributed not merely to an expansion of inter-Europe trade .
 From a more conventional American perspective, free trade and its attendant benefits were themselves a sufficient objective and justification for the ERP programme . Free trade and the attendant benefits are themselves themselves, however, according to the U.S. government .
 The United States had been particularly hard hit by the trading and export slump of the thirties . The U.S. spared no effort to convince others of the importance of liberalized tariff regimes .
 Like English Liberals’ enthusiasm for free trade in the era before 1914, such American pleas for the unrestricted movement of goods were not altogether un-selfinterested . The U.S. was not the only country in the world to support free trade .
 Eu94 THE REHABILITATION OF EUROPE rope in 1947 faced a choice . Even if not everyone saw it at the time, it was a good idea .
 Europe and Europeans had lost control of their destiny, writes David Frum . Frum says the choice was recovery or collapse, but the deeper question was whether Europe had lost its control of destiny . Europe's fate was passed over to the two great peripheral powers, the United States and the
 Kennan: The pall of fear hanging over Europe in 1947 was preparing the continent to fall, like a ripe fruit, into Stalin's hands . The Soviet Union was quite content to await such a prospect, as Kennan noted .
 Europe’s vulnerability was a problem, not an opportunity, says U.S. policymakers . But for American policymakers, it was an opportunity . Europe's vulnerability is a problem for the United States, not a problem .
 This is the broader context of the Marshall Plan, a lowering political and security landscape in which American interests were inextricably interwoven with those of a fragile and sickly European sub-continent . U.S. interests in Europe were intertwined with its interests in the Marshall
 The better-informed recipients of Marshall Aid, notably Bevin and Georges Bidault, understood this perfectly well . French Foreign Ministry on the Quai d’Orsay .
 European domestic interest in the European Recovery Program varied considerably from country to country . But domestic interest differed considerably from countries to countries .
 In Belgium, the Marshall Plan may have had a longterm prejudicial impact, allowing the government to spend heavily on investment in politically-sensitive industries like coal mining without counting the long-term cost .
 In the Plan’s first year, aid to Italy was largely devoted to urgently needed imports of coal and grain, together with help for struggling industries like textiles .
 Under Alcide De Gasperi and the Christian Democrats, Italian economic planning at the end of the forties resembled its east European counterpart, with consumer goods deliberately disfavoured . Food consumption held down to pre-war levels and resources diverted to infrastructural investment .
 American observers became nervous and tried unsuccessfully to encourage the government to introduce more progressive taxes and relax its austere approach .
 U.S. Marshal Planners would have liked to see social and economic policies slanted more to the Centre and away from traditional deflationist policies .
 ERP dollars—$1.million in 1948-49 and a further $1.m. in the next three years—financed almost fifty percent of French public investment under the Monnet Plan during the Marshall years . The country could never have managed without it .
 It was in France that the Marshall Plan faced the greatest popular criticism . It is thus more than a little ironic that it was in French that it faced greatest criticism .
 The Plan’s relatively poor image in France represented a partial public relations success for the French Communists, perhaps their greatest . French Communists .
 In Austria the Communists never made any dent in the popularity of Americans and their aid . The latter put food in people’s mouths and this was what mattered most .
 In the circumstances of a brutal civil war Marshall Aid, extended to Greece in April 1948, made the difference between survival and destitution . Marshall Aid was extended to the Greek Republic in 1948 .
 Western Europe indubitably recovered, and precisely over the period of the Marshall Plan, historian says . Western Europe has since recovered from the crisis, he says . The Marshall Plan was designed to help rebuild Western Europe .
 By 1949 French industrial and agricultural production both exceeded 1938 levels for the first time . By 1949 France had surpassed 1938 levels of production in France . France's agricultural and industrial production reached record levels .
 Sustained recovery was achieved in 1948 by the Netherlands, in 1949 by Austria and Italy, in 1950 by Greece and West Germany . By the same criterion sustained recovery was reached in 1948 and 1949 by the Dutch, Italy and Greece .
 Between 1947 and 1951 the combined GNP of western Europe rose by 30 percent . The GNP rose by more than 30 percent in the period between 1947 and 1950 .
 In the short-term the chief contribution of the Program to this recovery was surely the provision of dollar credits . In the long-term, the program's chief contribution to the recovery was to providing dollar credits, the government says .
 These underwrote trade deficits, facilitated the large-scale importation of urgently needed raw materials and thus carried Western Europe through the crisis of mid-’47 .
 Without Marshall Aid it is not clear how the fuel shortages, food shortages and other commodity scarcities could have been overcome at a politically acceptable price . The fuel shortages and food shortages are not likely to be overcome without aid .
 Western economies of western Europe surely could have continued to grow without U.S. assistance . This could only have been achieved by repressing home demand, cutting back on social services and further reducing the local standard of living .
 This was a risk most elected governments were understandably reluctant to run . This was the risk of a government losing control of the country's finances .
 In 1947 the coalition governments of western Europe were trapped and they knew it . The coalition governments were trapped in 1947 and knew it. In 1947 they were trapped .
 Marshall Aid ‘merely’ broke a logjam born of renewed demand, that Washington’s new approach overcame a ‘temporary’ dollar shortfall . It is all very well for us to recognize in hindsight that Marshall Aid 'merely' broke .
 Even if the ERP did no more than buy time, that was a crucial contribution, for time was precisely what Europe appeared to lack . Even if it was no more of a purchase, it was crucial to Europe's success .
 The Marshall Plan averted the crisis it averted was political . Marshall Plan was an economic program but it was also a political program . The crisis was averted by the Marshall Plan, which was not economic .
 Some observers disappointed at the Americans’ apparent failure to persuade Europeans to cooperate in integrating their planning as much as they had initially hoped .
 The European continent's collaborative habits and institutions were only indirectly indebted to American efforts, if at all . And it's true that whatever collaborative habits the Europeans eventually acquired were only indirect .
 Marshall’s invitation did at least oblige the mutually-suspicious European states to sit down together and co-ordinate their responses and, ultimately, much else . Any moves in this direction represented progress, but in the light of Europe's recent past, any moves in the direction
 The Marshall Plan helped Europeans feel better about themselves. Indeed, one might almost say that . Indeed, the Marshall Plan .
 It helped them break decisively with a legacy of chauvinism, depression and authoritarian solutions . It was a legacy with a history of authoritarian solutions. It helped the party break decisively .
 It made co-ordinated economic policy-making seem normal rather than unusual, it said . It made it seem normal to think of economic policy making .
 It made the beggar-your-neighbour trade and monetary practices of the thirties seem first impudent, then unnecessary and finally absurd . It made it seem like the 'beggar your neighbour' trade was unnecessary and absurd .
 None of this would have been possible if the Marshall Plan had been presented as a blueprint for the ‘Americanization’ of Europe . The Marshall Plan was presented as the 'Americanization' of Europe in 1945 .
 Post-war Europeans were so aware of their humiliating dependence upon American aid and protection that any insensitive pressure from that quarter would certainly have been politically counter-productive . On the contrary, post-war Europe was aware of its dependence on American aid .
 Western Europe was able to benefit from U.S. help because it was a long-established region of private property, market economics and stable polities . Western Europe has been a stable region of property and market economics for decades .
 Western Europe had to make its own decisions and would ultimately insist on doing so . But for just this reason, western Europe would have to decide its own fate . Western Europe has to do its own own decisions .
 The rest would depend on Europeans themselves, including good labour relations, balanced budgets and liberalized trade . The rest of Europe's economic and political relations would depend heavily on Europeans .
 The obvious comparison, however, was not between 1945 and 1918 . It was between the two years of American visions and European practices . The comparison was made between 1945 to 1918 .
 In more respects than we now recall, the two post-war eras were uncannily alike . "In more respects," they are uncannally alike, says the author of the book . The two decades after the Second World War, the world's post-WWII post-
 In the 1920s Americans were already encouraging Europeans to adopt United States production techniques and labour relations . Americans were encouraged to adopt US production techniques .
 In the 1920s many American observers saw Europe’s salvation in economic integration and capital investment . In the 1930s, European integration was seen as the key to Europe's salvation .
 Europeans looked across the Atlantic for guidance about their own future and for practical aid in the present . Europeans, too, looked across Europe for guidance in the 1920s .
 After World War One the U.S. gave only loans, not grants; and these were nearly always supplied through the private capital market . The big difference was that after World War I the United States gave only .
 When they were called in at the onset of the Depression, the effect was disastrous . The effect was devastating .
 After initial stumbles in 1945-47, American policymakers went to some lengths to correct the mistakes of the previous post-war era . The contrast is striking in this respect is striking .
 The Marshall Plan is significant not just for what it did but what it was careful to avoid . It is important to remember what the Marshall Plan did and what it avoided .
 European Recovery Plan could neither solve nor avoid, but everything else depends upon its resolution . EU Recovery Plan cannot solve or avoid the problem, yet everything else depended on its resolution, says David Cameron .
 France was to use Marshall counterpart funds to build huge new steel mills in Lorraine, but without German coal these would be useless . Without German coal, the French steel mills would have been useless .
 In the spring of 1948 German industrial output was still only half that of 1936 . In the Spring of 1948, industrial output in Germany was only half the output of the previous year .
 Britain spent unprecedented sums just to sustain the helpless population of its zone of occupation in northwest Germany . The British economy would never recover while the country was spending unprecedented sums to sustain its occupation .
 Without Germany to buy their produce, the trading economies of the Low Countries and Denmark were moribund . Denmark and Denmark's trading economies had been moribibund.
 The logic of the Marshall Plan required the lifting of all restrictions upon German production and output, so that the country might once again make its crucial contribution to the European economy . The logic was that all restrictions on German production should be lifted so that it could contribute to the EU economy .
 Marshall made clear from the outset that his Plan meant an end to French hopes of war reparations from Germany . The point, after all, was to develop and integrate Germany, not make of it a dependent pariah .
 It was clear to the Americans and their friends that the Marshall Plan would only work as part of a broader political setdement in which French and Germans alike could see real and lasting advantage . But in order to avoid a tragic re-run of the events of the 1920s, the
 A post-war setdement in Germany was the key to Europe’s future . This was as obvious in Moscow as it was in Paris, Paris, London or Washington . There was no mystery to this—a post-WWII set-dement was no surprise to
 The shape such a settlement should take was an altogether more contentious matter . But the shape of such a deal should take is still contentious .
 Sir Michael Howard: 'All the Balkans, except Greece, are going to be Bolshevised, and there is nothing I can do to prevent it' ‘Make no mistake, all the Balkans ... except Greece’, says Howard .
 Jean-Paul Sartre: 'Nobody in the world can understand what Europeans feel about the Germans until one talks to Belgians, Frenchmen or Russians'
 The author of these words, written to his diary in 1945, was Saul K Padover, the psychologist with the American armies whom we met in Chapter Three .
 His observation should be borne in mind in any account of the post-war division of Europe, he said .
 The point of the Second World War in Europe was to defeat Germany, and almost all other considerations were set aside so long as the fighting continued . Almost all of the other considerations are set aside as long as fighting continued.
 The Allies’chief wartime concern had been to keep one another in the war . The Allies had been trying to keep each other in each other .
 The Americans and British worried incessantly that Stalin might make a separate peace with Hitler, especially once the Soviet Union had recovered territory lost after June 1941 . The U.S. and British were worried about a possible peace deal with Hitler .
 Stalin, for his part, saw the delay in establishing a Second Front as a ploy by the Western Allies to bleed Russia dry before coming forward to benefit from her sacrifices . Stalin's view was that the Allies were trying to bleed the Soviet Union dry .
 This mutual unease illuminates the wartime accords and understandings reached by the three major Allied governments . This mutual . unease is the reason for the tension between Britain and Germany .
 At Casablanca, in January 1943, it was agreed that the war in Europe could only end with an unconditional German surrender . It was agreed in 1943 that the end of the war could only be achieved with unconditional surrender .
 At Teheran, the 'Big Three' agreed in principle upon a post-war dismantling of Germany, a return to the so-called ‘Curzon Line’ 1 between Poland and the USSR, recognition of Tito’s authority in Yugoslavia and Soviet access to
 Stalin was the obvious beneficiary of these agreements, but then since the Red Army played by far the most important role in the struggle with Hitler, this made sense . The obvious beneficiary was Stalin, who was Stalin's most important ally in the fight against Hitler .
 Churchill sat down with Stalin in Moscow in October 1944 and initialed the notorious ‘percentages agreement’ He was merely conceding to the Soviet dictator ground that the latter was already sure to seize .
 However heartless this must seem from the point of view of the countries concerned, it really wasn’t significant . But thirdly, and however heartless it must seem, the country’s interest in the situation was not significant .
 The Allies all signed the Declaration on Liberated Europe . All three governments will jointly assist the people in any European liberated state or former Axis satellite state in Europe .
 It was the postwar cynicism of the Soviet Union with regard to this commitment that would be thrown in the face of the West by understandably aggrieved spokesmen for the imprisoned nations . And it was the cynicism of Soviet Union .
 Nothing was decided at Yalta that had not already been agreed at Teheran or elsewhere . But nothing was agreed at the summit, including Iran and Syria, was decided already .
 By then Stalin hardly needed Western permission to do whatever he wished in eastern Europe, as the British at least understood perfectly well . For by then, the British knew perfectly well what Stalin wanted to do .
 Yalta left the truly important issue, post-war Germany, off the table precisely because it was so important and intractable . In fact, it left the real issue, the most important, off-the-table, because of its intractability, the author says
 It is unlikely Western leaders could have got a better deal out of Stalin during these last months of the war, even if it had occurred to them to try . And it is unlikely that the Western leaders would have been able to do so .
 The only hope for the Poles and others was that Stalin would be generous to them in return for Western goodwill . Stalin's only hope was that the Poles would get a better deal from the West . The Poles were forced to live with the Soviet Union in the 1940s .
 The Western Allies sought Stalin’s cooperation, not the other way around . But he had the latter in any case, and long after the defeat of Hitler it was the Western Allies .
 The Soviet Union had to be kept in the war against Germany (and later, as it was supposed, Japan) The problem of central Europe could wait upon the peace, he says .
 Roosevelt and Churchill might have protested more strongly in August 1944, when 200,000 Poles were killed by the Germans in a hopeless uprising in Warsaw while the Red Army looked on from the other side of the Vistula .
 Western leaders were not about to antagonize their major military ally just six weeks after D-Day landings in Normandy . Stalin’s view of the Poles’ underground Home Army was ‘a handful of power-hungry adventurers and criminals’
 Britain and France had declared war on Hitler in September 1939 over his violation of Poland . For Poles then and since this was a betrayal of the very purpose of the war, this was betrayal .
 The case for leaving Stalin a free hand in the east was self evident . But for the Western Allies the case was self-identifying .
 The search for a settlement of the German Question was going to prove horribly difficult, as perceptive observers could already see . It made sense to sustain for as long as possible the anti-German alliance that bound the wartime partners together .
 Stalin had broken off relations with the Polish government-in-exile in London in 1943 following the Katyn massacre . The shape of post-war Europe was dictated in the 2nd World War II .
 The Germans claimed it was the location of a mass execution by the Soviets of captured Polish officers . The Germans, who uncovered the site, correctly claimed that it was . The site was found by the Germans in 1945 .
 The Soviet authorities and their Western supporters, then and for the next half century, angrily denied it . The Soviet Union and Western supporters of the Soviet Union denied it.
 In south-east Europe the war was over by the end of 1944, with Soviet forces in full control of the northern Balkans . The war in the Balkans was over in 1945, with the Soviet forces taking over the Balkans .
 By May 1945, in central and eastern Europe, the Red Army had liberated and re-occupied Hungary, Poland and most of Czechoslovakia . The Red Army also occupied Poland, Hungary, and Czechs, Czechs and Slovakia . In 1945, the Soviet Union had liberated Hungary,
 Eisenhower could have reached Berlin before the Russians but was discouraged by Washington from doing so . The British and Americans were fighting virtually separate wars in north-western and south-western Germany respectively .
 Churchill would have liked to see a Western advance on Berlin but Roosevelt was conscious of his generals’ concern for loss of life . One fifth of all United States troop losses in World War Two were sustained at the Battle of the Bulge in the Belgian Ardennes in the previous winter .
 The line dividing what were not yet ‘eastern’ and ‘western’ Europe fell a little further west than the outcome of the fighting might have suggested . The United States army initially advanced 18 miles short of Prague and liberated the Pilsen region of western Bohemia
 On May 2nd 1945 the Yugoslav Army of National Liberation and the British Eighth Army came face to face in Trieste drawing through that most cosmopolitan of central European cities a line . The line became the first true frontier of the Cold War .
 So long as Germany remained the enemy it was easy to forget the deeper disputes and antagonisms separating the Soviet Union from its wartime allies . The Soviet Union and its allies were allies in the war .
 Four years of wary cooperation in a life or death struggle with a common foe had done little to obliterate nearly thirty years of mutual suspicion . The pair had been in contact for nearly 30 years .
 In Europe the Cold War began not after the Second World War but following the end of the First World War . For the first time in Europe, it began after World War II .
 The years 1941-45 were just an interlude in an international struggle between Western democracies and Soviet totalitarianism . The struggle was obscured but not fundamentally altered by the threat posed to both sides by the rise of Fascism and Nazism .
 It was Germany that brought Russia and the West together in 1941, much as it had succeeded in doing before 1914 . Germany was successful in bringing Russia and West together again .
 From 1918-34 the Soviet strategy in central and western Europe—splitting the Left and encouraging subversion and violent protest—helped shape an image of ‘Bolshevism’ as fundamentally alien and hostile . The Soviet strategy of splitting the Left helped shape the image
 Four years of troubled and controversial ‘Popular Front’ alliances did something to dispel this impression, despite the contemporary trials and mass murders in the Soviet Union itself . The Soviet Union was ruled out of power in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The MolotovRibbentrop Pact of August 1939, and Stalin’s collaboration with Hitler in his dismemberment of their common neighbours the following year, considerably undermined the propaganda gains of the Popular Front years .
 Only the heroism of the Red Army and Soviet citizens in the years 1941-45, and the unprecedented crimes of the Nazis, helped dispel these earlier memories . Only those who fought the Nazis helped dispel memories of the Nazi crimes in Russia .
 The unraveling of the wartime alliance and the subsequent division of Europe were not due to a mistake, to naked self-interest or malevolence . They were rooted in history, and the unraveling was not a mistake or a mistake .
 Before the Second World War relations between the U.S. and the UK and the USSR were tense . Relations between the two countries had always been tense .
 The difference was that none of them had had responsibility for large swathes of the European continent . The difference is that none had had been responsible for large parts of Europe .
 France and Germany had been separated by, among other considerations, the presence of France . Germany and France were separated .
 French humiliation in 1940 and German defeat five years later, everything was different . But with French humiliation and defeat in 1940, everything changed .
 The renewed Cold War in Europe was always likely, but it was not inevitable . It is not always always likely to happen again, but not inevitable, it was always possible . The new Cold War was always inevitable, but was not always inevitable .
 "It was brought about by the ultimately incompatible goals and needs of the various interested parties," says President Obama . "It's a good start to a long process of reconciliation," says Obama .
 The U.S. was now, for the first time, a power in Europe . Thanks to German aggression, the United States was now a power . The United States is now a powerful force in Europe.
 That the United States had overwhelming strength was self-evident, even to those mesmerized by the achievements of the Red Army . The United States has overwhelming strength, even though the Soviet Union was losing ground in Russia .
 The United States had 12 million men under arms to fight Germany and its allies . By the time Japan surrendered the American fleet was larger than all other fleets in the world combined .
 85 percent of the American war effort had gone on the war against Germany . The initial American intent was quite severe. So far as Germany was concerned .
 A directive from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, JCS1067, was presented to President Truman on April 26th 1945, two weeks after Roosevelt’s death . The directive was given to Truman two weeks later .
 The logic of this initial American approach to the German question was thus demilitarization, denazification, deindustrialization . To strip Germany of her military and economic resources and re-educate the population, the U.S. stripped Germany of its resources .
 The ‘Morgenthau strategy’ was vigorously criticized within the U.S. Administration itself . But from the outset the 'Morgenthalau strategy' had been vigorously criticized .
 Most of pre-war Germany’s best agricultural land was now under Soviet control or else had been transferred to Poland . Most of the land in Germany had been taken over by the Soviets .
 Meanwhile western Germany was awash in refugees who had access neither land nor food . Western Germany is awash with refugees who have access to land and food . The refugees were forced to leave Germany without land or food .
 Restrictions on urban or industrial output might keep Germany prostrate but they wouldn’t feed it or rebuild it . Restrictions would not keep the country prostrate, but they would feed it and rebuild it. Restrictions could keep it prostrate .
 "The burden, a very considerable one, would fall on the victorious occupiers," he says . That burden, he says, would be the burden of the victors .
 If, in American treatment of Germany, the balance of advantage swung increasingly to ‘peace’ this was largely due to the darkening prospect for USSoviet relations .
 Washington insiders say it was obvious from the outset that the incompatibility of Soviet and Western interests would lead to conflict . Clearly delineated zones of power might be a prudent solution to post-war problems .
 Kennan and Kennan differed implicitly on how to respond to Soviet actions . They did not disagree in their account of what Stalin was doing . Kennan: "The two men were very different in their accounts of Soviet actions"
 Other U.S. leaders were much more sanguine, however, and not just in the spring of 1945 .
 Kennan believed in the possibility of a post-war settlement based on broad principles of self-determination and Great Power cooperation . Charles Bohlen, another U.S. diplomat and the recipient of the Kennan letter quoted above, believed in a post war settlement .
 Bohlen and others placed their faith in Allied military occupation of the former Axis states and their satellites, together with free elections along the lines adumbrated at Yalta . The post-WWII Secretary of State James Byrnes placed his faith in the Allied occupation .
 Kennan's preference for the realpolitik of separate spheres . Only later, after observing the workings of Soviet power under the auspices of Allied Control Councils in Romania and Bulgaria, did they accept the incompatibility of these goals .
 One ground for initial optimism was the widely held view that Stalin had no interest in provoking confrontation and war . One ground was the view that he would not want to provoke confrontation with Russia . Stalin was assassinated in June 1944 .
 The U.S. risked little by keeping communications open with the Soviet Union and seeking mutually compatible solutions to common problems . And in that case the US had a monopoly of atomic weapons, it risked little . The US had to keep communications open by keeping communication open .
 U.S. helped bring about the new international institutions that the Americans had helped brought about and whose success they sincerely desired . Another element in United States policy in the initial post-war period was the international institutions .
 The United Nations, whose Charter was ratified on October 24th 1945 and whose General Assembly first met in January 1946, is obviously the best known . But it was the financial and economic agencies and agreements associated with ‘Bretton Woods’ which perhaps mattered more to policymakers at the
 The economic meltdown of the inter-war years seemed to Americans especially to be the root source of the European crisis . Americans especially seemed especially to blame for the crisis in the 1930s .
 Unless currencies were convertible and nations stood to benefit mutually from increased trade, there was nothing to prevent a return to the bad days of September 1931 . The post-World War One monetary system fell apart in 1931 .
 Members agreed to tariff and other concessions for contracting partners . They agreed to codes for trade practices and procedures for handling breaches and disputes .
 All of this was in itself a dramatic break from earlier ‘mercantilist’ approaches to trade . It was intended, in due course, to inaugurate a new age of open commerce .
 Bretton Woods goals and institutions, which also included a new ‘World Bank, were implicit in an unprecedented degree of external interference in national practices . Implicit in the Bretton-Woods goals was an unprecedented level of external intervention .
 The high ideals of those setting out plans and institutions for a better international system presumed a stable era of international cooperation from which all would gain . Put differently, the high ideals were set out for a stable international system .
 The Soviet Union was originally integral to the financial system proposed at Bretton Woods . It was to be the third-largest contributor to the International Monetary Fund quota .
 It was perhaps naive for the U.S. to imagine that these proposals would be acceptable to Russian policy-makers . But they got around this impediment by drawing up their plans without consulting the Russians or the French .
 They sincerely expected that the mutual benefits to be had from an increase in international commerce and financial stability would eventually overcome national traditions and political mistrust . Nevertheless, they said they hoped that they sincerely hoped that .
 Putting the matter thus has the effect of depicting the makers of U.S. foreign policy, Kennan aside, as remarkably innocent . Putting it out of context, it's not surprising that Kennan is innocent .
 Senator Estes Kefauver and Walter Lippmann refused to believe what they were told about Soviet actions in eastern Europe and elsewhere . And so, perhaps, they were, perhaps not only those like Estes .
 India and some of the British overseas Dominions had substantial holdings in sterling . At least through mid-1946, many U.S. leaders spoke and acted as though they truly be3 India .
 Had the pound been freely convertible into dollars in the immediate post-war era many of these holdings might have been run down . This further weakening Britain’s already fragile stock of foreign exchange .
 Britain re-imposed sterling controls in 1947 after a disastrous experiment with convertibility imposed from Washington . After an initial, disastrous experiment, the U.S. loaned Britain back into the UK in 1947 .
 Even Lucretius Patrascanu, a senior figure in the Romanian Communist leadership, was moved to comment, at the time of the Paris Peace Treaty negotiations in the summer of 1946, that Americans are crazy .
 The United States in 1945 and for some time expected to come seriously expected to extricate itself from Europe as soon as possible, and was thus keen to put in place a workable settlement that would not require American presence or supervision .
 U.S. did not expect to remain in occupation of Germany more than two years at most . This aspect of American post-war thinking is not well remembered or understood today, but it was uppermost in American calculations .
 The abrupt ending of Lend-Lease was part of a general cutting back of economic and military commitments to Europe . The abrupt end of LEND-Leases was part a general cut back of military and economic commitments to the continent .
 The American defense budget was reduced by five-sixths between 1945 and 1947 . The U.S. military budget was also reduced by a fifth-sixth .
 At the end of the war in Europe the U.S. had 97 combat-ready ground divisions in place . By mid-1947 there were just twelve divisions, most of them under strength and engaged in administrative tasks .
 Only 7 percent of U.S. voters in October 1945 placed foreign problems ahead of domestic concerns . But it played havoc with America’s European allies, who began seriously to fear a reprise of isolationism .
 In the event of a Soviet invasion of western Europe after 1945, American strategy consisted of an immediate retreat to peripheral bases in Britain, Spain and the Middle East . They were only half-mistaken .
 American diplomats were being taken through a steep learning curve . But even as they were reducing their military commitment to Europe, the U.S. diplomats were taking a steep learn curve . The United States is reducing its military commitment .
 It was hardly a ringing commitment to European defense . It was prompted perhaps by a letter from Truman in June . It reflected growing U.S. frustration at the difficulty of working with the Soviet Union .
 Wallace was notoriously ‘soft’ on Communism, but his distaste for American involvement with Britain and Europe was widely shared across the political spectrum . Wallace was famously 'soft' on Communism but was widely considered a 'no-one' on the Communist Party .
 As early as 1943 he had taken the full measure of Roosevelt’s desire to see the liquidation of the British Empire . There were times when Roosevelt seemed at least as concerned with reducing post-war Britain as with containing Soviet Russia .
 Of these, only the second objective was achieved—the third falling victim to the impossibility of the first . The first objective was to achieve the first objective, but the second was to be achieved .
 None of these, it might be noted, directly concerned Europe proper . But the second point, which explains British engagement in Greece, is the first point of interest .
 If British leaders were wary in dealings with Stalin it was not from any anxiety over his plans in central Europe . Instead it was from anticipation of future Soviet moves in Central Asia and the Near East . British leaders wary of Soviet plans in anticipation of possible Soviet moves .
 This made sense in the light of Britain’s continuing priorities—in East Asia, India, Africa and the Caribbean . This makes sense in light of the UK’�s continued priorities in East Asia and India, India and Africa .
 British strategists were much more realistic than their American allies when it came to Europe . But those selfsame Imperial illusions (as some, and not only in Washington, were already calling them) made them self-impressive .
 From London’s point of view, the war had been fought to defeat Germany, and if the price for this was a Soviet imperium in eastern Europe, then that would be how things would be . London's view was that if the cost of the war was this was this
 By 1945, the extent of Russian domination in Europe was becoming clear . British leaders were less optimistic than their American counterparts .
 Following the Russian-engineered coup in Bucharest in February 1945, and subsequent heavy-handed Soviet pressure in both Romania and Bulgaria, it was ob110 THE IMPOSSIBLE SETTLEMENT vious that the local price of Soviet hegemony was going to be high .
 The real British fear in Europe was that the USSR might control eastern Europe . The real fear was that it might draw a prostrate, resentful Germany into its orbit as well and thus establish mastery over Europe .
 To prevent this, the British Chiefs of Staff concluded in the autumn of 1944, it would probably be necessary to divide Germany and then occupy the western part of the country . To prevent it, they concluded, as well as partitioning Germany and occupying the west, they said .
 As General Alan Brooke, Chief of the Imperial General Staff, had confided to his diary on July 27th 1944, ‘Germany is no longer the dominating power in Europe.’ As General . Brooke wrote in his diary, 'Germany no longer . longer . dominating power'
 She cannot fail to become the main threat in 15 years from now, she says . She will be main threat if she fails to become main threat to the world .
 Germany should foster Germany, gradually bring her up and bring her into a Federation of Western Europe . Therefore, foster Germany and gradually bring it up to a Federation .
 Of all the Allied powers it was Britain which came closest to anticipating and even seeking the settlement that finally emerged . Britain was the closest to anticipate and even seek the settlement .
 British were in no position to impose such an outcome, nor indeed to impose very much on their own . But the British were not in any position to . impose such a . outcome, and indeed not very much to impose on themselves, on their . own .
 By the end of the war it was obvious that London was no match for Washington and Moscow . London was not a match for Moscow and Washington and Washington .
 Britain exhausted itself in the epic struggle with Germany and could not much longer sustain even the outer trappings of a great power . Britain had exhausted itself . It could not be sustained in the battle with Germany .
 Between Victory-in-Europe Day in 1945 and the spring of 1947 British forces were reduced from a peak of 5. million men and women under arms to just 1. million .
 In the autumn of 1947 the country was even forced to cancel naval manoeuvres in order to save fuel oil . In the fall of 1947, the Soviet Union had to cancel manoeuvres to save oil .
 The British policy was predicated on the assumption that Soviet aggression might take any form except war . In these circumstances the British were concerned not that the Russians would attack, but that the Americans would retreat .
 What remained of Europe wasn’t strong enough to stand up to Russia by itself . What remains of Europe isn't strong enough enough to resist Russia, it's said .
 Without the stopping power of the Americans, the Russians might easily have tried sweeping right forward . The Russians may have tried to sweep right forward, but the Americans stopped them .
 U.S. ambivalence about overseas engagement is not so different from their own stance in earlier days . And of course they understood very well, for it was not so much different from earlier days. And course they understand very well the American ambivalentence .
 From the mid-eighteenth century through to the dispatch of the British Expeditionary Force to France in 1914, the English had preferred to fight by proxy, avoiding protracted continental engagements and keeping no permanent force on European soil .
 A maritime power seeking to fight a European war with someone else’s soldiers could look to the Spanish, the Dutch, the Swiss, the Swedes, the Prussians and of course the Russians for allies . In the past, a maritime power looking for allies looked to the
 British decision to go ahead with their own atomic weapons programme was made in January 1947 . The British government decided to use the atomic bomb in 1947 .
 Britain’s best hope lay in encouraging continued U.S. engagement in Europe . It meant espousing the American faith in a negotiated settlement . Britain's best hope was to work with the Soviets in so far as this was still realistic .
 The fear of German revanchism could just about be sustained in Germany . So long as the fear of re-nationalism took precedence over anything else, this policy could just be sustained .
 The limbo in Germany, where the country’s economy was held hostage to unresolved political discussions, could not long continue . But what was painfully clear was that the limbo in German politics could not soon continue .
 The German economy needed to be revived, with or without Soviet agreement, says German politician . "The German economy must be revived," he says . "It's not a matter of whether or not the Soviet agreement"
 It was the British who fought two long wars against Germany from beginning of end and had been brought low by their hard-won victories . The British were keen to close that chapter, establish some modus vivendi .
 In better times the British would have retreated to their Isles, much as they suspected the Americans of wanting to retreat to their continent . The security of western Europe to its traditional guardians, the French .
 This image of France as a— the —European Great Power was shaken at Munich . But outside the chancelleries of Eastern Europe it was not yet broken .
 In six traumatic weeks, the cardinal reference points of European inter-state relations changed forever . The cardinal reference point in Europe's relations with the U.S. changed forever.
 France ceased to be not just a Great Power but even a power, and despite De Gaulle’s best efforts in later decades it has never been one since . France ceased the Great Power and has never had a power since .
 The shattering defeat of June 1940 was followed by four years of humiliating, demeaning, subservient occupation . Marshall Petain’s Vichy regime played Uriah Heep to Germany’�s Bill Sikes .
 French leaders and policymakers could not but know what had happened to their country . Whatever they said in public, French leaders must know what happened to them .
 French statesmen and politicians insisted upon their country’s claim to recognition as a member of the victorious Allied coalition, a world power to be accorded .
 This illusion could be sustained, in some degree, because it suited the other powers to pretend it was so . This illusion was sustained by the illusion of the British Empire, but it was sustained in part .
 The Soviet Union wanted a tactical ally in the West who shared its suspicion of the ‘Anglo-Americans’ The British wanted a revived France to take its place in the counsels of Europe and relieve Great Britain of continental obligations . Even the Americans saw some advantage, though not
 The French were given a permanent seat on the new United Nations Security Council . They were offered a role in the joint military administrations of Vienna and Berlin .
 The net effect of these encouragements was to pour further humiliation upon an already humbled nation . But the net effect was to pummel the nation, he says .
 On the Allied Control Council in Germany they blocked or vetoed the implementation of decisions taken at the Potsdam Conference of the Big Three on the grounds that France had not been party to them . France consistently blocked or blocked the implementation .
 The French provisional authorities initially refused to cooperate with UNRRA and Allied military governments in the handling of displaced persons . French refugees and DPs should be located and administered as part of an independent and exclusively French operation .
 French post-war governments felt very strongly their sense of exclusion from the highest councils of Allied decision-making . Above all, they felt strongly their . sense of excluded from the . highest councils .
 Decisions were being taken in Washington and London, the French came to believe, that directly concerned them but over which they had no influence . Like Britain, France was an Empire, at least on paper, but not on paper . Decisions that directly concern France were taken by Washington and
 Paris had become estranged from its colonial holdings in the course of the occupation . Paris became estranged from colonial holdings during the occupation of France .
 Despite the country’s significant possessions in Africa and South-East Asia, France was first and always a continental power .
 Soviet moves in Asia, or the coming crisis in the Mideast, were matters with which the French, unlike the British, were by now only indirectly concerned .
 France was now shrunk, Europe loomed larger in its field of vision . Precisely because France had been shrunk it loomed bigger in Europe's field of view .
 The country had paid an incalculable price in territorial and material loss and in human lives and suffering, says President Obama . "The country had ... paid incalculated price"
 The failure after 1918 to put in place a system of controls and alliances capable of restraining a renascent, vengeful Germany haunted the Quai d'Orsay .
 The country's first priority after the defeat of Hitler was to ensure that this mistake was not repeated . The country’s first priority is to ensure this mistake is not repeated, he says .
 The mining districts of the Ruhr, the Saarland and parts of the Rhineland should be separated from the German state . Their resources and output should be placed at French disposal, says French minister .
 Monnet Plan presumed availability of German coal deliveries in particular, without which the French steel industry was helpless . But it would also have served the purpose of placing Germany's huge primary resources at the service of France’s own plans for recovery .
 Even in 1938 France had been the world’s biggest importer of coal, buying from abroad some 40 percent of its requirements in coal and coke . France was the world's biggest coal importer .
 By 1944 French domestic coal output had fallen to less than half that of 1938 . France's domestic coal production was less than 50 per cent of the output in 1938 .
 Without German coal and coke, the post-war French recovery would be stillborn . The post-WWII recovery would have been stillborn, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 French policy fell foul of the same objections raised by Keynes to French policy a quarter century earlier . In the first place, the French policy was wronged by Keynes .
 It made little sense to destroy German resources if they were vital to Frances' recovery, she says . It was simply no way to oblige Germans to work for France while being held down to a low standard of living at home, she adds .
 The risk of provoking a nationalist backlash in Germany against post-war foreign oppression appeared at least as great in the 1940s as it had twenty years earlier . The risk was the same as the risk of a backlash against foreign oppression .
 Most serious objection to French plans for post-war Germany was that they took little account of the interests or plans of France’s Western allies . France was utterly dependent on those same allies not just for her security but for her very livelihood .
 On secondary issues, Western Allies could accommodate French demands, such as customs and monetary union with the Saarland . The French got their way in 1947, on a customs union, on which the French got its way .
 Paris had no leverage with which to oblige the ‘Anglo-Americans’ to do its bidding . But on the central issue of Germany’s future, Paris has no leverage . The French capital is in the process of deciding on the future of the country .
 French diplomats hope that a shared fear of Germany and suspicion of the ‘AngloAmericans’ might translate into support for French diplomatic goals . French diplomats in the aftermath of German defeat could hope a natural concordance of interests could thus hope that .
 Molotov refused to back Georges Bidault’s proposals for a separate Rhineland and foreign control of the Ruhr industrial belt . He had no interest in serving as a counterweight to assist the French in offsetting the foreign policy heft of London and Washington
 French dream up alternative ways to secure an impossible independence of policy . Yet the French continued to dream up alternatives to securing independence of foreign policy .
 As late as 1947, the French Ministry of War could have said France should adopt a stance of international neutrality . France should make preventive ententes or alliances with the USA and the USSR and lining up against whichever of the two initiated aggression .
 If France finally abandoned these fantasies and came round to the position of her Western partners in 1947, it was for three reasons . France finally came round with the West in 1947 .
 France was in no position to impose a German solution of her own, and no-one else wanted the one she was proposing . France was not in the right place to impose her own solution, and it was not the only solution .
 The former was indirectly but unambiguously dependent upon French agreement on a strategy for the latter . French President Nicolas Sarkozy's election victory was partly dependent on French unity .
 French politicians and the French national mood shifted definitively in the second half of 1947 . But thirdly, and decisively, French politicians changed decisively, in 1947 . The French government and French public mood shifted decisively in 1947.
 There was something of a war scare in Paris, coupling the country’s continued worries with continued worries about German revanchism with new talk of an impending Soviet invasion . At the same time there was also a fear of an imminent Soviet invasion.
 In these circumstances, and following their rebuff by Molotov, the French turned reluctantly towards the West, they turned reluctantly .
 Foreign Minister Bidault replied ‘yes’ given time and if France could avoid a civil war . Asked by United States Secretary of State George Marshall in April 1947 whether America ‘could rely on France’
 France was embroiled in a costly colonial war in Indo-China for which she urgently needed American help . If they wanted economic recovery and some level of American and British security guarantees against German revival or Soviet expansion, then they had to go along .
 6 Marshall was probably not much reassured to learn from Bidault that this public emphasis upon the German threat was strictly for domestic consumption . The Americans and British could guarantee France against a renascent military threat .
 France’s long-standing dilemma is how to secure privileged French access to the materials and resources located there . But none of this resolved France's long-term dilemma, says French minister .
 If these objectives were not to be obtained by force or by annexation, then an alternative means had to be found, says David Cameron . Cameron: "If these objectives are not to obtain by force, then they must be found"
 If you could not destroy Germany, then join her up to a European framework in which she could do no harm militarily but much good economically . In short, if you couldn't destroy Germany then join it up to the European framework .
 If the idea had not occurred to French leaders before 1948 this was not through a shortage of imagination, but because it was clearly perceived as a pis aller , a secondbest outcome . The idea was clearly seen as a second best outcome .
 A 'European' solution to France’s German problem could only be adopted once a properly‘French’ solution had been abandoned . French leaders took three years to accept this, and it took French leaders three years .
 France had to come to terms with the abrupt negation of three hundred years of history . In those three years France had, in effect, to come . to terms . France had . to come terms with an abrupt negating of three centuries of history.
 The situation of the Soviet Union in 1945 was precisely the opposite of that of France . France's situation in 1945 in the USSR was precisely opposite to France's in 1945, says historian .
 After two decades of effective exclusion from the affairs of Europe, Russia had re-surfaced . Russia had been excluded from the continent for two decades . Russia's influence in Europe has been re-emerged in recent years .
 The resilience of the Soviet population, the successes of the Red Army and, it must be said, the Nazis’ capacity to turn even the most sympathetic anti-Soviet nations against them, had brought Stalin credibility and influence, in the counsels of governments and on the streets .
 Stalin had direct or indirect control of a huge swathe of eastern and central Europe . Stalin was in control of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 His armies had only narrowly been blocked, by the rapid advance of the British under Montgomery, from moving forward through north Germany as far as the Danish border .
 As Western generals well knew, there was absolutely nothing to stop the Red Army advancing to the Atlantic if Stalin ordered it . The Red Army would not be able to stop it from advancing into the Atlantic .
 There is no doubt that Stalin wanted a Soviet atomic bomb . He insisted on Soviet control of parts of eastern Germany and Czechoslovakia where there were uranium deposits . Within a few years 200,000 east Europeans would be working in these mines as part of the Soviet atomic programme .
 The atomic bomb made Stalin even more suspicious of American motives and plans than he already was . But the atomic bomb did little to alter Soviet military calculations, he says .
 Stalin’s political goals derived directly from Stalin's political goals, which in turn drew on longstanding Soviet and Russian objectives, he says . These derived from the goals of the Stalinist regime, he adds .
 Stalin wanted back the land the Bolsheviks had lost, at the 1918 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk and in the course of the war with Poland two years later . Stalin wanted to return the land he had lost .
 This goal was partly achieved in the secret clauses of his 1939 and 1940 pacts with Hitler . This goal had been partly achieved by the secret pacts of Hitler and Hitler .
 Hitler invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, allowing the Red Army in turn to reoccupy disputed territories in the course of its advance on Berlin . The rest he owed to Hitler’s decision to invade the Soviet Russia in 1941, .
 The Soviet occupation and annexation of Bessarabia, the Bukovina, subCarpathian Ruthenia, western Ukraine and eastern Finland could all be presented as the spoils of victory, rather than deriving from unsavoury deals .
 For the Soviet Union the point of this territorial aggrandizement was twofold. The Soviet Union was expanding its territory in the early 1980s. For the Soviets, the point was to gain territorial power .
 Stalin became the leader of a huge Eurasian bloc in world affairs . The Soviet Union’s insistence on a system of vetoes in the new UN Security Council . This was a matter of some importance to Stalin .
 Land represented prestige but also and above all security . Land represented not just prestige, but also prestige . Land was a symbol of prestige and security for many .
 From the Soviet viewpoint a glacis to its west, a broad swathe of land across which Germans especially would have to pass if they wished to attack Russia, was a vital security concern for the Soviet Union . From the . Soviet viewpoint, a . glacis was a . broad sw
 The interpretation of that last phrase would prove, to say the least, contentious .
 In 1945 the Americans and British were not disposed to give Stalin an argument on the matter . But in 1945 the U.S. and Britain were not .
 Under the terms of a secret Czech-Soviet agreement of March 1945, the USSR had the right to mine and extract uranium from the Jachymov deposits in Western Bohemia . Looking back, we may see in these territorial seizures and economic spoliation the first stages of the bol
 To Western observers there was even something familiar and reassuringly traditional about Moscow’s initial post-war stance . But at the time this was not obvious to everyone . To Western onlookers, it was even familiar and comfortingly traditional .
 Overall, it is not possible to understand the Communist regime in Russia unless we take seriously its ideological claims and ambitions . The Communist regime's ideological aims and ambitions are important to understand, writes David Frum .
 Even if one knew little of Bolshevik doctrine it would be possible to make reasonably good sense of Soviet foreign policy simply by looking to the policies of the czars . But there were moments, and the years 1945-47 are one of them, when the years were one of those .
 Peter the Great introduced the strategy by which Russia would dominate through ‘protection’ of its neighbours . It was Peter the . Great, after all, who introduced the . strategy by . introducing the strategy to . Russia .
 Catherine the Great drove the Empire forward to the south and south-west . It was Catherine's role in driving the Empire to the South and the West .
 Czar Alexander I established the template for Russian imperial engagement in Europe . Alexander I, above all, established a template for Russia's imperial engagement with Europe .
 At the Vienna Congress of 1815, Alexander’s purposes had been quite explicit . The victorious and mutually suspicious allied powers met to re-establish continental equilibrium following the defeat of a tyrant .
 The concerns of small nations were to be subordinated to those of the Great Powers . Small nations had to be subordinate to the interests of the great powers . Small countries were not allowed to have their own concerns .
 Since British interests lay overseas and no other continental power matched that of Russia, the Czar would serve as arbiter of a post-war continental arrangement . The Czar was likely to be arbiter in the post-World War II era .
 Local protests would be treated as threats to the arrangement at large and put down with appropriate energy . Local protests could be put down by appropriate energy, police say .
 Russian security would be defined by the territory under Czarist control . Never again must a Western army be able to reach Moscow unimpeded . The success with which its occupants were forcibly reconciled to the new system .
 There is nothing in that account which does not apply to Soviet calculations in 1945 . There are no Soviet calculations which do not apply in 1945, it is claimed .
 Sazunov envisaged the future of eastern Europe as a cluster of small, vulnerable, states . nominally independent but effectively clients of Great Russia .
 To these enduring themes of Czarist foreign policy in Europe, Stalin added distinctive calculations of his own . Stalin added his own calculations to his own. Stalin added .
 Stalin believed time, Stalin believed, was on his side . That was one reason why he evinced no haste in reaching a settlement there .
 Defensiveness and a wary suspicion characterized all aspects of Soviet foreign policy . The Kremlin’s neurotic view of world affairs’ as George Kennan described it in 1946 .
 Stalin announced that the Soviet Union was returning to its pre-war emphasis on industrialization, war-preparedness, and the inevitability of conflict between capitalism and Communism . The Soviet Union would cooperate with the West only when it suited her .
 Stalin retreated to the 'hard' line taken by the Bolsheviks before 1921 and again between 1927 and the onset of the Popular Fronts . Stalin was retreating to the ‘hard-line’ line taken before 1921 .
 Stalin, like all tyrants, needed to invoke threats and enemies, whether domestic or foreign . The Bolshevik regime had always been insecure . Stalin's regime was born of a minority coup in unpropitious circumstances .
 The Soviet leadership was obsessed to the point of paranoia with ‘surprise attacks’ and challenges to its new-won standing . Like the USA after Pearl Harbor, but with rather better cause .
 The Russians continued to see Germany as the main threat for decades . And the Russians continued for many decades to see it as a main threat .
 He anticipated a coming cooling of relations with the West and was out to make the best of his assets and take advantage of Western weakness, it is said . That is doubtless true, but it is also true that he anticipated the coming cooling .
 Stalin had no clear strategy beyond that . But it is far from obvious that Stalin had any clear strategy . Stalin had a few clear goals beyond that.
 This fits with what we know of Stalin’s general approach, and it applies beyond the East German case as well, as well . It fits with the general approach of Stalin's general approach .
 The Soviets were certainly not planning for World War Three in the near term . The Soviet Union did not want to be involved in World War III in the short term .
 In 1990 Edvard Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Secretary, reportedly observed that despite a fortyyear-long Cold War with the United States, when his grandchildren played war games, Germany was still the enemy . Between June 1945 and the end of 1947 the Red Army was reduced
 Of course, Soviet calculations were by no means self-evident to western contemporaries . Even those who read Stalin as a cautious pragmatist could not be sure .
 Stalin himself was famously risk-averse, which is why some commentators regretted the West’s failure to exercise ‘containment’ sooner and further forward . Stalin was famously famously risk averse, and some commentators regret the failure of the West .
 The Soviet presence further east was a non-negotiable affair, as everyone recognized . No-one wanted another war in these years, but no-one feared another war .
 In the Allied Control Councils in Bulgaria or Romania the Soviets did not even pretend to take note of British or U.S. wishes, much less those of the locals . The Soviets were not even aware of British and American wishes .
 Only in Czechoslovakia was there a degree of ambiguity, the Red Army having long since withdrawn . The Red Army had long since pulled out of the Czech Republic .
 From his standpoint, Stalin operated in what passed in Moscow for good faith . Stalin operated from his standpoint of what passed by Moscow in good faith, he says . Stalin's actions in the past have led to a series of scandals .
 He and his colleagues assumed that the Western Allies understood that the Soviets planned to occupy and control ‘their’ half of Europe . They were willing to treat Western protests at Soviet behaviour in their zone as pro forma, the small change of democratic cant .
 The West was taking its own rhetoric too seriously, demanding freedom and autonomy in Eastern Europe, the Soviet leadership responded with genuine indignation . When it seemed to them that the West was demanding freedom, they responded with indignation .
 "We have not been asked, although we do not say that we like one or another of these governments," says the UK government .
 Everyone expected World War Two to end, like its predecessor, with an allembracing Peace Treaty . But five separate treaties were indeed signed in Paris in 1946 .
 These settled territorial and other business in Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Finland and Italy, though not in Norway . Norway remained technically in a state of war with Germany until 1951 .
 The spectre of German revanchism haunted Soviet calculations every bit as much as it did those of the French . Just as the war had been about Germany, so was the peace, and the peace was also about Germany .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send your photos of your favorite travel destinations in the next week's gallery .
 The Soviets were also granted the right to extract and remove goods, services and financial assets from their own zone . Thus it was agreed to treat the German economy as a single unit, but the Soviets also granted them the right .
 They were accorded 10 percent of reparations from the Western zones in exchange for food and raw materials to be supplied from eastern Germany . They were also accorded a 10 percent reparations .
 The accords treated the economic resources of East and West as separate and distinct . But these accords introduced a contradiction, by treating the resources of the two countries as separate .
 There was no final agreement on Germany’s new frontiers with Poland . Even the common ground of democratization posed practical difficulties in implementation .
 Allied leaders agreed to differ and to defer, instructing their Foreign Ministers to meet and continue the talks at a later date .
 Their goal, in principle, was to draw up definitive arrangements for post-war Germany . They drew up Peace Treaties between the Allied Powers and German and Austria . Their goal was to prepare peace Treaties with German and Austrian states .
 It was in the course of these encounters, notably in Moscow during March and April 1947, that the gap separating Soviet and Western approaches to the German problem became clear . The gap between the two sides became clear during these encounters .
 The Anglo-American strategy was driven in part by calculations of political prudence . It was part of a strategy to avoid a repeat of the Vietnam War .
 If Germans in the Western zone of occupation remained beaten down and impoverished, they would sooner or later turn back to Nazism . Or else to Communism, says historian John MacKinnon .
 In the regions of Germany occupied by American and British military governments, the emphasis switched early to reconstructing civic and political institutions and giving Germans responsibility for their domestic affairs . The emphasis switched quite early on in the regions occupied by U.S. and Britain .
 This offered emerg122 THE IMPOSSIBLE SETTLEMENT ing German politicians considerably more leverage than they could have hoped for when the war ended and they didn't hesitate to exploit it . The occupiers could not answer for the future political allegiance of the German nation .
 Communist occupation policies in Berlin and the Soviet-occupied territory of eastern Germany were not such as to attract disaffected German sentiments and votes . Fortunately for the Western allies, Western allies were not as bad as the Soviet occupation .
 From the outset, the Soviets established in their zone of occupation a de facto Communist-led government without Allied consent . The Soviets set about rendering superfluous the Potsdam accords by ruthlessly extracting and dismantling whatever fell within their grasp .
 There was never any prospect of the Communists gaining control of the country or even the Soviet zone except by force . The Soviet zone was the only way to take control of Soviet territory .
 Communist candidates came far behind both the Social Democrats and Christian Democrats in 1946 elections . Communist candidates were far behind Social Democrats .
 Western occupiers were running into difficulties of their own . But by this time, the Western occupier was running into problems .
 By July 1946 Britain had been forced to import 112,000 tons of wheat and 50,000 tonnes of potatoes to feed the local population of its zone (the urban and industrial north-west of Germany), paid for out of an American loan .
 The United States Army was not well pleased, since the cost of feeding millions of hungry Germans fell on its own budget . The Americans were not under the same economic constraints and their zone had not suffered as much war damage, but the situation appeared no less absurd .
 The British Cabinet was still reluctant to accept a formal division of occupied Germany into eastern and western halves .
 The four Occupying Powers were not about to reach an agreement . But it was becoming obvious that the four occupiers were not going to reach a deal .
 The main Nuremberg Trial ended in October 1946 and the terms of the Paris Peace Treaties were finalized the following month . The Allies were bound by little more than their co-responsibility for Germany, which thus came increasingly to the fore .
 Americans and British agreed at the end of 1946 to fuse the economies of their two occupation zones into a so-called ‘Bizone 5 . But even this did not yet signify a firm division of Germany, much less a commitment to integrating the Bizone into the West .
 Marshall was optimistic, in early 1947, that whatever arrangements were made to resolve the German economic conundrum need not result in a divided Germany . U.S. Secretary of State Marshall was still optimistic, early 1947 .
 The real break came in the spring of 1947, at the Moscow meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the US, Britain, France and the Soviet Union . The meeting was to seek agreement on a Peace Treaty for Germany and Austria .
 The British and Americans were determined to build up the Western German economy in order that the Germans might support themselves but also contribute to the revival of the European economy .
 Soviet representatives wanted a restoration of reparations from the Western zones of Germany . They wanted a united German administration and economy as initially envisaged at Potsdam .
 The Western Allies were no longer seeking a single German administration . But by now the Western Allies had already decided to leave Germany . The West was no longer looking for a single administration .
 This would mean the effective handing over of the country to the Soviet sphere of control, given the military asymmetry of the time . For this would entail the abandonment of the population of the western zones of Germany .
 Moscow Conference of 1947 'really rang down the Iron Curtain,' says U.S. political adviser to the U.K. Military Government in Germany . 'It was the Moscow conference of 1947 ... which really rang down . down the iron curtain,' he says .
 Ernest Bevin abandoned any serious hope of agreement over Germany before he even arrived in Moscow . Marshall (and Bidault) was the defining moment for the two sides . Bevin had abandoned hope of a deal with the West .
 For the Americans especially, Germans were rapidly ceasing to be the enemy . Germans were no longer the enemy. Americans were rapidly becoming less likely to be .
 The Foreign Ministers—Molotov, Bevin, Marshall and Bidault—met one last time, in London, from November 25, through December 16th 1947 .
 It was a curious gathering, since their relations had already broken down . It was the first time they had gathered together since the war .
 The Western Allies were moving forward with independent plans for West European recovery . Stalin had established the Cominform, instructed the Communist parties of France and Italy to take an intransigent line in their countries’ affairs .
 The Ministers discussed the prospects for an all-German government under Allied control . They also discussed other terms for an eventual Peace Treaty .
 There was no further agreement on the common administration of Germany or plans for its future . The meeting broke up without scheduling any future gatherings .
 Britain, France and the U.S. began tripartite discussions on Germany’s future at an extended conference, once again held in London, beginning on February 23rd, 1948 .
 In the shadow of the Prague coup, France and Britain extended their Dunkirk Treaty into the Brussels Pact of March 17th . The Brussels Pact was binding Britain and France and the Benelux countries in a mutual defense alliance . The treaty was the result of a coup in the wake of
 There was now nothing to inhibit the Western leaders and the London Conference agreed to extend the Marshall Plan to western Germany and lay down schemes for an eventual government for a West German state . This proved an easy accommodation for the West Germans .
 American GI was pleasantly surprised at his reception in Germany following the rather frosty French response to their liberators . ‘Hell, these people are cleaner and a damned sight friendlier than the French,' he said .
 Sokolovsky condemned plans for western Germany as the enforced imposition of capitalist interests upon a German population denied the chance to demonstrate its desire for Socialism . He claimed that Western powers were abusing their presence in Berlin, which he claimed was part of the Soviet Zone, to interfere in eastern German affairs
 The Soviet delegation swept out of the room, followed by the rest of the Soviet delegation . He then swept out .
 To the extent that the Cold War was about Germany, the outcome was probably preferred by all parties to a Germany united against them . A divided country would probably prefer a divided country to a united country, says historian .
 No one planned this outcome in May 1945, but few were deeply discontented with it . The U.S. ended the war in 1945 with the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Adenauer could hardly have espoused the division of Germany as a goal, however much he welcomed it in private . Adenauer was not likely to espouse the division, however, however .
 His chief opponent in the first years of the Federal Republic, the Social Democrat Kurt Schumacher, was a Protestant from West Prussia . He was a tireless advocate of German unity .
 Adenauer would readily have accepted a neutralized Germany as the price for a single German state, which was what Stalin appeared to be offering . In contrast to Adenauer, Stalin would have accepted neutralizing Germany as a price .
 Adenauer had to tread carefully to ensure responsibility for a divided Germany fell squarely on the occupying forces . Schumacher’s position was probably the more popular one in Germany at the time, which was why Adenauer .
 By 1948 the United States, like Great Britain, was not unhappy with the emergence of a divided Germany . American influence was dominant in the larger, western segment .
 It is sometimes suggested that certain key American decisions and declarations, notably the Truman Doctrine of March 1947, precipitated Stalin's retreat from compromise to rigidity . The responsibility for European divisions lay with Washington's insensitivity or, worse, its calculated intransigence .
 Truman Doctrine had remarkably little impact on Soviet calculations . For the Truman Doctrine, take this example, it was very little impact .
 Truman’s March 12th 1947 announcement to Congress that ‘It must be the policy of the U.S. to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or outside pressure’ was a direct response to London's inability to continue with aid to Greece
 Stalin was not much interested in Turkey and Greece, the chief beneficiaries of the aid package . He understood perfectly well that his own sphere of interest was unlikely to be affected by Truman's grandstanding .
 The American assumption of erstwhile British responsibilities in the Eastern Mediterranean was a sign and precursor to a split within the Western camp . The British position in the eastern Mediterranean is a sign of a split in the West .
 Whatever led Stalin to adjust his calculations in Eastern Europe, it was decidedly not the rhetoric of U.S. domestic politics . Stalin adjusted his calculations, and it was not his rhetoric .
 The immediate cause of the division of Germany and Europe lies rather in Stalin’s own errors in these years, he writes . Stalin”s own error was to blame for division of Europe, he says .
 In central Europe, where he would have preferred a united Germany, weak and neutral, he squandered his advantage in 1945 and subsequent years by uncompromising rigidity and confrontational tactics .
 If Stalin’s hope had been to let Germany rot until the fruit of German resentment and hopelessness fell into his lap, then he miscalculated seriously . There were moments when the Allied authorities in western Germany wondered whether he might yet succeed .
 In that sense the Cold War in Europe was an unavoidable outcome of the Soviet dictator’s personality and the system over which he ruled . The Cold War was the result of the personality of a Soviet dictator, writes Peter Bergen .
 All the Soviet Union needed to do was accept the Marshall Plan and convince a majority of the Germans of Moscow’s good faith in seeking a neutral, independent Germany . The Soviet Union should have accepted the plan and convinced the majority of Germans of its good faith, he says .
 In 1947 this would have shifted the European balance of advantage . In 1947 it would have radically changed the balance of power in Europe .
 Whatever Marshall, Bevin or their advisers might have thought of such maneuvers, they would have been helpless to prevent them . Whatever Marshall or Bevin's advisers might think of such moves, they were powerless to prevent it .
 That such tactical calculations were beyond Stalin cannot be credited to the West . Stalin's tactical calculations are beyond Stalin's ability to make such calculations .
 After fighting a murderous war to reduce the power of an over-mighty Germany, the victors should have proven so unable to agree on post-war arrangements to keep the German colossus down that they ended up dividing it between them in order to benefit separately .
 It had become clear that the only way to keep Germany from being the problem was to change the terms of the debate and declare it the solution . The British, the Americans, the French and the Soviets were among those who declared Germany the solution to the problem .
 Noel Annan: 'It was odious to find oneself in alliance with people who were willing to go along with Hitler to keep Communism at bay'
 The best hope for the West was to encourage the Germans themselves to create a democratic state . But the West's best hope is to encourage Germany to become a Western democratic state, he says .
 Anthony Eden: 'This war is not as in the past; whoever occupies a territory also imposes upon it his own social system' ‘Whoever occupies a land also imposes on it his social system’
 Josef Stalin’s famous aphorism was not quite as original as it appeared . Milovan Djilas in Conversations with Stalin said it was a mistake .
 Stalin’s point was clear—and put to Djilas well in advance of the Communist take-over of eastern Europe . Nevertheless, Stalin's message was clear, and put out well before the Communist takeover .
 From the Soviet side the war had been fought to defeat Germany and restore Russian power and security on its western frontiers . From the . Soviet side, the . war had . been fought against Germany and restored Russian power .
 The territories running in a north-south arc from Finland to Yugoslavia comprised small, vulnerable states whose inter-war governments had had been uniformly hostile to the Soviet Union .
 Poland, Hungary and Romania had been consistently unfriendly to Moscow . They were suspicious of Soviet intentions towards them and suspicious of Moscow's intentions .
 The only acceptable outcome for Stalin was the establishment of governments that could be relied upon never posing a threat to Soviet security, he says . Stalin's regime was in those parts of the region not pre-emptively absorbed into the USSR itself .
 Stalin wanted to align the political system of the states of eastern Europe with that of the Soviet Union . The only way to guarantee this was to guarantee such an outcome was to align it with the USSR . This, from the start of the start, was what Stalin wanted and intended .
 In many places, Soviet occupiers were welcomed as liberators and harbingers of change and reform . In many countries, the Soviet occupation was welcomed as a liberator and harbinger of change .
 The Soviet Union had almost no leverage in the domestic affairs of its western neighbours beyond the authority of its overwhelming military presence . On the other hand, however, the Soviet Union did not have much leverage .
 Communists in much of the region had been banned from public life and legal political activity for most of the previous quarter century . Communists in the region were banned in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Even where Communist parties were legal, their identification with Russia and the rigid, sectarian tactics imposed from Moscow had reduced them to a marginal irrelevance in East European politics .
 By the end of the war, or very shortly thereafter, every country in eastern Europe had such a coalition government . The coalition government was formed in the wake of the Second World War .
 Neither Stalin nor his local representatives were in any doubt as to their long-term goal . In view of continuing scholarly disagreement over responsibility for division of Europe, it is perhaps worth emphasizing that Stalin and his local .
 Coalitions were the route to power for Communist parties in a region where they were historically weak . They were only ever a means to this end, writes David Frum . Frum: Coalitions are only a means of power for the Communist parties .
 Communists put themselves in key positions on ‘denazification’ committees, district commissions and in the trade unions . Communists also put themselves on 'enazification' committees, districts commissions and trade unions committees .
 Communists were in a minority of government places in Soviet-occupied areas . This reflected the initial post-war disposition of the government places . Western observers were reassured by the Communist Party's presence in Russia .
 Communists’ stated objective in 1945 and 1946 was to ‘complete’ the unfinished bourgeois revolutions of 1848, to re-distribute property, guarantee equality and affirm democratic rights in a part of Europe where all three had always been in short supply .
 Stalin's goals appealed to many in the region and in western Europe who wanted to think well of Stalin and his purposes . These were plausible goals, at least on the surface, and they appeal to many . These are plausible goals at the time, but they appealed to the West .
 The appeal to Communists was sharply diminished in a series of local and national elections in eastern Germany, Austria and Hungary . Their appeal to the Communist Party was also sharply diminished .
 Communist candidates were consistently defeated by representatives of the old Liberal, Social Democratic and Agrarian/Smallholder parties . Despite every advantage of military occupation and economic patronage, Communist candidates regularly defeated by the old Liberals, Social Democrats .
 Communist parties adopted instead of a strategy of covert pressure, followed by open terror and repression . The result was that Communist parties adopt instead of . covert pressure and repression, the result was .
 In the course of 1946 and into 1947 electoral opponents were maligned, threatened, beaten up, arrested, tried as ‘Fascists’ or ‘collaborators’ and imprisoned or even shot .
 Vulnerable or unpopular politicians from non-Communist parties were targeted for public opprobrium . Their colleagues consented to this mistreatment in the hope it would not be applied to them . Politicians consented, hoping their colleagues would not have been targeted .
 As early as the summer of 1946, seven out of twenty-two members of the ‘Praesidium’ of the Agrarian Union were in prison . Thirty-five out of the eighty members of its governing Council were imprisoned .
 Agrarians, Liberals and other mainstream parties proved an easy target, tarred with the brush of Fascism or anti-national sentiment and picked off in stages . Mainstream parties were picked off by the government in stages in the 1980s .
 The more complicated impediment to Communist ambitions were the local Socialist and Social-Democratic parties who shared the Communists’ own reforming ambitions . The Communist Party was defeated by the Socialist Party in 1945 .
 It was not easy to charge Social Democrats in central or eastern Europe with ‘Fascism’ or collaboration . Social Democrats had usually been as much the victim of repression as Communists .
 Industrial working-class constituency in rural eastern Europe was traditionally Socialist, not Communist .
 Socialists could not easily be beaten, the Communists chose instead to join them . Thus since the Socialists were not easily beaten, they joined the Communists . The Communists joined the Communist Party in 1968 .
 In the circumstances of post-liberation eastern Europe this seemed to many socialists a sensible proposition . In the past, it seemed to be the case for a socialist state .
 By then the Socialist parties had split and split again over the issue of fusion, so that long before they disappeared they had ceased to be an effective political force in their country .
 Western Socialists often encouraged them to merge with the Communists, either in the innocent belief that everyone would benefit, or else in the hope of moderating Communist behaviour . Socialists were often encouraged by the Communist Party to merge .
 Communists did indeed do rather better at elections in 1947 and thereafter, with some help from violent assaults on their remaining opponents, intimidation at polling stations and blatantly abusive vote counts . Communists were able to do better after decimation, imprisonment or absorption of main opponents .
 Soviet strategy in the course of 1948 and 1949 reverted to a radical policy of state control, collectivization, destruction of the middle-class and purges and punishment of real and imagined opponents . In keeping with this transition from united front coalitions to Communist monopoly of power .
 This account of the initial Soviet take-over in eastern Europe describes a process common to all the countries of the region . It describes the Soviet takeover of eastern Europe as a common process .
 Communists could reasonably hope to secure power by legal or ostensibly legal means . This appears to have been Stalin’s preference, at least through the autumn of 1947 .
 Communists’ tactics became more confrontational and less embarrassed by judicial or political constraints, even at the cost of alienating foreign sympathy, once it was clear that electoral success would elude them . But the point was power, not legality, which is why Communists' tactics were more confront
 Bulgaria and Romania had been at war with the USSR, in part because of local Communist weakness, but mostly just because they were so obviously consigned by geography to the Soviet sphere from the outset . In Bulgaria, Romania and Romania the Soviet hand was heaviest—in part because both countries had
 In Bulgaria the Communist leader Georgy Dimitrov declared bluntly as early as October 1946 that anyone who voted for the anticommunist opposition would be regarded as a traitor . Anyone who voted against the Communist Party would be considered a traitor, he said .
 The only thing preventing the occupying Red Army and its local allies from openly destroying all dissent was the need to work with the Western Allies on a Peace Treaty for Bulgaria and to secure Anglo-American recognition of a Communist-led government as Bulgaria’s legitimate authority .
 Once the peace treaties were signed, the Communists had nothing to gain by waiting . The chronology of events is thus revealing . The peace treaties signed by the Communists were signed .
 On June 5th 1947 the United States Senate ratified the Paris Peace Treaties with Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, Finland and Italy . Despite misgivings of American diplomats in Sofia and Bucharest .
 The leading anti-Communist politician in Bulgaria, the Agrarian leader Nikola Petkov, was arrested the very next day . Petkov had refused to follow more accommodating Agrarians into the Communists’ Fatherland Front .
 On September 15th the Bulgarian Peace Treaty officially came into force . Four days later the USA offered to extend diplomatic recognition to the government in Sofia .
 Within 96 hours Petkov was executed, his sentence had been delayed until the official American announcement . Petkov's execution was delayed by the U.S. government .
 With Petkov judicially murdered, the Bulgarian Communists need fear no further impediments . Petkov was the prime minister of the Communist Party of Bulgaria .
 The Bulgarians had actually oscillated quite markedly over the years from enthusiastic pro-Germanism to ultra-Slavophilism . Although the Soviets guaranteed the return to Romania of northern Translyvania, Stalin had no intention 'The Bulgarians' had actually . no intention of
 Romanian Communist leaders were frequently not even Romanian, at least by traditional Romanian criteria . Worse, they were often not even Romania, as well as by traditional criteria .
 Ana Pauker was Jewish, Emil Bodnaras was Ukrainian, Vasile Luca was of Transylvanian German background . Ana Paukers was Jewish and Emil Bodnaras was of Ukrainian background . Vasiles Luca died at the age of 50 .
 Romanian Communists were utterly dependent on the Soviet forces . Perceived as an alien presence, they were seen as a Soviet presence in Romania .
 In Romania, subversion and violence were not one option among others—they were the only road to power . In Romania as in Bulgaria (or Albania) where Enver Hodxa mobilized the southern Tosk communities against tribal resistance from the northern Ghegs), subversion was not one
 The Poles, too, were fore-doomed to the Soviet sphere after World War Two . The Poles were also fore-predicted to be part of the USSR .
 The prospects of a Soviet-friendly government emerging spontaneously by popular choice were minimal . This was because of their location, on the route from Berlin to Moscow, and history, as longstanding impediments to Russian imperial ambitions in the west .
 The difference between Poland and the Balkan states was that Poland had been a victim of Hitler, not his ally . Hundreds of thousands of Polish soldiers had fought with the Allied armies on Eastern and Western fronts .
 Polish Communists, for all their marginality (many of them, too, were of Jewish origin), were of Polish origin . These considerations allowed them to claim a place in Polish national and even nationalist political traditions . Many of them were Jewish .
 Poland's Communists would always have been an insignificant minority in electoral terms . Nevertheless, Poland’s Communists too would always be an insignificant majority in terms of votes .
 Mikolajczyk was prime minister of the wartime government-in-exile . He was fatally handicapped by his party’s insistence on being both anti-Nazi and anti-Soviet .
 Stalin was more or less indifferent to the success of ‘Socialism’ in Poland, as later events would reveal . Stalin was indifferent to success of 'Socialism' in Poland .
 Polish foreign policy is not a matter of concern in the country's foreign policy . But he was far from indifferent to the general tenor of Polish policy, especially Poland's .
 The outcome of the German standoff was more important to him than anything else, at least in Europe . Indeed, together with the outcome of this week's German standoff, it was more than important .
 Remnants of the wartime Home Army continued to fight a guerilla war with the Communist authorities for a few more years . But theirs, too, was a hopeless cause, and their efforts were futile .
 In Poland, the Soviet Union had so obvious an interest in the political complexion of the country that the Poles’ wartime illusions—before and after Yalta— can seem quixotic . The Poles' wartime illusions, before and after the war, can seem to be quix
 In Hungary, notions of a ‘Hungarian road to Socialism’ were not altogether fanciful . In Hungary it was hoped that the country would move towards socialism .
 Soviet advisers might have been willing to play out the 'democratic' tactic longer than they did . Had there been widespread public support for the local Communists they might have played out the ‘democratic’ tactic .
 Communists proved consistently unpopular in Hungary, even in Budapest . But in Hungary too, the Communists proved to be consistently unpopular . The Communist Party was a major factor in the country's political landscape .
 Communist Interior Minister Laszlo Rajk managed to secure only 22 percent of the vote . Smallholders were duly reduced to a 15 percent share of vote .
 Hungary’s road to Socialism converged rapidly with that of its eastern neighbours . In these circumstances Hungary's road to socialism converged quickly with its east neighbours .
 It is easy, in retrospect, to see that hopes for a democratic Eastern Europe after 1945 were always forlorn . It was easy to see how hopes for democracy after 1945 had always been dashed .
 Central and Eastern Europe had few indigenous democratic or liberal traditions . Central and eastern Europe was largely dominated by Soviet-era Soviet-Russian-style communism .
 Inter-war regimes in this part of Europe had been corrupt, authoritarian and in some cases murderous . The inter-war regime in the region was corrupt and authoritarian, and some were murderous .
 The real governing class in inter-war Eastern Europe was the bureaucracy, recruited from the same social groups who would furnish the administrative cadre of the Communist states . The bureaucracy was recruited from social groups to furnish the . Communist states.
 The transition from authoritarian backwardness to Communist ‘popular democracy’ was a short move and an easy one . For all the rhetoric of‘Socialism’, the transition was short and easy .
 The alternative of a return to the politicians and policies of pre-1939 Romania or Poland or Hungary significantly weakened the anti-Communist case, at least until the full force of Soviet terror was felt after 1949 . Moreover the alternative of returning to the political and political policies of the pre
 The Soviet Union was now the self-appointed protector of the new borders of Romania and Poland, not to speak of the redistributed land of expelled Germans and others all across the region . It was not the first time the Soviet Union had been in charge of the region's borders .
 This was a reminder, as though it were needed, of the omnipresence of the Red Army . The Red Army is a reminder of its omnipremence in Russia .
 The 37th Army of the 3rd Ukrainian Front was detached from the forces occupying Romania in September 1944 and stationed in Bulgaria . It remained in Bulgaria, where it remained until the Peace Treaties were signed in 1947 .
 Soviet forces remained in Hungary until the mid-Fifties , in Romania until 1958 . Soviet forces remain in Hungary .
 The German Democratic Republic was under Soviet military occupation throughout its forty-year life . Soviet troops transited regularly across Poland during that occupation .
 The Soviet Union was not about to leave this part of Europe, whose future was intimately bound up with the fate of its giant neighbour, as events were to show . Russia's future was tied up with its neighbour's fate, as well as its own .
 Edvard Benes’s London-based government-in-exile was the only one that made unambivalent overtures to Moscow well before 1945 . Thanks to Munich, they had few illusions about the Western powers .
 Benes may not have been as alert as his mentor, the late President Tomas Masaryk, to the risks of a Russian or Soviet embrace, but he was not a fool either . Benes was not fool either. He was not the fool either, but was not as alert
 Benes alone of the eastand south-east European wartime prime-ministers-inexile, was able to bring his government home . Benes reconfigured it with seven Communists and eleven ministers from the other four parties in 1945 .
 They had made a respectable showing at the last pre-war Czechoslovak elections, obtaining 849,000 votes in 1935 .
 The Communists were certainly not beyond using patronage and pressure to secure support . The Communists used patronage to secure their support in the 1960s .
 They had taken the precaution of obtaining the vital ministries and placing their men in crucial positions within the police and elsewhere . And, as elsewhere, they had taken a precaution, obtaining the necessary ministries .
 Czechoslovakia's 'Czech road' still looked quite different from those to the east . In anticipation of the elections of 1948 the homegrown Communists were preparing to come to full power by a ‘Czech Road’
 Stalin left Czechoslovakia alone until the autumn of 1947 . But at least until the fall of 1947 Stalin left the country alone .
 Prague billboards carried portraits of Stalin alongside those of President Benes himself, long before the Communists had even established a government of their own .
 Foreign Minister Jan Masaryk and his colleagues did not hesitate, in the summer of 1947, to decline Marshall Aid at Moscow’s behest . We have seen that Foreign Minister .
 Stalin, in short, had nothing to complain of in Czechoslovak behaviour . Stalin had nothing in short to complain about Czechoslovakia behaviour .
 In February 1948 the Communists engineered a political coup in Prague, taking advantage of the imprudent resignation of non-Communist ministers to seize control of the country . Nevertheless, in February 1948, the Communists took control of Prague . The coup was over an issue of Communist infiltration of
 The Prague coup was of enormous significance, precisely because it came in a more or less democratic country that had seemed so friendly to Moscow . Moscow had seemed friendly to the Czech Republic, but the coup was a coup .
 It galvanized the Western allies, who inferred from it that Communism was on the march westwards . The Western allies inferred from that that . Communism was . on the rise westwards.
 In the West, Prague awoke Socialists to the realities of political life in eastern Europe . Prague woke them to the reality of life in the West . Prague was the birthplace of the Prague Spring .
 Leon Blum published in the French Socialist paper he Populaire a hugely influential article, criticizing western Socialists’ failure to speak out about the fate of their comrades in eastern Europe .
 A significant part of the non-Communist Left in France, Italy and elsewhere would now firmly situate itself in the Western camp, a development that consigned Communist parties in countries beyond Soviet reach to isolation and growing impotence .
 If Stalin engineered the Prague coup without fully anticipating these consequences, it was not just because he had always planned to enforce his writ in a certain way throughout the bloc . It was not the first time Stalin had planned to do so, it's because he wanted to enforce this writ in the
 Czechoslovakia mattered little in the grand scheme of things, not much in the big scheme of history . Nor was it because it mattered much to the Czech Republic in the world's history .
 What happened in Prague was a return by Stalin to the style and strategy of an earlier era . Stalin was moving swiftly from stonewalling and disagreement to open confrontation with her former allies .
 Stalin’s anxiety at his inability to shape European and German affairs as he wished was behind the shift . This shift was driven by his growing irritation with Yugoslavia . Stalin was also annoyed at the situation in Yugoslavia and Germany .
 Yugoslavs had come to power by their own efforts, depending neither on local allies nor foreign help . Alone of the Communist parties in Europe, the Yugoslavs were the only Communist Party in Europe . Yugoslavia was one of the last Communist Party to win power in Yugoslavia .
 British in December 1943 had stopped sending aid to rival Chetnik partisans and had swung their support behind Tito . U.N. spent more money in aid to Yugoslavia than anywhere else in Europe .
 Yugoslav Communist partisans fought the only successful resistance war against the German and Italian occupiers . But for contemporaries what mattered was that the Yugoslav Communist Party had fought a successful war . For contemporaries, this was the only success of the war .
 Tito's Communists had no truck with coalitions of the kind being set up elsewhere in liberated eastern Europe and set about immediately destroying all their opponents . Tito’s Communists set about destroying all opponents. The Communist Party was victorious in 1945 .
 Tito pressed forward with mass arrests, imprisonment and execution of his opponents, together with forced collectivization of the land . Tito was a leader of the Communist Party in Yugoslavia at the time of his death .
 Yugoslavia, it seemed, was on the hard, cutting edge of European Communism . Yugoslavia, the hard-working Yugoslavia, seemed to be on the edge of Soviet Communism .
 Moscow lavished unstintinting praise on Tito and his party, evinced great enthusiasm for their revolutionary achievements . Tito's party was held up as a model for others to emulate .
 Yugoslav leaders in return insisted on respect for the Soviet Union . They saw themselves as introducing the Bolshevik model of revolution and government into the Balkans .
 As Milovan Djilas recalled, ‘all of us were pre-disposed towards in spirit.’ ‘All the players in the team were in spirit,’ he said . ‘We were all in spirit,' he said. ‘and we were
 Stalin's view of Yugoslavia was always a little too enthusiastic, says Stalin . But Yugoslav devotion to Bolshevism was, from Stalin's point of view, always too enthusiastic . Yugoslavia's devotion to the Soviet Union was never quite enough .
 Stalin, as we have already seen, was interested less in revolution than in power . Stalin was more interested in power than in revolution . He was interested in revolution, not revolution, but power .
 Moscow to decide when a moderate approach is called for and when a radical line is adopted . It was for Moscow to determine the strategy of Communist parties, it was said .
 As the origin and fountainhead of world revolution, the Soviet Union was not a model for revolution but the model . The Soviet Union is the origin of the revolution, and the model of revolution was not for revolution .
 Under the appropriate circumstances lesser Communist parties might follow suit, but they were ill advised to trump the Soviet hand . The Soviet hand was ill advised .
 Stalin's frustration with Tito is recorded as early as January 1945 . Stalin did not come to these conclusions all at once, although his frustration with the ‘inexperienced’ Tito was recorded in 1945 . Tito died at the hands of the Red Army in 1945
 Stalin and Tito had disagreements over practical issues of regional policy . Tito was setting up the indigenous Yugoslav revolution as a counter-model to that of the Soviets . Stalin was growing sense in Moscow that Tito got above himself and was getting above himself .
 This idea had a certain appeal beyond Yugoslavia’s borders . It made economic sense for Bulgaria, in the view of Traicho Kostov, one of the Communist leaders in Sofia . It would represent a further break with the small-state nationalism that had so hampered these countries
 Stalin himself was not initially averse to talk of a Balkan federation . Dimitrov, Stalin’s confidante in the Comintern and the first Communist leader of Bulgaria, spoke openly of the prospect in 1948 .
 Plan to embrace all of south-eastern Europe into common federal arrangement under Communist rule was appealing . But there were two problems with the otherwise appealing plan to embrace southern Europe .
 What began as a basis for mutual co-operation among local Communists soon came, in Stalin’s suspicious eyes, to appear more like a bid for regional hegemony by one of them .
 Tito's ambitions would probably have led Stalin to cap Tito’s ambitions . This alone would probably, in time, have led Tito to cap his ambitions . Tito would have been able to take over the throne of Yugoslavia .
 Tito was making problems for Stalin in the West . Tito made problems for the West in the 1930s and '50s .
 Yugoslavs openly backed and encouraged the Greek insurgency, both in 1944 and in 1944 . The Greek civil war flared up again three years later . The Yugoslavs were heavily involved in the conflict in the early 1950s .
 Tito helped the Greek Communists to emulate his own successes . Tito's support was coloured by Yugoslav interests in the disputed ‘Slav’ regions of Greek Macedonia . This was consistent with Tito’s own rather narcissistic activism .
 Greece was in the Western sphere of interest, as Churchill and Truman had made very clear . But Greece was not in the West's sphere of interests, as Truman and Churchill had made clear .
 Stalin had no interest in provoking a quarrel with the West over Greece, a secondary issue for him . Stalin was not keen on provoking a clash with the west over the issue .
 The Greek Communists naively supposed that their uprising would trigger Soviet help, perhaps even even the intervention of Soviet forces, but this was never in the cards . The Greek Communist Party was defeated by the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 Stalin regarded them as undisciplined adventurers pursuing a lost cause, likely to provoke an American intervention, he says . Stalin regarded the U.S. as a risk of provoking an intervention, according to the Russian leader .
 Tito’s provocative encouragement to the Greek insurgents annoyed Stalin, who rightly reasoned that without Yugoslav assistance the Greek imbroglio would long since have resolved itself peacefully 5 —and alienated him still further from his Balkan acolyte . Tito's provocative encouragement angered Stalin .
 Tito was embarrassing Stalin and fuelling Anglo-American irritation in the Balkans . Tito's actions in the south Balkans also fuelled tensions with the U.S.
 Tito's combination of irridentism and partisan revolutionary fervour was a growing embarrassment to Stalin . Tito’s combination of Yugoslav irridents and revolutionary fervor was thus an embarrassment to the Stalinist .
 It was widely believed in Western military circles after May 1945 that if a Third World War were to break out soon, it would be in the Trieste region . According to the Official British History of the Second World War .
 Stalin was not interested in provoking a Third World War, and surely not over an obscure corner of north-east Italy . Stalin did not want to provoke a war, but was not keen on provoking a war .
 Stalin was already privately exasperated over Yugoslavia by the summer of 1947 . Stalin was frustrated with the situation in Yugoslavia by summer 1947 .
 It cannot have pleased him that the railway station in the Bulgarian capital was covered with posters of Tito as well as Stalin and Dimitrov . Even the slavishly loyal Rakosi reportedly sung Tito’s praises to Stalin himself .
 Tito was not just a diplomatic embarrassment for the Soviet Union in its relations with the Western Allies . He was causing trouble within the international Communist movement itself . Tito became a major figure in the Communist Party movement .
 Moscow succeeded in imposing its control over the world Communist movement, except in China . From the late Twenties through to the outbreak of war, Moscow had indeed succeeded in imposed its control on the world .
 In its resistance against the Germans the Soviet Union had been forced'to invoke patriotism, liberty, democracy and many other ‘bourgeois’ goals . The Soviet Union was forced to invoke patriotism and liberty .
 Communism had lost its revolutionary edge and become, deliberately, part of a broad anti-Fascist coalition . Communism had become part of the anti-fascist coalition .
 In the Thirties Moscow had been able to keep tight control of its foreign parties through financial aid, personal intervention and terror . This had been the tactic of the pre-war Popular Fronts .
 In wartime that control had been lost—symbolized by the shutting down of the Comintern in 1943 . The Comintern was shut down in 1943, and the U.S. lost control of the Communist Party .
 Like the Czechs, they pursued what they described as the French or Italian ‘road to Socialism’, working within governing coalitions and treating national and Communist objectives as unproblematically compatible . The Czechs and Italians followed the French and Italian 'road to socialism' in their
 Communist ministers ejected from the governments of France and Italy in May 1947 . Communist ministers were ejected from both governments in 1947 . They were ejected by the French and Italian governments in 1946 .
 Communists in Western Europe were unsure how to respond to the Marshall Plan, only belatedly taking their cue from Stalin’s rejection of it . The Marshall Plan was the first Western European response to the plan .
 In general, communications between Moscow and the Western parties were poor, says Moscow .
 Moscow was establishing commercial treaties with its eastern European neighbours and satellites . It was part of a concerted reaction against the Marshall Plan and the threat it posed to Soviet influence in the region .
 Stalin called a meeting in Szklarska Por^ba, in Poland, for late September 1947 . Stalin called the meeting in Poland to implement the new approach .
 Communist parties of Poland, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, France, Italy and Italy were invited to take part . The Communist parties were invited by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union .
 At Szklarska Por^ba the French and Italian representatives were subjected to patronizing lectures on revolutionary strategy from the Yugoslav delegates . Edvard Kardelj and Milovan Djilas were singled out for praise by Zdanov and Malenkov, the Soviet delegates .
 Peaceful co-existence, of the kind they had been pursuing in domestic politics, was at an end . Peaceful relations between the two nations had been at odds for years . Peace of the two countries had been trying to achieve a peaceful relationship in the past .
 An ‘anti-imperialist democratic camp’ (in Zdanov’s words) was forming and a new line was to be followed . An anti-capitalist democratic camp was forming, and a 'new line' was being followed .
 Moscow expected Communists to pay closer attention to local considerations to Soviet interests . Moscow expected to pay more attention to the Soviet Union .
 The western European Communists certainly suffered as a consequence . They were marginalized in domestic affairs and in the Italian case lost heavily in the April 1948 general elections in which the Vatican and the United States Embassy intervened massively on the antiCommunist side .
 In Zdanov’s ‘two camps’ theory, Communists in the Western camp were now consigned to a secondary, spoiler role . Communists in Western camp now seen as a secondary character in the West .
 Tito-Stalin rift was publicly initiated by Stalin’s condemnation of the Balkan Federation idea in February 1948 and cancellation of trade negotiations . Stalin also condemned the idea of trade talks with the Soviet Union in the same month . Tito and Stalin's rift was publically initiated
 Tito refused to attend the forthcoming second Cominform conference . Both sides claimed the best of intentions . Tito's refusal to attend has been pursued through formal communications and accusations .
 The split was then consummated at that conference, on June 28th 1948, with a formal resolution expelling Yugoslavia from the organization . Yugoslavia was expelled for its failure to acknowledge the leading role of the Red Army and the USSR in the country’s liberation and socialist transformation .
 Officially, Belgrade was charged with conducting a nationalist foreign policy and pursuing incorrect domestic policies . Belgrade is accused of conducting an incorrect foreign policy .
 Yugoslavia represented the international equivalent of a ‘left opposition’ to 6 . The PCI actually increased its vote somewhat at the 1948 elections, but only at the expense of the Socialists, who lost heavily .
 Christian Democrats outscored the combined Left by over four million votes . Christian Democrats won over 4 million votes over the Left . The Christian Democrats were victorious in the election .
 Stalin needed to break Tito in order to make very clear to Tito’s fellow Communists that Moscow would brook no dissent . Tito was the leader of Yugoslavia in the 1950s and '60s .
 Tito would have been hard put to survive the Soviet economic boycott . Tito and his country were more vulnerable than they seemed at the time . Without growing Western backing Tito was more vulnerable .
 Yugoslavs paid a high rhetorical price for their opinionated actions . The Yugoslavs certainly paid a large rhetorical price . Yugoslavia's actions were seen as the result of an opinionated act .
 In the course of the next two years Cominform attacks were steadily ratcheted up . In the months following the attacks, the attacks on the network were steadily increasing .
 The attacks on Tito and his followers coincided with the full flowering of the Stalinist personality cult . Tito's followers were purges and show trials of the coming years . It is significant that the attacks coincided with Stalinist cult and purges .
 Stalin feared Tito's corrosive effect on the fealty and obedience of other Communist regimes and parties . Stalin truly did see in Tito a threat and challenge, and feared his corrosive influence . Tito was a 'threat and a challenge' to the Communist Party .
 Stalin went to such trouble to assert and re-assert authority in eastern Europe, it was in large measure because he was losing the initiative in Germany, he says . Stalin was trying to assert his authority in Eastern Europe .
 On June 1st 1948 the Western Allies, meeting in London, announced plans to establish a separate West German state . West Germany became West Germany in 1948 .
 The old Reichsmark was withdrawn, with every German resident entitled to exchange just forty of them for the new marks at a 1:1 ratio, thereafter at a ratio of 10:1 . Every German resident was entitled to swap 40 of the old marks for 40 new marks .
 The following day the Western military government in Berlin blocked Soviet efforts to extend the new Eastern zone currency to West Berlin . West Berlin was under four-power rule and had not hitherto been treated as part of Soviet-occupied eastern Germany .
 The first transport plane landed at Tempelhof airfield in Berlin on June 26th . The Soviet troops tightened control over surface connections into the city .
 Western allies shipped 2. million tons of food on 277,500 flights over 11 months . 73 Allied airmen were killed in that period, including 73 airmen .
 Stalin’s purpose in blockading Berlin was to force the West to choose between quitting the city (taking advantage of the absence in the Potsdam protocols of any written guarantee of Allied surface access to it), or else abandoning their plans for a separate West German state .
 Berlin was always a negotiating chip for Stalin, but in the end he secured neither objective . This was what Stalin really wanted, he wanted to use Berlin as a bargaining chip . Stalin wanted Berlin, but he got neither .
 Soviet blockade only made them more determined to move ahead with plans for West Germany . It made division of the country more acceptable to Germans themselves, as well as the Soviet blockade .
 On January 31st 1949 he publicly proposed lifting the blockade in exchange for a postponement of plans for a West German state .
 The Western allies had no intention of making any such concession, but it was agreed to convene a meeting to discuss the matter . The Soviet Union ended the blockade in exchange for nothing more than a conference of Foreign Ministers scheduled for May 23rd .
 The conference duly took place and lasted for a month, but predictably found 8 . Had he wished to do so, there was little practical impediment, he could have done so .
 In the spring of 1948 the Soviet Union had three hundred divisions within reach of Berlin . In the Spring of 1948, three hundred Soviet divisions were within reach . The Soviet Union was able to reach Berlin within hours .
 The United States had only 60,000 soldiers in all of Europe, fewer than 7,000 of them in Berlin . The U.S. had only 6,500 soldiers in Europe, less than 6,000 in Germany .
 The West German parliamentary council in Bonn formally passed into effect the ‘Basic Law’ establishing a West German government . Stalin responded by announcing plans for a complementary East German state, formally created on October 7th .
 By the time the conference broke up, on June 20th, the military government in West Germany had been replaced by High Commissioners from the US, Britain and France .
 The Federal Republic of Germany had come into being . The Allies reserved certain powers of intervention and even the right to resume direct rule if they judged it necessary .
 In the first place, it led directly to the creation of two German states, an outcome none of the Allies had sought four years earlier . In the second place, the outcome was that of two states .
 For the Western powers this had become an attractive and attainable objective . For all the lip service paid to the desirability of German unification, no one would be in any hurry to see it happen .
 Stalin could not compete with the Allies for the allegiance of the Germans nor force them to abandon their plans, he says . He could not force the Germans to abandon plans, so a separate East German Communist state was the least bad outcome . Stalin's state of East German Communism was not the
 Berlin crisis committed the United States for the first time to a significant military presence in Europe for the indefinite future . U.S. has committed the U.K. to a major military presence .
 Ernest Bevin, the British Foreign Minister, successfully urged the Americans to lead the airlift to Berlin . Bevin had been assured by Marshall and General Clay that the risk was worth taking. This was the achievement of Bevin .
 From July 18th to September 10th 1948 France was in the midst of a political crisis with no clear governing majority in the Assemblee Nationale . The French were all the less involved in the Berlin crisis .
 Berlin crisis led directly to a reappraisal of Western military calculations . The Berlin crisis also led to a re-evaluation of the West's military strategy . The U.S. has been in the grip of the Berlin crisis in the past .
 If the West was going to protect its German clients from Soviet aggression then it would need to give itself the means to do so . The West needed to give it the means of protecting its own clients from Russian aggression, he says .
 The Americans had stationed strategic bombers in Britain at the start of the Berlin crisis . These were equipped to carry atomic bombs, of which the U.S. had 56 at the time .
 Washington had no established policy on the use of atomic bombs . In the event of a Soviet advance, the U.S. strategy in Europe still presumed a retreat from the continent .
 In its aftermath Europe entered a period of heightened insecurity, with much talk of war . In the aftermath of the war in Iraq, Europe has been at risk of war with the threat of another war .
 The European allies signed the Brussels Pact, on March 17th 1948 . It was in this atmosphere that the United States Congress passed the Marshall Plan .
 The Brussels Pact, however, was a conventional 50-year Treaty binding Britain, France and the Benelux countries to ‘collaborate in measures of mutual assistance in the event of a renewal of German aggression’ in the 1950s .
 In a speech to Parliament on January 22nd 1948, Bevin committed Britain to engagement with her continental neighbours in a common defense strategy, a ‘Western European Union’ Bevin said that British security needs were no longer separable from those of the continent .
 This western European Union was officially inaugurated with the Brussels Pact . Such an arrangement would be incomplete unless extended to the concept of North Atlantic security as a whole . Stalin was just then applying considerable pressure on Norway to get it to sign a ‘nonaggression’ pact with the
 At Bevin’s urging, then, secret discussions took place in Washington between British, United States and Canadian representatives to draft a treaty for Atlantic defense .
 On July 6th 1948, ten days after the start of the Berlin airlift, these talks were opened to other members of the Brussels Pact . The French were not well pleased to discover that once again the ‘Anglo-Americans’ had been arranging the world behind their back
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation was agreed and signed by the US, Canada, and ten European states . By April of the following year the North Atlantic treaty Organisation had been agreed by the U.S., Canada, Canada and ten other states .
 As late as 1947 few would have predicted that the U.S. would commit itself to a European military alliance .
 The Treaty secured Congressional approval, after three months of discussion, because it was represented as an Atlantic defense pact, rather than a Euro-American alliance . Many in the United States Congress were notably reluctant to approve Article V of the Treaty .
 The United States Chiefs of Staff in 1949 calculated that it would be 1957 at the earliest before an effective defense on the Rhine could be mounted . The U.S. chiefs of staff in 1949 said it would not be until 1957 that effective defense would be mounted until 1957 .
 It would serve as a reinsurance policy against German revanchism . And perhaps more important, it would also serve as an insurance policy against Germany's economic woes .
 West German state was only because of the promise of NATO protection . French government only gave approval for state after World War One was still firmly in mind .
 The French welcomed NATO as a guarantee against a revived Germany that they had been unable to obtain by diplomatic means in the previous three years . The French thus welcome NATO as the guarantee against Germany .
 The Dutch and Belgians also saw in NATO an impediment to future German revanchism . The Dutch, Belgians and the Dutch saw NATO as a potential obstacle to future re-nationalism .
 The Italians were included to help shore up Alcide De Gasperi’s domestic support against Communist critics . The Italians are included in the list to shore up his domestic support .
 The British regarded the NATO Treaty as a signal achievement in their struggle to keep the United States engaged in Europe’s defense .
 Truman Administration sold the agreement to Congress and the American people as a barrier to Soviet aggression in the North Atlantic . Truman administration sold the deal to Congress as a security barrier .
 An integrated Allied command in peacetime, after all, was an unheard of departure from practice . It was the first time an Allied command has been integrated in the peacetime .
 In the spring of 1950 Washington was still worrying about how to explain to the French and other Europeans that the only realistic hope for West European defense was to rearm Germany . The subject made everyone uneasy and was thought likely to provoke an unpredictable response from Stalin .
 The appeal of neutrality, as an alternative to defenseless confrontation, is growing in Germany and France alike . The appeal for neutrality is growing, as well as the appeal of neutral neutrality in Germany .
 If the Korean War had not broken out just at this moment (a reasonable counter-factual) the contours of recent European history might look very different indeed .
 Stalin's support for Kim II Sung’s invasion of South Korea on June 25th 1950 was his most serious miscalculation of all . Stalin supported the invasion of the Korean peninsula in 1950 .
 The Americans and West Europeans immediately drew the conclusion that Korea was a diversion or prelude, and that Germany would be next to fall . Walter Ulbricht’s imprudent boast that the Federal Republic would be in the spotlight was encouraged by the boast .
 The budget increases requested in National Security Council paper #68 would almost certainly not have been approved but for the Korean attack . The Soviet Union had successfully tested an atomic bomb just eight months earlier, leading American military experts to exaggerate Soviet preparedness for war .
 The risk of a European war was greatly exaggerated, but not completely absent . The risk was exaggerated by the risk of European war in the 1980s, but it was greatly absent .
 Stalin was contemplating a possible assault on Yugoslavia, not West Germany, but abandoned the idea in the face of Western rearmament . Stalin was considering a possible attack on Yugoslavia but abandoned it in face of rearmaments .
 Just as the West misread the Soviet purpose in Korea, so did Stalin . Stalin assumed that the U.S. had aggressive designs on his sphere of control in eastern Europe .
 None of these assumptions and miscalculations was clear at the time, and politicians and generals proceeded as best they could on the basis of limited information and past precedent . But none of this was clear when it happened .
 The United States defense budget rose from $15. billion in August 1950 to $70 billion by December of the following year . President Truman’s declaration of a National Emergency led to the increase in defense spending .
 By 1952-53 defense expenditure consumed 17. percent of the United States GNP, compared with just 4. percent in 1949 . Defense spending consumed 17 percent of U.S. GNP .
 In every NATO member state, defense spending increased to a post-war peak in the years 1951-53 . NATO member states increased their defense spending in the 1950-53 years .
 The economic impact of this sudden leap in military investment was equally unprecedented . The military investment is equally unprecedented, says President Obama .
 Germany especially was flooded with orders for machinery, tools, vehicles and other products that the Federal Republic was uniquely well-placed to supply . West Germans were forbidden to manufacture arms and could thus concentrate on everything else else .
 West German steel output alone, 2. million tonnes in 1946 and 9 million tonnes, grew to nearly 15 million tonnes by 1953 . West Germany steel output in 1946 grew to 2 million tonnes per year .
 The dollar deficit with Europe and the rest of the world fell by 65 percent in the course of a single year . The U.S. spent huge sums overseas on arms, equipment stockpiles, military emplacements and troops .
 The cost of living in West Europe went up as government spending fuelled inflation . In France consumer prices rose 40 percent in the two years following the outbreak of war in Korea .
 The 1951 United States Mutual Security Act closed out the Marshall Plan and transformed it into a programme of military assistance . The West Europeans were clearly in no condition to sustain for very long what amounted to a war economy .
 By the end of 1951 the United States was transferring nearly $5 billion of military support to Western Europe . The U.S. transferred nearly $4 billion in support to the region .
 NATO thus became a major military commitment, drawing on the seemingly limitless resources of the United States economy and committing the Americans and their allies to an unprecedented peacetime build up of men and materiel . From a psychological boost to European confidence, NATO now becomes a major commitment . NATO became a
 General Eisenhower returned to Europe as Supreme Allied Commander . Allied military headquarters and administrative facilities were established in Belgium and France .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation was now, unambiguously, an alliance . The North American Treaty Organisation had now been an alliance.
 Its primary task was what military planners called the ‘forward defense’ of Europe: confrontation with the Red Army in the middle of Germany .
 NATO agreed at NATO Council meeting in Lisbon in February 1952 that the alliance would need to raise at least ninety-six new divisions within two years . To perform this role, it was agreed at the NATO Council in Lisbon that the NATO would need at least 90% of its strength .
 Dean Acheson first raised the issue formally at a Foreign Ministers’ meeting in Sep152 THE COMING OF THE COLD WAR tember 1950 . President Truman himself was initially reluctant to discuss the issue .
 No-one wanted to put weapons in the hands of Germans just five years after the liberation of Europe . But there was something perverse about spending billions of dollars to defend the West Germans from Russian attack without asking them to make a contribution of their own .
 The risk of alienating German sympathies and encouraging neutralist sentiments could not be ignored . And if Germany was to become, as some anticipated, a sort of buffer zone and future battlefield, then the risk was not ignored . The risk was to be seen as a risk to alienate
 After June 1950 Soviet sensibilities were no longer a prime consideration . The Soviet Union was no longer interested in Soviet sensibilities .
 The British saw no option but to find some device for arming Germany while keeping it firmly under Allied control . The British, however reluctantly, saw no choice but to arm Germany .
 It was the French who had always been most firmly opposed to putting weapons in German hands . France had certainly not joined NATO just to see it become an umbrella for German remilitarisation .
 France managed to block and postpone the rearmament of Germany until 1954 . France also managed to postpone and postpone rearmarmament until 1954.
 Long before then French policy had been undergoing a signal transformation, allowing Paris to accept with some equanimity a limited restoration of Germany .
 France had embarked upon a novel vocation as the initiator of a new Europe . Unhappy and frustrated at being reduced to the least of the great powers, France embarked on a novel .
 The nineteenth century had seen a variety of more or less unsuccessful customs unions in central and western Europe . Even before World War One there had been occasional idealistic talk, drawing on the idea that Europe's future lay in a coming together of its disparate parts .
 In 1924 the French economist Charles Gide joined other signatories across Europe in launching an International Committee for a European Customs Union . Gide launched the committee in 1924 . The committee was launched by Gide in Paris, France, Belgium and France .
 A junior minister in the British Foreign Office would profess himself ‘astonished’ at the extent of continental interest in the ‘panEuropean’ idea in the 1990s . Three years later a junior . minister in . the British foreign office would profess . himself‘aston
 The Great War brought French and Germans to a better appreciation of their mutual dependence . More prosaically, the Great War had brought France and Germans, in a curious way, to a greater appreciation .
 An international Steel Pact was signed in September 1926 by France, Germany, Luxembourg, Belgium and the region of the Saar . It was designed to regulate steel production and prevent excess capacity .
 Like other ambitious projects of the 1920s, the Steel Pact barely survived the 1929 crisis and ensuing depression . The Steel Pact was one of the most ambitious projects in the world's history .
 Many on both sides saw in this latest Franco-German ‘collaboration’ the germ of a new ‘European’ economic order . The situation was equally obvious to Germans, and when the Nazis occupied France in 1940 and reached agreement with Petain on a system of
 Pierre Pucheu envisaged a post-war European order where customs barriers would be eliminated and a single European economy would encompass the whole continent, with a single currency . The Free French executed him after he was executed by the Vichy government .
 Pucheu's vision represented a sort of updating of Napoleon’s Continental System under Hitlerian auspices . It appealed to a younger generation of continental bureaucrats who had experienced the frustrations of economic policy making in the 1930s .
 The projects were presented in terms of a shared, pan-European interest, rather than self-interested projections of separate national agendas . What made such projects especially seductive was that they were presented as a shared interest, not self-interest .
 They were ‘European’ rather than German or French, and were admired during the war by those who wanted desperately to believe that some good might come out of the Nazi occupation . They were 'European' rather than 'German or French', and were much admired .
 The Nazis themselves had apparently unified much of Europe in a technical sense . The Nazis had removed frontiers, expropriated property, integrating transportation networks and so forth .
 The attraction of a Europe liberated from its past and its mutual antagonisms was not lost abroad, either . And the attraction of the continent's future was also not lost overseas, too .
 In public, after 1945, few were willing to say a good word about the wartime New Order . Kennan underestimated the inefficiency and bad faith Kennan had underestimated .
 There were enthusiasts for the ‘Movement for European Unity 5 formed in January 1947 at Churchill’s instigation . And there were enthusiasts .
 Winston Churchill was an early advocate of a European assembly of some kind . Winston Churchill had been an early and influential advocate of the European assembly . Churchill was a strong advocate of an assembly of a kind .
 I trust that the European family may act unitedly as one, under a Council of Europe . Hard as it is to say now, it is not clear what will happen in the future .
 Post-war political circumstances seemed unpropitious for such ideals . But the post-war politics . It is not the first time the country has had such ideals expressed .
 The best that might be expected was the creation of a sort of forum for European conversation, which is what a May 1948 Congress of the European Unity Movement in The Hague proposed . The best thing that might have been expected might be the creation .
 The Council of Europe 5 was inaugurated in Strasbourg in May 1949 and held its first meeting there in August of that year . Delegates from Britain, Ireland, France, Italy, Sweden, Denmark and Norway took part .
 The Council had no power and no authority; no legal, legislative or executive status . It had no legal or legislative status . The Council has no power or authority .
 In November 1950 it issued a ‘European Convention on Human Rights’ that would assume greater significance . Its most important asset was the mere fact of its existence .
 Churchill himself recognized, in a speech given in Zurich on September 19th 1946, ‘The first step in the re-creation of the European family must be a partnership between France and Germany. As Churchill himself had recognized,
 French, as we have seen, were in no mood to envisage such a partnership . But in those first post-war years the French were no longer in the mood .
 Their small neighbours to the north were moving rather faster, however, however . The small neighbours were moving very quickly, however.
 Even before the war ended the exiled governments of Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands signed the ‘Benelux Agreement 5 , eliminating tariff barriers and looking forward to the eventual free movement of labour, capital and services between countries .
 The Benelux Customs Union came into effect on January 1st 1948 . There followed desultory conversations between France and Italy over projects to extend such cooperation .
 Half-formed projects for a ‘Little Europe 5’ all came to grief on the shoals of the German problem .
 Marshall Plan negotiators in Paris in 1947 concluded that the German economy should be integrated into the economy of Europe in such a way as to contribute to a raising of the general standard of life . Everyone agreed, as the Marshall Plan .
 Western Germany, even after it became a state in 1949, had no organic links to the rest of the continent . The Marshall Plan and Allied occupation of Western Germany were both temporary. Western Germany had no links to Europe except via the Marshall Plan .
 Most Western Europeans still thought of Germany as a threat, not a partner . Most Western European thought of it as a potential threat to the West .
 Only 29 percent of Dutch population had a 'friendly' view of Germans in 1947 . For the Netherlands it was important that an economically revived Germany be politically and militarily weak .
 Neither country could envisage an accommodation with Germany unless it was balanced by the reassuring involvement of Great Britain . Neither country would envisage a compromise with Germany if it were balanced by Britain .
 With the Prague coup, the agreement on a West German state, the Berlin blockade and the plans for NATO became clear to French statesmen like Georges Bidault and Robert Schuman that France must re-think its approach to Germany . The Prague coup was the reason for France to re
 Only the tiny Saarland had been temporarily separated from the main body of Germany . The coal of the Saar region was not suitable for coking . There was now to be a West German political entity including the Ruhr and Rhineland .
 Dean Acheson appealed to Schuman for France to take the initiative in incorporating the new West German state into European affairs . On October 30th 1949, 1949, Schuman was in France with France .
 The French were well aware of the need to do something — as Jean Monnet would later remind Georges Bidault, the U.S. would surely encourage a newly-independent West Germany to increase its steel production .
 Monnet’s own plan—and with it the revival of France—depended upon a successful resolution of this dilemma . As we saw in Chapter Three, Monnet's own plan . Monnet: France's revival of French was dependent upon the resolution of the dilemma .
 This constituted a genuine diplomatic revolution, albeit one that had been five years in the making . It was five years before a diplomatic revolution was made in the UK .
 Schuman’s proposal represented a practical solution to the problem that had vexed France since 1945 . More than a coal and steel cartel, but far, far less than a blueprint for European integration, Schuman said .
 The High Authority would have the power to encourage competition, set pricing policy, direct investment and buy and sell on behalf of participating countries .
 It would take control of the Ruhr and other vital German resources out of purely German hands . But above all it would take over the German economy .
 Robert Schuman announced his Plan on May 9th 1950, 1950, informing Dean Acheson the day before . Schuman's Plan was announced by Schuman in 1950 .
 For the first time the Federal Republic of Germany was entering an international organization on equal terms with other independent states . Adenauer wished for Germany to be bound to the Western alliance, as he wished, as Adenauer wanted .
 Italy and the Benelux countries followed suit, though the Dutch were initially reluctant to commit themselves without the British . The Dutch were at first reluctant to . commit themselves .
 The British declined Schuman’s invitation and without Britain there was no question of the Scandinavians signing on . But the British did not accept Schuman's invitation to join the project .
 It is perhaps worth pausing to remark on a feature of the Community which did not escape notice at the time . It was perhaps worth . pausing . remarking on the fact that the Community did not . escape notice of the feature .
 All six foreign ministers who signed the Treaty in 1951 were members of their respective Christian Democratic parties . The Treaty was signed in 1951 .
 De Gasperi from the Trentino, in north-east Italy; Adenauer from the Rhineland; Schuman from Lorraine . Adenauer, Adenauer and Schuman also from Germany and France .
 When De Gasperi was born, the Trentino was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire . He studied in Vienna, studying in Vienna .
 Schuman grew up in a Lorraine that had been incorporated into the German Empire . Schuman was born in Lorraine, which was incorporated into Germany .
 As a young man, like Adenauer, he joined Catholic associations . Adenauer had belonged to the same ones that the Rhinelander had . ten years earlier .
 When they met, the three men conversed in German, their common language . The three men spoke in German when they met .
 A trans-national ‘High Authority’ exercising executive power for the common good, writes David Frum . Frum writes .
 In the Protestant lands of Scandinavia and Britain (or to the Protestant perspective of a North German like Schumacher), the European Coal and Steel Community carried a certain whiff of authoritarian incense . The European Coal & Steel Community was founded in 1945 .
 Tage Erlander, the Swedish Social Democratic Prime Minister from 1948-68, ascribed his own ambivalence to the overwhelming Catholic majority in the new Community .
 At the time this was not an extreme point of view, nor was it uncommon . At the same time, it was not the most extreme view of the U.S. government .
 Monnet's High Authority never did exercise the kind of power Monnet intended . It was not really even a particularly effective economic lever, since the High Authority did not exercise its power . Monnet: "It was not even even a really effective economic leverage"
 Europe is moving forward with a renewed self-confidence, says David Frum . Frum says it provided the psychological space for Europe to move forward with self-confident .
 It was not a project for European integration, Monnet’s flights of fantasy notwithstanding notwithstanding, but rather the lowest common denominator of West European mutual interest at the time of its signing . The signing of the treaty was not intended for integration, but for the West .
 It was a political vehicle in economic disguise, a device for overcoming Franco-German hostility . It was an economic vehicle in disguise, says the historian . "It was a vehicle in political disguise," he says .
 The problems that the European Coal and Steel Community was designed to address began to resolve themselves . Meanwhile, the problems that were designed to be solved began to be resolved .
 In the last quarter of 1949 the Federal Republic of Germany regained the industrial output levels of 1936 . By the end of 1950 it had surpassed them by one-third .
 Germany was consuming its own raw materials to fuel local industry in 1950 . A year later, the trade balance was negative, as Germany consumed more raw materials . Germany's trade balance in 1950 was negative .
 By 1951 the balance was once again positive and would stay so for many years to come, thanks to the German export of manufactured goods . By 1951, the balance had returned to a positive trend .
 By the end of 1951 German exports had grown to over six times the level of 1948 . By the late Fifties western Europe was suffering the effects of a glut of coal .
 It was Korea, not Schuman, that sent the West German industrial machine into high gear . How much of this can be attributed to the ECSC is a mat158 THE COMING OF THE COLD WAR .
 The British had nothing against a European customs union . But they were quite in favour of one, at least for other Europeans . The British were against a customs union, but they were in favour .
 What made them uncomfortable was the idea of a supernational executive implied in the institution of a High Authority, even if it only directed the production and pricing of two commodities, they said . The High Authority is meant to be a high authority, not a national executive .
 The British saw the ECSC as the thin edge of a continental wedge in British affairs . But the implications were the more dangerous for being unclear . The ECSC's implications for the UK were more dangerous than being unclear, says the historian .
 The British economy appeared in far healthier condition than that of its continental neighbours . Britain's economy appeared to be healthier than any of its European neighbours .
 In 1947 British exports represented, by value, the sum of the exports of France, Italy, Germany, western Germany, the Benelux countries, Norway and Denmark combined .
 Britain’s trade with Europe in 1950 was much less than it had been in 1913 . Britain had extensive commerce with the whole world .
 British officials had more to lose than to gain by participating in binding economic arrangements with countries whose prospects looked very uncertain, they say . In the eyes of British officials, the country had more than to lose, they argue .
 A year before Schuman’s proposal, the UK position, expressed in private by senior civil servants, was that ‘there is no attraction for us in long-term economic cooperation with Europe.’
 In 1950 the British Commonwealth covered large tracts of Africa, South Asia, Australasia and the Americas, much of it still in British hands . Much of it was still in Britain hands .
 The Commonwealth was a major source of raw materials and food, and the Commonwealth was integral to British national identity, or so it seemed at the time . Now, the Commonwealth has been replaced by the Commonwealth .
 To most policymakers it was obviously imprudent—as well as practically impossible—to make Britain part of any continental European system that would cut the country off from this other dimension of its existence .
 Britain, then, was part of Europe but also part of a world-wide Anglophone imperial community . Britain was part-of Europe but part of the world's imperial community.
 The British people tended to be ambivalent about America—perceiving it from afar as a ‘paradise of consumer splendours’ in contrast to their own constricted lives, but resenting it for just that reason .
 Their governments, however, continued to profess faith in what would later be called the ‘special relationship’ between the two countries .
 Britain was one of the three Great Powers at Yalta and Potsdam, and as the third nuclear Power following the successful test of a British bomb in 1952 . In some degree this derived from Britain’s presence at the wartime ‘top table'
 It drew, too, on the close collaboration between the two countries during the war itself .
 It rested, a little, on the peculiarly English sense of superiority towards the country that had displaced them at the imperial apex . And it rested a little . It rested on a peculiarly British sense of . superiority towards . the country .
 The Americans were frustrated by the UK’s reluctance to merge its fate with Europe . They were irritated by the British insistence upon preserving its imperial standing .
 There was more to London’s stance in 1950 than imperial self-delusion or bloody-mindedness . However, there was more than self-defence in 1950, says historian .
 In France the war had revealed everything that was wrong with the nation’s political culture . In Britain, it had seemed to confirm everything right and good about national institutions and habits .
 World War Two, for most Britons, had been fought between Germany and Great Britain . The British had emerged triumphant and vindicated and had emerged victorious .
 This sense of quiet pride at the country’s capacity to suffer, endure and win through had marked Britain off from the continent . The nation was proud of its ability to suffer and endure through adversity .
 In 1945 Labour won a clear parliamentary majority for the first time in its history . Labour pressed through a broad range of nationalizations and social reforms culminating in the constitution of the world’s first universal welfare state .
 The government’s reforms were mostly popular—in spite of prompting remarkably little change in the deepest habits and affinities of the nation . The reforms are mostly popular, but they have not changed the deep habits of the country .
 Domestic politics in post-war Britain was taken up with matters of social justice and the institutional reforms it required . Domestic politics was dominated by matters of justice and social justice .
 This was to a considerable degree the result of a failure on the part of previous governments to address social inequalities . The belated re-centering of debate around urgently needed public expenditure seemed to many to constitute a well-earned reward for the country’s recent sacrifices .
 Most British voters (and many British Members of Parliament) had no idea how poor their country was and what it had cost them to win their epic struggle with Germany . But it also meant that most British voters had absolutely no idea of how poor they were .
 World War Two to Britain was twice that of World War One . Britain lost one quarter of its national wealth during the war . The cost of the war was double that of the previous war .
 Britain struggled to pay off huge dollar-denominated debts from a drastically reduced income . This accounts for Britain’s recurrent post-war currency crises .
 These problems would have been bad enough for any medium-sized European country in Britain’s straitened post-war circumstances . They were hugely exacerbated in this case by the global scale of British imperial responsibilities .
 The cost to Britain of remaining a Great Power had greatly increased since 1939 . The cost of Britain remaining in the Great Power has increased since then .
 The country’s expenditure on all military and diplomatic activity in the years 1934-38 was £6 million per annum . The country spent £6million per year .
 In 1947, on military expenditure alone, the government budgeted £209 million . In 1947 the government spent £209million on military spending .
 Hong Kong, Malaya, the Persian Gulf and North Africa, Trieste and Austria . Trieste, Austria, West Germany and the United Kingdom itself .
 Britain had a large and expensive diplomatic, consular and intelligence establishment spread worldwide . The colonial civil service was also a significant burden .
 The COMING OF THE COLD WAR READING, never imposed during the war, was introduced in 1946 and not abandoned until July 1948 . Bread ra162 bread ra162 was introduced during WWII .
 The government celebrated a ‘bonfire of controls’ on November 5th 1949; but many of those same controls had to be re-imposed with the belt-tightening of the Korean War . Basic food rationing in Britain only ended in 1954—long after the rest of
 The British proved remarkably tolerant of their deprivations—in part because of a belief that these were shared fairly across the community . The accumulated frustration with rations and regulations, and a certain air of puritanical paternalism, contributed to Conservative electoral recovery in the 1950s .
 David Lodge’s recollections of his youth were ‘cautious, unassertive, grateful for small mercies and modest in our ambition,’ in marked contrast to the generation that would succeed them . The sense that there was no choice and that the government knew
 Britain remained a deferential, class-divided society—and the welfare state, as we have seen, benefited the ‘middling sort’ above all .
 The share of the national wealth held by the richest 1 percent of the population fell from 56 percent in 1938 to 43 percent in 1954 . The effective disappearance of unemployment pointed an optimistic contrast with the grim pre-war decade .
 Between 1946 and 1948 150,000 Britons migrated to Canada, Australia and New Zealand . In 1951 it seemed as though the worst of the austerity years were over and the country offered itself the optimistic spectacle of a ‘Festival of Britain’ .
 The title itself points to something distinctive about the country . No documentary film-maker in France or Italy or Germany would have thought to use it .
 Film is a celebration of Englishness, strongly coloured by shared recollections of suffering and glory in the recent war . Film is suffused with an only partly self-conscious pride in the peculiarities of the place .
 There is no reference whatsoever to England’s neighbours or allies . And there is no mention whatsoever to any of the country's neighbours and allies . No reference was made to the UK's neighbours or its allies .
 The British rejected Robert Schuman’s invitation in 1950 because of what they took to be the disutility of joining a European economic project, and because of their longstanding discomfort with continental entanglements .
 The British decision to stand aside from the ECSC was above all an instinctive, psychological and even emotional one . It was a product of the utter peculiarity of recent British experience, writes Andrew Keen .
 In the absence of Britain power within the ‘little Europe’ of the West fell by default to France . France is the most powerful country in the West .
 The French did what the British might have done in other circumstances and made ‘Europe’ in their own image, eventually casting its institutions and policies in a mould familiar from French precedent . The French duly did .
 At the time it was the continental Europeans, not the British, who expressed regret at the course of events . The continental Europeans expressed regret, not British, at the time of the invasion .
 Monnet, too, would later look back and wonder how different things might have been . Britain chose to take the initiative at a moment when her authority was still unrivalled . Monnet would look back at the moment she was in charge .
 In post-war Europe 10 years was a very long time and by then the die was cast . But in post-WWII Europe ten years was very long . It was a long time before the end of the war was over .
 From the start there were people who realized they lacked the proper temperament for the idyll and wished to leave the country . The country's idyll is now the most popular tourist destination in the world .
 By definition an idyll is one world for all, the people who wished to emigrate were implicitly denying its validity . But since by definition, the idyll was one world to all, it was implicitly denying it validity .
 Evgenia Ginsburg: ‘Stalinism means the killing of the inner man.’ Ginsburg says . Ginsburg's book, Journey into the Whirlwind, is published in New York, New York .
 No matter what the sophists say, no matter what lies the communist intellectuals tell, that’s what it all comes down to. That's what it's all down to . And it's not just a lie, it's a lie .
 Moliere, Monsieur de Pourceaugnac, was the French leader of the Soviet Union . Moliere was born in France and died in 1945 .
 The USSR had out-produced and out-fought the Nazi colossus, ripping the heart from the magnificent German military machine . But after a halting start, the USSR was out-produced and fought the Nazis .
 Stalin's policies vindicated, his pre-war crimes largely forgotten . Stalin’s policies were vindicated . His pre-WWII crimes were largely forgotten in the Soviet Union . He was a Soviet dictator .
 Of all the victors in World War Two, the USSR suffered permanent economic damage . The USSR was the only one to suffer permanent economic harm from the war . The Soviet Union suffered permanent damage to its economy .
 The measurable losses in people and resources were immense, and would be felt for decades to come, the author says . The measurable loses in people, resources would be immense, he says .
 Roads, bridges, railways had been deliberately destroyed across much of Byelorussia, Ukraine and western Russia . Roads and bridges were deliberately destroyed in Ukraine and Russia .
 The grain harvest in the early fifties was smaller than that of 1929, which in turn had been far less than the last peacetime harvest under the czars . In turn, the harvest was less than that in the peacetime .
 The war had been fought across some of the Soviet Union’s best arable land . Hundreds of thousands of horses, cows, pigs and other animals had been killed in the conflict .
 Ukraine had never recovered from the deliberate, punitive famine of the thirties . It was unplanned, unplanned famine in 1946-47 . Ukraine was never recovered .
 The war years had also seen what would prove an enduring semimilitarization of Soviet life . But the war years also saw what would proved to be a semimiliated state of Soviet Russia .
 Centralised direction and a relentless focus on the production of tanks, guns and planes had turned the wartime USSR into a surprisingly effective war machine . The USSR was careless of human life and welfare but otherwise well adapted to fighting a total war .
 Longstanding Leninist metaphors of class struggle and confrontation could now be linked with proud memories of a real war . Leninists have long been associated with class struggle, confrontation .
 The war of 1941-45 in Russia was a great patriotic war . Thanks to the Nazis’ treatment of the lands and people they overran, the war was a very patriotic war.
 Stalin's post-war foray into central Europe served Stalin’s purposes in his post-WWII foray . The Soviet Union's roots in Russia's imperial past served Stalin's purposes, he says . And that same emphasis upon the Soviet Union”s roots served Stalin .
 He was also interested in the economic benefits to be had from his victories in the West . But he also wanted to see the benefits of his victory in the region .
 After 1945, the Soviet Union took over, quite literally, where the Germans had left off, attaching eastern Europe to its own economy as a resource to be exploited at will . What happened after 1945 was that .
 The Soviet Union extracted reparations from Hungary and Romania, as former allies of Hitler . Hungary was one of the last allies of the Soviet Union . Romania was another former ally of the USSR .
 From countries that had not fought against him Stalin was no less demanding, but on ‘fraternal’ rather than punitive terms . Stalin was on 'fraternal terms’ with countries not fighting against him .
 It is estimated that until the late 1950s the Soviet Union exacted from the GDR, Romania and Hungary considerably more than it spent to control them . The Soviet Union spent considerably more to control the countries until the 1950s .
 Bulgaria and especially Poland probably cost Moscow rather more in aid, between 1945 and i960, than they furnished in trade in trade and other deliveries . Bulgaria and Poland were likely to have cost Moscow a lot more than trade .
 Stalin insisted upon reproducing in his territories under his control forms of government and society identical to those of the Soviet Union . Even the czars, even the Soviets, had to reproduce in those territories .
 Stalin set out to re-mould eastern Europe in the Soviet image . Stalin had done in eastern Poland between 1939 and 1941, and in the Baltic states in 1940 and again in 1945 .
 Each country was to undergo economic ‘reforms’ and adopt Five Year Plans to bring its institutions and practices into line with those of the Soviet Union . Each country would undergo economic 'reforms'
 Stalin’s motives for reproducing Soviet society in the satellite states were once again very simple . Stalin's motives for reproduction of Soviet society was once again simple .
 The widespread desire in post-war Eastern Europe for peace, ‘Professor Kenneth Jowett of UC Berkeley. ‘The widespread desire for peace. For peace, there is a widespread desire to peace,’ he says .
 The preference for Communists over Fascists, or for some form of democratic Socialism, could not be counted upon to survive practical experience of Communist rule . Fascists could not have a long-term success over Communists, says historian .
 Even the appeal of Soviet guarantees against German revanchism might wane in time . The appeal of the Soviet guarantee against German revanchism may wane .
 Stalin needed to secure his satellite neighbours’ unswerving allegiance, and he knew only one way to do this was to do it . Stalin needed the satellite neighbour’s unswerve allegiance to him .
 Hungarian Constitution was to take and keep a ‘leading role’, extinguishing or absorbing all other political parties . In the words of the Hungarian Constitution of August 1949, it was to . extinguish or absorb all other parties .
 Some were modern, urban and industrial, with a sizeable working class . Others were rural and impoverished, with some being poor .
 Poland and Hungary had sizeable state sectors, dating from pre-war strategies of protection against German economic penetration . Some, like Poland, Hungary and Hungary, had quite sizeable state sector .
 In some countries, property and business had been in private hands before the war . In others, like Czechoslovakia, property was mostly in private ownership before the conflict .
 Some countries and regions had a thriving commercial sector . Others resembled parts of the Soviet Union itself . Some countries had thriving commercial sectors .
 Most of the region had suffered seriously from the effects of the Depression and the autarkic protectionist policies adopted to combat it . But, as we have seen, during the war certain industrial sectors—in Hungary and Slovakia especially—had actually benefited from German investment .
 The Communist seizures of power were followed by the imposition of economic uniformity across the region .
 Leninist redefinition of 'socialism' as matter of ownership rather than social relations . The state expropriated large-scale firms in service, commerce and industry, where these were not already in public hands .
 State took over, taxed or squeezed out of business all firms employing more than fifty people . Next, the state took over or squeezed firms employing over fifty people. Next, it took over and squeezed out businesses employing over 50 people .
 In Czechoslovakia, by December 1948, there were hardly any private businesses left with more than 20 employees . The Czech Republic was one of the most prosperous countries in the world when it was formed .
 By the same date 83 percent of Hungarian industry was in state hands, 84 percent of Polish industry, 85 percent of Romanian industry and 98 percent of Bulgarian industry . By that same date, state hands were in control of 83 percent .
 One of the means at hand for eliminating the property-owning middle class in eastern Europe was currency reform . Currency reform was one of the ways to eliminate property-owned middle class .
 This was an effective device for destroying the cash savings of peasants and businessmen alike, an updating of older exactions like the forced capital levy . This is an updated version of an old version of forced capital levations like forced capital taxes .
 As in the Soviet Union, so in Soviet-run eastern Europe, the peasantry were doomed . The peasantry was doomed, but as was the peasants in eastern Europe .
 The initial post-war reforms in the countryside had distributed small parcels of land to large numbers of farmers . Initial post-WWII reforms had distributed smaller parcels of farm land to farmers . The initial reforms were distributed small plots of land .
 Communist parties of eastern Europe actively encouraged inefficient land redistribution . Until they were firmly ensconced in power, the Communist parties actively encouraged land redistribution.
 In the early stages of rural collectivization, small peasant landowners were penalized by punitive taxation, differential prices and quotas that favored the new collective and state farms . Their children were denied access to post-primary education .
 Even under such conditions, a surprising number of independent peasants held on, though mostly on economically insignificant ‘microfundia’ of two hectares or less .
 In Bulgaria, in the course of the first two Five-Year Plans beginning in 1949, viable agricultural land had been completely removed from private hands . In Bulgaria in the 1950s and 1960s, viable farmland had been removed completely .
 In the Czech lands, collectivization began quite late (in 1956 most arable land was still privately farmed) 95 percent of agricultural land would be taken over in the next ten years, rather less in backward and inaccessible regions of Slovakia .
 Independent farmers survived only in name in Hungary . But here, as in Hungary and throughout the region, independent farmers survived just in name .
 The measures taken against them and the destruction of markets and distribution networks ensured their impoverishment and ruin . They were destroyed by the destruction and destruction of their markets and networks .
 The irrational, occasionally surreal quality of Soviet economic practice was faithfully reproduced throughout the bloc . The irrational and surreal nature of the Soviet Union's economic policy was faithfully replicated throughout the country .
 In 1951, there were even efforts to send urban clerks and government functionaries out into the fields . In Slovakia, in the course of 1951, in . 1951, government officials were even sent out to work in the field .
 As this faithful echo of Soviet rhetoric from the 1930s suggests, antipathy towards the peasant, and successful implementation of rural collectivization, were one of the chief tests of Stalinist orthodoxy . As this .
 Collectivisation of land and the destruction of small businesses released an abundant supply of men and women for work in mines and factories . The single-minded Communist emphasis upon investment in heavy goods production at the expense of consumer products and services ensured unprecedented increases in output .
 Five Year Plans were everywhere adopted, with wildly ambitious targets . Five years later, the world's most ambitious plans were adopted . It was the first time the country had a successful government .
 In terms of gross production figures the growth rates in this first generation of industrialization were impressive, notably in countries like Bulgaria or Romania which started from virtually nothing .
 The number of people employed in agriculture even in Czechoslovakia dropped by 18 percent between 1948 and 1952 . Czechs are the most urbanized state in the region, with the lowest level of agriculture .
 In the Soviet Zone of Germany raw steel output rose from 120,000 tons in 1946 to over 2 million tons by 1953 . Raw steel output in the Soviet zone of Germany rose to over two million tons in 1953 .
 On an appropriately smaller scale the semi-militarized, monolithic, first-generation industrialization of the interwar Soviet Union was being re-run throughout the Soviet bloc . On a smaller scale it was re-enacting the first-genius industrialization .
 Communists in eastern Europe were reproducing a foreshortened and accelerated version of western Europe’s nineteenth-century industrial revolution . Much as they had set out to do in Russia, the Communists in east Europe were replicating their success in Russia .
 The economic history of eastern Europe after 1945 bears a passing resemblance to the pattern of West European recovery in the same years .
 The Baltic states, fully incorporated into the Soviet Union itself, were even worse off than the rest of eastern Europe . In western Europe, too, investment in productivity and growth was given priority over the provision of consumer goods and services .
 In 1949 kolkhozes in northern Estonia were required to begin grain deliveries even before the harvest had begun, in order to keep in line with Latvia, four hundred kilometers to the south . In 1949 the kolkhoozes began to begin delivering grain even before they had already
 By 1953 rural conditions in Estonia had deteriorated to the point where cows blown over by the wind were too weak to get back on their feet unaided .
 In Western Europe, certain industrial sectors and regions took off from low starting points . A dramatic transition from countryside to town took place in the course of the 1950s in Italy and France .
 The distinctive feature of the economic history of Communist eastern Europe is that, in addition to coal, steel, factories and apartment blocks, first-generation Soviet industrialization produced grotesque distortions and contradictions, more so than in the USSR itself .
 The rules for inter-state Communist trade were laid down by Comecon . Comecon was established in 1949 .
 Each country was to trade bilaterally with the Soviet Union (another echo of Nazi-era requirements) Each nation was assigned a non-negotiable role in the international Communist economy . Moscow once again substituting for Berlin .
 East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Hungary would supply finished industrial products to the USSR . Poland and Romania were to specialize in producing and exporting food and primary industrial products .
 The imperial power furnishing raw materials and the colonies exporting finished goods . The structure is reminiscent of European overseas colonization .
 The Soviet model of the thirties, improvised to address uniquely Soviet circumstances of vast distance, abundant raw materials and endless, cheap, unskilled labor, made no sense at all for tiny countries like Hungary or Czechoslovakia, lacking raw materials but with a skilled industrial labor force .
 Czech regions of Bohemia and Moravia had a higher per capita output than France . They specialized in leather goods, motor vehicles, high-tech arms manufacture and a broad range of luxury goods .
 Pre-1938 Czechoslovakia was comparable to Belgium and well ahead of Austria and Italy . Measured by industrial skill levels, productivity, productivity and share of foreign markets .
 Yugoslavia, Mongolia, China, North Korea and North Vietnam also became members of the group . In later years Yugoslavia, China and North Korea were also members . North Vietnam and Yugoslavia were members .
 In 1938, per capita car ownership in Czechoslovakia and Austria was at similar levels; by i960 the ratio was 1:3 . In i960, the ratio of car ownership increased to 1:2 .
 Czechs were constrained to direct their exports exclusively to their Soviet masters . Even the products in which the country still had a competitive edge, such as small arms manufacture, no longer afforded Czechs any benefit .
 Following the one-time start-up benefits from unprecedented growth in primary industries . The same was true for every other satellite state, the same as every other .
 By the midfifties, Soviet Eastern Europe was already beginning its steady decline into ‘planned’ obsolescence . By the 1950s, Eastern Europe had already begun its decline into 'planned' obsolescences .
 There are two partial exceptions to this brief account of the economies of the Soviet bloc . The Soviet bloc was one of the largest economies in the world .
 Polish collectivization of land was largely successful in Poland, but failed in the early 1900s . Collectivization was a relatively successful form of industrialization in Poland . Poland was the first country to collectivize its land .
 Stalin seems to have grasped the impracticality of forcing Polish peasants onto collective farms, but this consideration alone would hardly have caused him to hesitate . Stalin's decision to force Polish peasants to collective farms was hardly a surprise .
 In marked contrast to the other subject peoples of eastern Europe, there were a lot of Poles . Poles' capacity and propensity to rebel against Russian servitude was familiar to generations of Russian officers and bureaucrats .
 From the Soviet point of view, Polish opposition was an annoyance . Remnants of the Polish wartime underground carried on a guerilla war against the Communist regime until at least the end of the 1940s .
 Poland is now more ‘Polish’ than at any time in its complicated history, it had Moscow to thank . Moscow to blame for Poland’s growing influence in Russia .
 Inter-state relations, above all in the Soviet bloc, did not hinge on gratitude or its absence . The Soviet Union did not rely on gratitude for its absence, but on its own .
 Poland’s use value to Moscow was above all as a buffer against German or Western aggression . Poland's use value was to Moscow, says President Vladimir Putin .
 It was desirable that Poland become socialist, but it was imperative that it remain stable and reliable . It was also imperative that Poland remain a reliable and stable state .
 Stalin was willing to tolerate a class of independent farmers, however inefficient and ideologically untidy, and a publicly active Catholic Church . In return for Polish domestic calm Stalin made a deal with the Catholic Church, in ways that would have been unimaginable elsewhere .
 Until the Stalin-Tito split, Yugoslavia was the most ‘advanced’ of all the east European states along the path to socialism . Yugoslavia was, as we have seen, the most 'advanced' of all of the east Eastern European states .
 Tito's first Five Year Plan outdid Stalin by aiming at a higher rate of industrial investment than anywhere else in the Soviet bloc . Tito’s first Five Years Plan was aimed at a . higher . rate of investment than any other in the . Soviet bloc, Tito
 Post-war Yugoslavia was well on the way to outdoing Moscow itself in the efficiency and ubiquity of its apparatus of repression . Seven thousand collective farms had been set up before collectivization had even begun in the other satellite states .
 Yugoslavia’s per capita income at the time of the break with Stalin was the lowest in Europe save for neighboring Albania . The land had already been beaten into penury in the course of four years of occupation and civil war . Yugoslavia was already impoverished .
 Theodore Roosevelt: "A short visit here is enough to make one decide that Capitalism is worth fighting for. As for Communism, Communism is not a thing to consider"
 Tito became more radical after split with Stalin in the early months of his presidency . Tito was more radical, more 'Bolshevik' than his Soviet critics .
 Without external help, and faced with the very real prospect of Soviet invasion, he turned to the West for aid . The West turned to Russia for help .
 In September 1949 the United States Export-Import Bank loaned Belgrade $20 million . The bank loaned the money to Belgrade in September 1949 .
 In 1950 the United States Congress offered a further $50 million in aid under the Yugoslav Emergency Relief Act of 1950, and followed this in November 1951 with an accord that allowed Yugoslavia to receive military aid . In November 1951, the Mutual Security Act agreed that Yugoslavia would receive military assistance under the
 By 1953 the Yugoslav national deficit on current account was fully covered by American aid . Over the course of the years 1949-55 Tito’s aid from all Western sources amounted to $1.1 billion .
 Western aid allowed the Yugoslav regime to continue favoring heavy industry and defense, as it had been doing before the 1948 split . Western aid continued to be used in Yugoslavia's heavy industry .
 League of Yugoslav Communists retained all the reins of authoritarian power . The ultra-Bolshevism of the post-war years was abandoned .
 By the spring of 1951 only the postal service, together with rail, air and river transport, was left under federal (i.e. central government) control . The postal service was the last service to be left under central government control .
 Other services, and all economic enterprises, were in the hands of the separate republics . The two republics were formed in the early 1980s .
 By 1954, 80 percent of agricultural land was back in private hands, following a March 30th 1953 decree permitting peasants to withdraw themselves and their land from the collective .
 Stalin emerged from his victory over Hitler far stronger even than before, basking in the reflected glory of the Red Army, at home and abroad . Stalin had emerged from the victory over . Hitler . far stronger than before .
 The personality cult around the Soviet dictator, already well advanced before the war, now rose to its apogee . The cult of Soviet dictator was already well-advanced .
 Popular Soviet documentaries on World War Two showed Stalin winning the war virtually single-handed, planning strategy and directing battles with not a general in sight . Stalin's films show him planning strategy, directing battles without a military presence .
 In almost every sphere of life, from dialectics to botany, Stalin was declared the supreme and unchallenged authority . Stalin declared the Soviet Union's supreme authority in the 1930s . The Soviet Union was overthrown in 1945 .
 Soviet biologists were instructed to adopt the theories of the charlatan Lysenko, who promised Stalin undreamed-of agricultural improvements if his theories were officially adopted and applied to Soviet farming . Lysenko's theories about the inheritability of acquired characteristics were to disastrous effect .
 It is significant that Stalin left his nuclear physicists alone and never presumed to second guess their calculations . On his 70th birthday in December 1949 Stalin’s 6 nuclear calculations were made on his birthday . On December 17, 1949 Stalin's 6 nuclear physicists were left alone .
 Stalin, Stalin, our brother and father, your name. Like beautiful red yarn into our hearts we wove, Stalin's name. We wove your name, Stalin. Stalin . Stalin. Your name. Stalin’s name .
 This obsequious neo-Byzantine anointing of the despot, the attribution to him of near-magical powers, unfolded against a steadily darkening backdrop of tyranny and terror . It unfolded against the backdrop of Tyranny and Terror, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Volga Germans deported in 1941 . Chechens, Ingush, Karachays, Nalkars, Kalmyks, Crimean Tatars and others in the wake of the deportation .
 Poles and Balts had been exiled east by the hundreds of thousands between 1939 and 1941 . Ukrainians in the 1930s and others before them, back to 1921 . This brutal treatment of small nations was hardly new .
 The initial post-war trials of collaborators and traitors across the region echoed nationalist sentiment as well as nationalist sentiment . The trial of traitors and collaborators echoed nationalist sentiments .
 Non-Communist victims of early public trials refused to plead guilty or confess to their alleged ‘anti-national’ crimes . Those who had thrown in their lot with the Germans and whose activities were common knowledge .
 Unlike Stalin, Tito posed no imperial threat . Tito led his country to Communism with no help from Moscow . He was executed nonetheless .
 Bulgarian state TV show was faked in Communist Bulgaria . But it was so obviously faked that it rapidly became an embarrassment, even in communist Bulgaria .
 Stalin was notoriously paranoid about threats to his monopoly of power . But that does not mean that he was altogether mistaken to see in Tito and ‘Tito-ism’ a genuine danger .
 Nationalism ceased to be a local asset and became instead the main enemy . Henceforward, therefore, nationalism ceased to . be a . local asset . henceforward, . nationalism ceased . to be an asset .
 The military were firmly under the thumb of the occupying Soviet forces . The military was under the control of the Soviet-occupied regime .
 Mass popular protest posed the only significant threat to Communist regimes, as it would seriously erode the credentials of the ‘worker and peasant’ state . Mass popular protests were the only threat to the Communist regimes .
 The Peoples’ Democracies were by no means always unpopular with the proletarians they claimed to represent . But in their early years they were unpopular with some of the people they claim to represent, they were always unpopular .
 Most of the population of Soviet eastern Europe, especially in the more backward regions, accepted their fate without protest, at least in these years . Most people accepted the fate of Soviet Eastern Europe without protest .
 Mass demonstrations by 20,000 workers at the §koda plant in Plzen, a major industrial center in western Bohemia, followed by a march on the city hall, on June 1st 1953, by thousands of workers .
 The Plzen demonstrations, confined to one provincial city, fizzled out . Plzen protests were confined to a provincial city .
 As late as 1966, four-fifths of Polish state employees had only a primary school education . But a few days later a far larger protest was sparked off a few dozen miles to the north .
 The country was run by a strikingly under-educated administrative caste . It is run by the country's most educated administrative caste, the country was ruled by an elite caste .
 East German regime was far more rigid than its Soviet masters in Moscow, writes David Frum . Frum says it ignored advice to East German Communist leadership to accept reforms to stem the hemorrhage of skilled workers to the West .
 On June 16th some 400,000 workers went on strike across East Germany . The biggest demonstrations were in Berlin, with the biggest demonstrations in Berlin .
 As with the Plzen protesters, the German workers were easily put down by the Volkspolizei . But not without cost, the protesters were put down .
 Nearly three hundred were killed when Red Army tanks were called in . Many thousands more were arrested, of whom 1,400 given long prison sentences .
 Following the June Seventeenth uprising, the secretary of the Writers’ League had leaflets distributed on Stalin Allee where one could read that the people had forfeited the confidence of the government and could regain it only through redoubled efforts . The leaflets were distributed by the Writers' League
 Angry, disaffected workers on the industrialized western edge of the Soviet empire were a poor advertisement for Communism . But they hardly represented a threat to Soviet power . Both the Plzen and Berlin uprisings took place after Stalin’s death .
 In Stalin’s time the truly threatening challenge came, as it seemed, from within the Communist apparatus itself . In Stalin's time the real threat was from the Communist Party itself . The Communist Party is now in power in Russia and the West .
 Stalin thus reverted to earlier methods, updated and adapted to circumstances . This was the real implication of the Yugoslav schism, and it was in direct response to ‘Titoism’ Stalin .
 The chief precedent for the purges and trials of these years was the Soviet Terror of the 1930s, the Soviet terror of the same era .
 In the 1930s the presumptive ringleader was Leon Trotsky . Tito was un-beholden to Stalin and with views of his own about Communist strategy and practice .
 The purge comes at the end of a long string of judicial purges . And they came, after all, at the . end of the long-running judicial purge .
 Communist regimes of Eastern Europe had used the courts to punish and close down the churches everywhere except Poland, where open confrontation with the Catholic Church was deemed too risky . In addition to the post-war trials for treason and political trials of anti-Communist politicians, the Communist regimes used the
 The previous year the Uniate Church in Romania was forcibly merged with the more pliable Romanian Orthodox church by the new Communist regime . In keeping with a long tradition of persecution reaching back to the Russian czars of the eighteenth-century .
 Selected Catholic priests were tried on two separate occasions in Prague on charges of spying for the Vatican (and the Vatican) by the early 1950s there were eight thousand monks and nuns in Czechoslovak prisons . The priests received sentences ranging from ten years to life imprisonment .
 Monsignor Grosz succeeded the imprisoned Cardinal Mindszenty as head of the Catholic Church in Hungary in January 1949 . He was found guilty of working to restore the Habsburgs and of plotting with Titoists to arm Hungarian Fascists .
 The first, beginning in 1948 and lasting through 1950, were immediate responses to the TitoStalin rift . The first was a response to a rift between Russia and the Soviet Union .
 Communist Interior Minister Ro$i Xoxe was tried in May-June 1949, found guilty and hanged the following month . In Albania, he was found guilty of murder and hanged in June 1949 .
 Xoxe had the distinction of really having been a supporter of Tito and his plans for the Balkans, at a time when these had Moscow’s backing . He was charged with Titoism, charged with supporting his plans to the Balkans .
 In this respect his case was a little unusual, as was the fact that it was handled in secret in secret . The case was the first of its kind to be handled in a secret, as well as its handling of it .
 Rostov had criticized a SovietBulgarian economic agreement as unfavorable to his country . But Stalin distrusted him anyway . He was an ideal candidate for a trial intended to illustrate the crimes of nationalism .
 In 1924 the 27-year-old Kostov was arrested and tortured by the Bulgarian police . He and his ‘group’ (The Treacherous Espionage and Wrecking Group of Trai9) were tortured .
 He leaped from a fourth-floor window at police headquarters in Sofia and broke both legs . Afraid that he might betray the Communists he leaped out of the window .
 Rostov refused to speak the pre-agreed text in his courtroom appearance, publicly retracted his statement to his interrogators and was carried out of the courtroom protesting his innocence . Rostov finally gave in under sustained torture and signed his 'confession of guilt'
 Rostov was hanged on December 16th 1949, 1949, and his 'co-conspirators' sentenced to long imprisonment . Rostov's trial had begun in accordance with decisions taken by Stalin and his police chief Lavrenti Beria before the trial had started .
 Rostov's case was unusual in that he was the only East European Communist who retracted his confession and protested his innocence at a public trial . Rostov’s case in Russia was unusual because Rostov was only the only Communist in the country to retract his confession .
 This caused some minor international embarrassment for the regime . Instructions were given that this must never happen again. This caused an international embarrassment .
 Rostov’s execution was staged by the Hungarian Communists shortly before he was executed . Rostov was executed by the Communist Communist Party of Hungary .
 The text was the same as in Bulgaria—literally so, with only the names changed . In Bulgaria, the text is the same but the names were changed .
 Accusations, details, confessions were all identical, which is not surprising since both trials were scripted in Moscow . It's not surprising that both trials are scripted .
 Rajk himself was no innocent; as Communist Interior Minister he had sent many others to prison and worse . Rajk had also sent many other people to prison, including himself .
 The proceedings of the Tribunal trying Rajk and his fellow ‘conspirators’ were broadcast live by Radio Budapest . Rajk’s own confession of September 16th 1949, was broadcast live on Radio Budapest.
 The pre-determined verdict was announced on September 24th; Rajk and two others were condemned to death . Rajk was sentenced to death on September 26th .
 The public trials of Rajk and Rostov were only the tip of an iceberg of secret trials and tribunals set off by the hunt for Titoists in the Communist parties and governments of the region .
 The persecutions in Poland and East Germany did not result in any major show trials . Thousands of men and women were jailed in East Germany and Poland .
 Gomulka had openly criticized plans for land collectivization in Poland . She was associated with talk of a Polish 'national path' to socialism .
 In August 1948 he was replaced as General Secretary by Bolesfaw Bierut . He was criticized for this by loyal Stalinists in the Polish party .
 Gomulka was finally arrested in July 1951 and only released in September 1954 . Reduced to the post of administrator for Social Assurance in Warsaw, he was reduced to a reduced role .
 One of the trials in Poland began on the day of Gomufka’s arrest in 1951 . There were trials in which a group of officers was charged with anti-state plotting .
 Field’s imaginary network of master spies and Titoists had already been invoked in the charges against Rajk and others . Gomulka was to have been the main evidence against him . Field's imaginary network was based in Budapest, Hungary, based on his imaginary network .
 Poles were able to resist Soviet pressure to conduct full-scale public witch-hunts on the Hungarian model . But the Poles resisted Soviet pressure on the same model . The Polish government was able to avoid public witch hunts .
 Soviet leaders undoubtedly judged it imprudent in these early years to tear the Polish Communist leadership apart in full public view . Some Soviet leaders thought it was too risky to do so in the early years .
 The biggest show trial of them all was to be staged in Prague in November 1952 . No such inhibitions applied in Czechoslovakia, however, where the trial was held in 1952 .
 A major show trial had been planned from 1950, in the immediate wake of the Rajk and Rostov purges . A major Czech show trial was due to take place in 1950, but was never completed .
 Tito was still the enemy and accusations of espionage for the West still figured prominently in the indictments . Tito still was the enemy of the West when the charges were brought .
 Of the 14 defendants at the ‘Trial of the Leadership of the Anti-State Conspiracy Centre’, eleven were Jews . Of the fourteen defendants, eleven of them were Jewish .
 On the very first page of the charge sheet it was made abundantly clear that this was no accident . On the first page, it is made abundantly . This is no accident. It is no matter what it is said to be the case .
 Until the Second World War his dislike for Jews was so comfortably embedded in his destruction of other categories of person—Old Bolsheviks, Trotskyites, Leftand Right-deviationists, intellectuals, intellectuals and so on—that their Jewish origin seemed almost incidental to their fate . But until
 It was a matter of dogma that Communism had no truck with racial or religious prejudice . Once the Soviet cause was attached to the banner of ‘anti-Fascism’, as it was from 1935 until August 1939 and again from June 1941, the Jews of Europe had no
 The European Communist parties, especially those of central and eastern Europe, counted significant numbers of Jews among their members . Jews were significant members of the Communist parties .
 Jews of inter-war Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Romania were an oppressed and disliked minority . The Jews were a disliked minority of the Jews . Jews were oppressed and often mistreated in the 1930s .
 As the most uncompromisingly anti-national and ambitious of these, Communism had a distinctive appeal . Communism had to be seen as the most ambitious and ambitious . It was the most anti-National and ambitious and anti-British .
 Whatever its defects, the Soviet Union offered a revolutionary alternative at a time when central and eastern Europe appeared to be facing a choice between authoritarian past and a Fascist future . Whatever its passing defects, it was an alternative to an authoritarian past or a Fascistic future .
 The appeal of the USSR was accentuated by the experience of war . The appeal was further accented by the experiences of war in the Soviet Union .
 Jews who found themselves in Soviet-occupied Poland after the Germans attacked in 1939 were frequently deported eastwards . Many died of disease and hardship and many died from disease .
 The advance of the Red Army through Ukraine and Byelorussia into the Baltic States, Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland and Germany saved the Jews in these lands .
 Stalin most certainly did not fight the Second World War for the Jews; but had Hitler won, millions more Jews would have been exterminated . Had the Germans and their collaborators remained in control of the territories they had captured up to the Battle of Stalingrad .
 Many of the Communist parties took over in eastern Europe, many of their leading cadres were of Jewish origin .
 In the first post-war years Stalin displayed no hostility to his Jewish subordinates . In the early 1950s, Stalin showed no hostility toward Jewish subordinates.
 At the U.N. the Soviet Union was an enthusiastic supporter of the Zionist project . The Soviet Union favored the creation of a Jewish state in the Middle East as an impediment to British imperial ambitions .
 At home Stalin had looked favorably on the work of the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee . The committee was formed during the war to mobilize Jewish opinion in the USSR and abroad behind the Soviet struggle against Nazis .
 Soviet Jews, like many others, supposed that the more ecumenical mood of the war years would translate into easier times after victory . Stalin sought and accepted help from any likely quarter, when Stalin sought it from any quarter .
 Before the war had even ended Stalin, as we have seen, was exiling whole nations to the east and doubtless harbored similar plans for the Jews .
 The wartime invocation of the banner of Russian nationalism brought Soviet rhetoric closer to the Slavexclusivist language of old-time Russian anti-Semites . This was certainly not to the regime’s disadvantage .
 For Stalin himself it represented a return to familiar territory, his own anti-Jewish instincts underscored by his observation of Hitler’s successful exploitation of popular anti-Semitism . For Stalin, it was a return .
 Dead Jews were posthumously assimilated into the same local communities that had so disliked them when they were alive . Racism had no place in the Marxist lexicon; dead Jews were assimilated in the same communities .
 The presumptively cosmopolitan qualities of Jews were once again held against them by Stalin . Stalin had hoped to benefit in the dark months following the German attack . But now the international links from which Stalin hoped to . benefit from the Cold War were once more to be held against .
 In the eighteen months following the end of World War Two more Jews were killed in Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia than in the ten years preceding the war .
 Solomon Mikhoels, a major figure in Russia’s Yiddish Theatre, was murdered on January 12th 1948 .
 The arrival in Moscow of Israeli Ambassador Golda Meir on September 11th 1948 was the occasion for spontaneous outbursts of Jewish enthusiasm .
 This would have been provocative and unacceptable to Stalin at any time, he says . Stalin would have considered such a move 'provocative' and 'unacceptable'
 The Berlin blockade had just begun and the Soviet split with Tito was entering its acute phase . Tito and Tito's split with the Soviet Union was entering an acute phase in the 1980s .
 On September 21st 1948 Pravda published an article by Ilya Ehrenburg indicating clearly the change of line on Zionism . The article was published by the same day as the publication of the article by Ehrenberg .
 Yiddish schools and theatres were shut down and banned from the Yiddies in the 1930s . Yiddie newspapers and schools were banned and libraries closed . The Holocaust was the first major Holocaust in the United States .
 The Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee itself had been suppressed on November 20th 1948 . The Committee was suppressed on that date .
 Its remaining leaders, artists, writers and government functionaries were arrested the following month and kept in prison for three years . The remaining leaders and artists were arrested and kept imprisoned .
 Pressured to confess to an ‘anti-Soviet’ conspiracy, they were clearly being prepared for a show trial . Pressured under torture to confess, they confessed to an anti-Soviet conspiracy .
 The security forces colonel sought to broaden the charges out to encompass a large-scale Jewish conspiracy against the USSR directed from Washington and Tel Aviv . Vladimir Komarov, a Russian security forces officer, sought the charges .
 All but one were executed; the sole survivor, Lina Shtern, received ten years in prison . The sole survivor of the massacre was executed; she was sentenced to ten years .
 Anti-Semitic tide was gathering strength in the satellite states . Meanwhile the anti-Semitism tide was growing in the satellites states, Israel says .
 In Romania, a substantial part of the Jewish population survived the war . Anti-Zionist campaign was launched in the autumn of 1948 and sustained for the next six years .
 Plans for a show trial in Romania centred on the Romanian Communist leader Lucretius Patra§canu . Plans for the trial centre around the death of the Communist leader .
 Patra§canu’s publicly voiced doubts over rural collectivization made him a natural candidate for a Romanian ‘Rajk trial’ based on charges of pro-Titoism, and he was arrested in April 1948 .
 Patra§canu’s case was bundled with that of Ana Pauker . But by the time his interrogators were ready to bring him to trial the goalposts had moved . The goalposts were moved and the case was dropped .
 She was also a notorious hard-liner in doctrinal and policy matters, which made her an exemplary target for the Romanian leadership trying to curry favor with local population .
 Stalin’s death aborted the plans of Romanian Communist leader Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej to stage a show trial of Pauker and others . Pauker's trial was set to take place in Romania, but Stalin's death prevented it .
 Victims range from genuine members of the Revisionist Zionists to Jewish Communists tarred with the Zionist brush . They were accused of illegal relations with Israel and of collaborating with Nazis during the war .
 They were sentenced to prison for periods ranging from ten years to life . They were jailed for between ten years and life .
 Finally Patra§canu himself was tried in April 1954, after languishing in prison for six years . Charged with spying for the British, he was found guilty and executed .
 In January 1953, prominent East German Jews and Jewish Communists fled west . The 'Doctors’ Plot' was unfolding in Moscow .
 East German Central Committee member demanded Jews be excluded from public life . Hans Jendretsky demanded Jews—‘enemies of the state’ be excluded .
 All three states avoided a full scale anti-Semitic show trial of the kind planned in Moscow and carried through in Prague . But by luck, by timing or out of prudence, all three states avoid a full show trial .
 The Slansky Trial, as it became known, is the classic Communist show trial . Slansky trial was known as one of the most notorious show trials in the world .
 Czech Communists accused with Slovaks of having taken part in a Titoist-Trotskyist conspiracy along lines familiar from Rajk case . To them were added various mid-level Czech Communists .
 None of those implicated and held in prison during 1950 and 1951 was senior enough to serve as figurehead and ringleader for the major public trial that Stalin was demanding . Stalin demanded a public trial, but none of the implicated were senior enough .
 In the spring of 1951 Soviet Police Chief Beria instructed the Czechs to shift the emphasis of their investigations from a Titoist to a Zionist plot . The Czechs were ordered to shift their investigations to a Zion plot .
 From now on the whole enterprise was in the hands of the Soviet secret services . Colonel Komarov and another officer were sent to Prague to take the investigations in hand .
 At first Gottwald was reluctant to have Slansky arrested . The two of them had worked closely together in purging their colleagues over the past three years .
 The Soviets presented forged evidence linking Slansky to the CIA, and Gottwald gave way . Gottwald was forced to give up on the case .
 On November 23rd 1951 Slansky was arrested; in the days that followed prominent Jewish Communists still at liberty followed him into prison . Slansky's arrest was the first of many Jewish Communists arrested .
 The security services now set themselves the task of extracting confessions and evidence from their many prisoners in order to construct a major case against Slansky and his collaborators .
 The former General Secretary himself was tortured in the face of barbaric torture . The task took them the best part of a year to complete .
 The text of the confessions, the indictment, the predetermined sentences and the script of the trial were then sent to Moscow for Stalin’s personal approval . Stalin's personal approval was then approved by Stalin himself .
 Back in Prague a ‘dress rehearsal’ of the full trial was conducted—and tape-recorded . The 'dress rehearsal' was conducted back in Prague, Czech Republic, where the trial took place .
 Rostov's confession was to provide an alternative text for ‘live transmission’ in the unlikely event that one of the defendants retracted his confession in open court, like Rostov . The alternative text text was used to provide a 'live transmission' of the confession .
 Eleven of the fourteen accused were sentenced to death and executed . Three were condemned to life imprisonment . Eleven of 14 accused were executed and three were condemned for life imprisonment.
 If they were of Jewish origin and Zionist orientation, little attention among us was paid to their class origins . But if they were Jewish, they would have been more likely to be more prominent in society .
 The Slansky trial was a criminal masquerade, judicial murder as public theatre . Slansky was a trial of judicial murder in public theatre, the judge said . The trial of Slansky is a 'criminal masquerade' and 'judicial murder'
 The trial of the Anti-Fascist Committee in Moscow was intended as an overture to the arrest of the Soviet Jewish doctors whose ‘plot’ was announced by Pravda on January 13th 1953 . The Prague proceedings were also intended as a overture .
 Jewish physicians were accused of murdering Andrei Zdanov, conspiring with the ‘Anglo-American bourgeoisie’ and advancing the cause of‘Jewish nationalism’ in connivance with the American Jewish Joint Distribution 13 . The survivors were all released in later years, though
 Stalin appears to have hesitated before making a decision on a show trial of Jewish doctors . He died before he could make a decision in 1953 .
 Stalin’s purposes in mounting the whole charade of purges, indictments, confessions and trials are of greater interest . Of greater interest are the purposes of Stalin's purposes for mounting the charade, writes John Avlon .
 Trials might seem counter-productive; the obviously false testimonies and confessions, the unembarrassed targeting of selected individuals and social categories, were hardly calculated to convince foreign observers of the bona fides of Soviet judicial procedures . Trials may seem counter productive, but it was hardly calculated .
 They were, rather, a form of public pedagogy-by-example; a venerable Communist institution whose purpose was to illustrate and exemplify the structures of authority in the Soviet system . The institution was, in fact, an example of the structure of authority .
 They told the public who was right, who was wrong; they placed blame for policy failures; they assigned credit for loyalty and subservience . They even wrote a script, an approved vocabulary for use in discussion of public affairs .
 Following his arrest Rudolf Slansky was only ever referred to as ‘the spy Slansky’, this ritual naming serving as a form of political exorcism .
 The function of the courts was ‘to educate the citizens in de14’ As the Czechoslovak ‘Court Organisation Act’ of January 1953 baldly summed it up, it was very precise . The script was very specific .
 The accused were reduced from presumptive political critics or opponents to unprincipled conspirators . Their purposes were venal and traitorous, their purposes venal, traitorous . The accused have been reduced to presumptive opponents .
 ‘Public’ were not being asked to believe what they heard; they were merely being trained to repeat it . But the ‘public’ was not being . asked to . believe what it heard; it was merely being . trained to . repeat it.
 If Communist economic policy was not producing its pre-announced successes, if Soviet foreign policy was blocked or forced to compromise, someone must take the blame . Someone must take responsibility for the failure of Soviet economic policy, says historian .
 Any and all Communist leaders and ministers were potential victims in waiting . They had carried out unpopular policies now seen to have failed, they said . And precisely because they had carried on unpopular policies, they were potential targets in waiting.
 Communist ministers confessed to sabotage when policies they had implemented failed to deliver the goods . Just as defeated generals in the French Revolutionary wars were frequently charged with treason, so Communist ministers confess to sabotage .
 The advantage of the confession, in addition to its symbolic use as an exercise in guilt-transferal, was that it confirmed Communist doctrine . The confession was used as a symbolic use of guilt-Transferal .
 There were no disagreements in Stalin’s universe, only heresies; no critics, only enemies; no errors, only crimes . Stalin's universe was like Stalin's, with no disagreements, no enemies, no errors or crimes .
 The trials served both to illustrate Stalin’s virtues and identify his enemies’ crimes . Stalin's crimes were the crimes of his enemies . The trials were meant to show Stalin's virtues and expose his enemies' crimes .
 Stalin’s paranoia and the culture of suspicion that surrounded him surrounded him . They also illuminate the extent of Stalin's paranoia, the culture he created in the Soviet Union .
 One part of this was a deep-rooted anxiety about Russian, and more generally ‘Eastern’ inferiority, a fear of Western influence and the seduction of Western affluence . The anxiety about Russia and Western influence was part of the anxiety about 'Eastern' inferiority
 Indictment went on to describe the accused as exhibiting ‘a feeling for servile under-valuation’ that Western spies had successfully exploited . The indictment said the accused exhibited a ‘sensile undervaluation'
 In the early 1950s, following the outbreak of war in Korea, Washington did consider the possibility of destabilizing eastern Europe . The U.S. intelligence made a number of unsuccessful attempts to penetrate the Soviet bloc .
 Arrests and trials were a public reminder of the coming confrontation; a justification for Soviet war fears; and a strategy (familiar from earlier decades) for slimming down the Leninist party and preparing it for combat . Thus the arrests and purges and trials . were a reminder of
 The 1949 charge that Rajk had conspired with the U.S. and Britain to overthrow the Communists seemed believable to many Communists and their sympathizers in the West . Rajk was accused of conspiring with the United States and Britain in 1949 .
 In Stalin's eyes any Communist who had spent time in the West, out of Soviet reach, was to be regarded with suspicion . Stalin’s eyes were to be suspicious, whatever he or she was doing there there .
 Communists who had been active in Spain during the Civil War of the thirties were the first to fall under suspicion . Communists from Eastern Europe and Germany were among those who fell under suspicion in Spain .
 Laszlo Rajk had served in Spain (as a political commissar of the ‘Rakosi battalion’); so had Otto Sling, one of SMnsky’s co-defendants . Sling was a member of the SMnky's
 Following Franco’s victory, many of the Spanish veterans had escaped into France, where they ended up in French internment camps . Many of these Spanish veterans were later imprisoned in France .
 A significant number of them had joined the French Resistance . They teamed up with German and other foreign Communists who had taken refuge in France . From there, they had joined French Resistance, where they teamed up .
 Slansky trial defendant Artur London was also a defendant in the trial of Slansky . Slansky was later held against Communist Party members of Russia .
 The wartime Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee in the USSR had been instructed to make Western contacts and document Nazi atrocities . The activities later formed the basis of the criminal charges against them against them .
 They usually had a more heroic track record in domestic resistance than their Moscow confreres . They had returned after the war courtesy of the Red Army, and thus a more popular local image .
 The 'national' Communists were almost always the main victims of the post-war show trials . For these reasons the ‘national’ Communists were always always the victims of show trials.
 In Czechoslovakia, the men who had organized the Slovak national uprising against the Nazis were ready-made victims of Soviet suspicion . Stalin did not enjoy sharing the credit for the liberation of Czechsoslovakia’s .
 Traicho Rostov had led the Bulgarian Communist partisans during the war, until his arrest . Rostov took second place to Georgii Dimitrov, newly returned from Moscow, until he was turned against him in 1949 .
 In Poland Gomulka had organized armed resistance under the Nazis, together with Marian Spychalski . After the war Stalin favored Bierut and other Moscow-based Poles . In Poland he had organized an armed resistance .
 Spychalski and Gomufka were both later arrested and, as we have seen, narrowly avoided starring in their own show trial . Spychalki and the pair were later later arrested, but not charged .
 In Romania it was one 'national' Communist, Dej, who engineered the downfall of another ‘national’ Communist, Patra§canu, as well as the eclipse of the impeccably Muscovite Ana Pauker .
 Rostov spent the early thirties in Moscow, at the Comintern’s Balkan desk . Rostov had also spent the late 1930s in Moscow at Comintern's Balkan bureau .
 Stalin was not interested in agreement or even consent, only unswerving obedience . Far from saving him, however, this just exacerbated his crime, it just exacerbated it .
 There was a considerable element of personal score-settling and cynical instrumentalism in the selection of trial victims and the charges against them. Lastly, there was a . element of . personal score . settling and cynical . instrumentalism .
 In some instances, the latter fabricated cases against people out of coincidence or fantasy . In others they deliberately claimed the opposite of what they knew to be the case .
 Two of the defendants in the Slansky trial were accused of over190 INTO THE WHIRLWIND billing Moscow for Czech products . The trial is expected to last for months .
 Goods made in the satellite states were deliberately under-priced to Soviet advantage . Only Moscow could authorize exceptions, and only Moscow authorized exceptions .
 Later he re-established the Communist network while maintaining the ban on other parties . Later he had secretly re-established the Communist Network .
 His actions, impeccably orthodox at the time, were grist to the Soviet mill when the time came to remove him from the Soviet Union . But his actions, . At the . time, they were . well-honoured at the times .
 Other Communists were purged without public trials or without any judicial process at all . Other Communists purged in the 1950s and '60s without trial or judicial process'
 The overwhelming majority of Stalin’s victims, in the Soviet Union and the satellite states, were of course not Communists at all . But the majority of the victims were not Communists, the author says .
 In Czechoslovakia, Communists represented just one-tenth of 1 percent of those condemned to prison terms or work camps . In the years 1948-54, Communists were one in twenty of those who were condemned to death .
 In the GDR the Stasi was created on February 8th 1950, with the task of overseeing and controlling not just Communists but the whole of society . The Stasi were created in 1950 with the aim of controlling not only Communists but also the entire society .
 Stalin was routinely suspicious not only of Communists with contacts or experience in the West, but of anyone who had lived outside the Soviet bloc . Stalin was suspicious of anyone with contacts with the West but also of anyone outside the USSR .
 The entire population of eastern Europe fell under Kremlin suspicion in those years . It thus went without saying that virtually the entire population in eastern Europe was under suspicion .
 Any Soviet citizen or soldier who survived Nazi occupation or imprisonment was thus an object of suspicion . The Nazi occupation of the Soviet Union was so widespread that many Soviet citizens were subject to suspicion .
 The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet passed a law punishing soldiers who committed rape with 10 to 15 years in a labour camp in 1949 . The law was passed by the Presidium in 1949, and disapproval of the Red Army’s rampage across eastern Germany and Austria was the least of
 The real motive was to fashion a device with which to punish returning Soviet soldiers at will . The device was intended to be a device that could be used to punish Soviet soldiers .
 The scale of the punishment meted out to the citizens of the USSR and Eastern Europe in the decade following World War Two was monumental . Outside the Soviet Union itself, it was utterly unprecedented. The scale was unprecedented outside the USSR itself .
 In Bulgaria, from an industrial workforce of just under half a million, two persons out of nine were slave laborers . Bulgaria's industrial workforce is just under 50,000 .
 In Czechoslovakia it is estimated that there were 100,000 political prisoners in the early 1950s . The figure does not include the many tens of thousands working as forced laborers in the country’s mines .
 The person was then legally presumed dead, though with no further official acknowledgement or confirmation . Three months later, the person was finally presumed dead . The person's death was not officially confirmed .
 At the height of the terror in Czechoslovakia some 30 to forty such announcements would appear in the local press every day . At the time of the . height of . the terror, some thirty to . forty such . announcements would be published every day in the . local press .
 Tens of thousands disappeared this way; many hundreds of thousands more were deprived of their privileges, apartments, jobs, jobs . "Tens of thousands disappear this way," says President Obama .
 In Hungary, during the years 1948-53, about one million people (of the total population of less than ten million) are estimated to have suffered arrest, prosecution, imprisonment or deportation . In Hungary during that period, about 1 million people were arrested, prosecuted, imprisoned or deported .
 The wives of prisoners and deportees lost their employment, their apartments and their personal effects . They lost their jobs, apartments and personal effects. The wives were forced to leave their homes .
 Josephine Langer, whose husband Oskar Langer was a witness at the Slansky trial, was later sentenced in a secret trial to 22 years in prison . At best, if they were lucky, they were then forgotten, like Josephine .
 Romania saw perhaps the worst persecution, certainly the most enduring . Romania was perhaps the country's most enduring persecution .
 Romania was remarkable for the severity of its prison conditions and various ‘experimental’ prisons . In addition to well over a million detainees in prisons, labor camps and slave labor on the Danube-Black Sea Canal .
 Most victims were students, ‘Zionists’ and non-Communist political detainees . Most of the victims were 'Zionist’s' and 'non-communist' political detainees.
 The Communist state was in a permanent condition of undeclared war against its own citizens . The state of China was in the 'permanent condition of underelict war'
 Stalin understood the need for enemies, and it was in the logic of the Stalinist state that it was constantly mobilizing against its foes—external, but above all domestic . Like Lenin, Stalin understood that the state needed enemies, like Lenin .
 An inevitable necessity of our period is the ever increasing class struggle, says the author of the book . "An inevitable necessity" of our era is the rise of class struggle .
 The martial vocabulary so beloved of Communist rhetoric echoed this conflictbound condition . The martial language was used in the Communist Party's rhetoric .
 In practice intellectuals were often the easiest target, just as they had been for the Nazis . But in practice intellectuals often were often targets of the Nazis, as they were for Hitler .
 Andrei Zdanov’s venomous attack on Anna Akhmatova: ‘A nun and a whore, who combines harlotry with prayer.’ ‘Or rather a nun and whore,’ he said. ‘Rather a nun . and
 Had Akhmatova been Jewish, like much of the central European intelligentsia, the caricature would have been complete . Had she been Jewish she would've been a caricature of her .
 The instruments of control and terror through which the Communist state operated after 1947 were perfected by Stalin’s men, but they did not need to be imported from the East; they were already in place . Stalin's men perfected by the most part of the system, but for the most
 The ‘Sovietization’ and ‘Russification’ of everything in Eastern Europe from manufacturing processes to academic titles would sooner or later alienate all but the most inveterate Stalinists . This process and its consequences, the 'Sovietization' and 'Russification
 It had the ancillary effect of blurring many people’s recollection of their initial ambivalence in the face of the Communist transformation . And it had the . an effect of . blurring . many people's recollection of . their initial . ambivalentence .
 Anti-Semitic and xenophobic tone of Stalinist public language had found a sympathetic audience in eastern Europe, just as it did in the Soviet Union itself . In later years it was easy to forget that the anti-Semitic tone of Soviet public language was found in much of eastern Europe .
 Economic nationalism had popular local roots too, so that expropriation, nationalization, controls and state regulation of work were by no means unfamiliar . Economic nationalism was popular in the 1930s and 1940s, with expropriations and controls .
 In its initial phases, then, the Soviet take-over of eastern Europe was not quite as one-sided and brutal a transition as it would appear in retrospect . Even if we discount the high hopes vested in the Communist future by a minority of young people in Warsaw or Prague, we
 The Nazis’ brutality had alienated potentially friendly local sentiment in the territories they’liberated from the USSR in 1941-42 . Stalin soon dispersed illusions and expectations in the satellite states .
 The result of imposing an accelerated version of the Soviet Union’s own dismal economic history upon the more developed lands to its west has already been noted . The result is already noted .
 The only resource upon which Communist managers could consistently rely was labor-intensive production pressed to the breaking point . Communist managers relied heavily on labor intensive production to keep a living wage .
 The centrally planned economies were actually quite effective at extracting surplus-value from miners and factory workers by force . But this was all they could do . The centrally-planned economies were quite effective .
 The trials and purges, and the accompanying chorus of mendacious commentary, helped degrade what remained in eastern Europe of the public sphere . The trials, purges and accompanying commentary helped degrade whatever remained of eastern Europe's public sphere, he says .
 Politics and government became synonymous with corruption and arbitrary repression, practiced by and for the benefit of a venal clique . Politics was replaced by suspicion and fear, and the result was fear and suspicion .
 Soviet rule was a form of misrule adapted for the near-influx of foreign power . It was what made Soviet rule so resented outside the Soviet Union's borders .
 The effect of the Sovietization of eastern Europe was to draw it steadily away from the western half of the continent . The effect was to be seen in eastern Europe in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The Marshall Plan injected some $14 billion into Western Europe’s recovering economy . Stalin extracted approximately the same amount from eastern Europe . It is symptomatic and somehow appropriate .
 The distinction between eastern and western Europe had not been the only one by which the continent understood itself, nor even the most important . But the distinction between east and west Europe was not the only way of understanding itself, as well as western Europe .
 Mediterranean Europe was markedly different from North-West Europe . Religion had far greater salience than politics in the historic boundaries within and between states .
 In Europe before World War Two, differences between North and South, rich and poor, urban and rural, counted for more than those between East and West . In Europe, North and West counted more than East and East .
 The impact of Soviet rule upon the lands east of Vienna was thus more marked than it had been upon Russia itself . The impact was even more marked by the Soviet rule than that of the Soviet Union .
 The Russian Empire, after all, had only ever been part-European . The European identity of post-Petrine Russia was itself contested in the century preceding Lenin’s coup .
 In brutally cutting the Soviet Union adrift from its ties to European history and culture, the Bolsheviks did great and lasting violence to Russia . The Bolsheviks cut Russia from Europe by cutting it off from European ties .
 Their suspicion of the West and their fear of Western influence was not unprecedented . It had deep roots in self-consciously Slavophil writings and practices long before 1917 . But their suspicion of West and fear of western influence wasn't unprecedented .
 It was, indeed, part of the insecure small-state nationalism of Poles, Romanians, Croats and others that they saw themselves not as far-flung outriders at the edge of European civilization . They saw themselves as the under-appreciated defenders of Europe�
 Romanian and Polish intellectuals looked to Paris for fashions in thought and art . The Germanspeaking intelligentsia of the late Habsburg Empire, from Sub-Carpathian Ruthenia to Trieste, had always looked to Vienna .
 That integrated, cosmopolitan Europe had of course only ever existed for a minority—and it died in 1918 . That integrated Europe had only ever been a minority of Europe .
 The new states hatched at Versailles were fragile and somehow impermanent from the very start . But the new states were fragile, they were fragile from the start, says historian .
 The inter-war decades had thus been a sort of interregnum, neither peace nor war, in which the fate of post-imperial central and eastern Europe remained somehow undecided . The interregnant period was the sort of 'interregnum' between peace and war .
 The imposition of a Russian rather than a German solution cut Europe’s vulnerable eastern half away from the body of the continent . Instead of a solution to the problem, the Russian solution will cut Europe's vulnerable east away from its body of Europe .
 At the time this was not a matter of great concern to western Europeans themselves . At the . time this . issue was not . concern to Western Europeans themselves themselves .
 Western Europeans were largely indifferent to the disappearance of eastern Europe . With the exception of the Germans, the Germans were most directly affected by the division of Europe .
 There should be an impermeable armed barrier running from the Baltic to the Adriatic, says President George Vatanka .
 The peoples to the east of that barrier were thrust back into a grimy, forgotten corner of their own continent, at the mercy of a semi-alien Great Power . History itself ground slowly to a halt .
 The staking out of political and intellectual positions for and against the Soviet Union did not begin with the post-World War Two division of Europe, writes David Frum . Frum: "The staked out of ... positions for ... and against [the Soviet Union] began with the
 Between 1947 and 1953, the line dividing East from West, Left from Right, was carved deep into European cultural and intellectual life . In these post-war years, 1947 to 1953, it was in these post war years that the line between East and West was carved .
 Between the wars the far Right had been better supported than it suited most people, recall . The far Right was better supported between the wars than most people recall .
 Polemical journalism and literature of the 1930s abounded in racism, anti-Semitism, ultra-nationalism, clericalism and political reaction . From Brussels to Bucharest the polemical . journalism of the . 1930s was filled with racism and anti-Semitic, ultra
 The content of public writing and performance was spectacularly metamorphosed by the fall of Hitler, Mussolini and their followers . But the tone stayed much of the same in the 1930s and 1940s . The tone of public speaking and public performance remained much the same .
 In their preoccupation with nation, degeneration, sacrifice and death, inter-war Fascist writers had looked to the First World War . The Fascists were fascinated by nation and degeneration and death .
 Good versus Evil, Freedom against Enslavement, Resistance against Collaboration, is a battle of good versus evil . "Good versus Evil" is a war of wills between good and evil .
 Liberation from Nazi or Fascist occupation was widely welcomed as an occasion for radical political and social change . Liberation was a chance to turn wartime devastation to revolutionary effect and make a new beginning .
 Frustrated expectations turned readily enough to cynicism—or else to the far Left, in a world once more polarized into irreconcilable political camps . And when, as we have seen, that opportunity was seemingly thwarted and 'normal' life was summarily restored .
 Post-war European intellectuals were in a hurry and impatient with compromise . Post-WWII European intellectuals are impatient for compromise, they say .
 After the Second World War it was largely an older, discredited cohort that disappeared from the scene . But after the second World War, it was much of a discredited cohort of older men .
 In its place emerged writers, artists, journalists and political activists who were too young to have known the war of 1914-18 . They were impatient to make up the years lost in its successor .
 Their political education came in the era of the Popular Fronts and anti-Fascist movements . When they achieved public acclaim and influence, often as a result of wartime activities, it was at an unusually early age by traditional European standards .
 In France, Jean-Paul Sartre was 40 when the war ended; Simone de Beauvoir was 37; Albert Camus, the most influential of them all, was just 32 . In Britain, the war had ended in 1945; in France, it was the end of
 Of the older generation only Francois Mauriac could match them in influence, precisely because he was not tainted by any Vichyite past . Mauriac is not the only man to match the influence of the older generations .
 In Italy only the Neapolitan philosopher Benedetto Croce remained from an earlier generation of Italian public figures . Only the philosopher remained from the earlier generations of Italian politicians .
 In post-Fascist Italy Ignazio Silone was among the more senior of the influential intellectual figures . The novelist and political commentator Alberto Moravia was 38, the Communist editor and writer Elio Vittorini was a year younger .
 In eastern Europe, the social promotion of youth was even more marked . In pre-war years, the intellectual elites were tainted with ultra-conservatism, mystical nationalism or worse .
 Czeslaw Milosz's influential essay The Captive Mind was published in 1951 when he was just 40 and already in political exile . He was not at all atypical. He was already 40 and in exile from Poland .
 Jerzy Andrzejewski published Ashes and Diamonds, his acclaimed novel of postwar Poland, while in his thirties .
 The leaders of the East European Communist parties were, typically, slightly older men who had survived the inter-war years as political prisoners or else in Moscow exile, or both .
 Soviet-backed takeovers played an important part in their success . But just below them was a cohort of very young men and women whose idealistic commitment to the Soviet backed takeovers .
 Heda Kovaly’s husband, Rudolf Margolius, one of the defendants at the Slansky trial in December 1952, was 35 when he was appointed minister in the Communist government of Czechoslovakia . Artur London, another of the accused at that trial, was
 London had received his political education in the French resistance . London had learned how to exercise political and military responsibilities at a very young age .
 Youthful enthusiasm for a Communist future was widespread among middleclass intellectuals, in East and West alike . Youngest enthusiasm for the Communist future among middle-class intellectuals was widespread .
 It was accompanied by a complex complex of inferiority towards the proletariat, the blue-collar working class . And it was accompanied with a distinctive complex of . inferiority . towards the . proletariat .
 In the immediate post-war years, skilled manual workers were at a premium . This was a marked contrast with the Depression years still fresh in collective memory .
 There was coal to be mined; roads, railways, buildings, power lines to be rebuilt or replaced . Tools to be manufactured and then applied to the manufacture of other goods .
 Young, ablebodied men in Displaced Persons camps had little difficulty finding work and asylum, in contrast to women with families—or ‘intellectuals’ of any sort . For all these jobs there was a shortage of trained labor; as we have seen, young, able
 The universal exaltation of industrial work and workers is a political asset for parties claiming to represent them . One consequence of this is that it is a distinct political asset to political parties that claim to represent workers .
 Leftleaning, educated, middle-class men and women embarrassed by their social origin could assuage their discomfort by abandoning themselves to Communism . The Communist Party is a Communist Party .
 Students, teachers, writers and artists from Britain, France, Germany and elsewhere flocked to Yugoslavia to help rebuild railways with bare hands .
 In August 1947 Italo Calvino wrote enthusiastically about young volunteers from Italy similarly engaged in Czechoslovakia . In 1947 he wrote about the young volunteers in the Czech Republic .
 Devotion to a new beginning, the worship of a real or imagined community of workers, and admiration for the Soviets (and their all-conquering Red Army) separated a young post-war generation from its social roots and the past .
 The decision to become a Communist (or a ‘Marxist’) was typically made at a young age . In the circumstances of the time, usually meant Communist .
 Communist parties initially flattered intellectuals, for whom Communism’s ambitions stood in appealing contrast to the small-state parochialism of their homelands as well as the violent anti-intellectualism of the Nazis . The parties were first flattered by intellectuals for their appeal
 Only a minority of East European students, poets, playwrights, novelists, journalists or professors who became active Communists . These were often the most talented men and women of their generation .
 Pavel Kohout first came to the public eye in his native Czechoslovakia as an ultra-enthusiast for his country’s new regime . In later decades he would achieve international renown as a dissident and post-Communist essayist and playwright .
 Her youth is marked by young shock workers . She has the reason of a million heads And the strength of millions of human hands . Her battalion is the words of Stalin and Gottwald .
 Communism operated on the principle that writers need not think , they need only understand . As Milosz would observe, this is not the case for writers to think .
 Young intellectuals in the region are looking for understanding and commitment . Even understanding required little more than commitment, which is precisely what young intellectuals are seeking .
 Mlynar’s generation knew only the years of war and Nazi occupation, during which ‘it was either one side or the other—there was no middle ground,’ he said .
 I am indebted to Professor Shore for the quotation from Ludek Pachman . I am also indebted to Professor Shore .
 It helps account for the scale of disenchantment and disillusionment that followed . But it doesn't explain the extent of the disillusionment, disillusionment .
 Younger converts were stunned to discover the rigors of Communist discipline and the reality of Stalinist power . But younger converts, particularly intellectuals, were stunned by the realities of Communist power .
 The imposition of Zdanov’s ‘two cultures’ dogma after 1948, with its insistence upon the adoption of ‘correct’ positions on everything from botany to poetry, came as a shock in eastern Europe .
 Slavish intellectual adherence to a party line, long-established in the Soviet Union, came harder to countries that had only recently emerged from the rather benign regimen of the Habsburgs . Slavish adherence to the party line became harder to those who had only emerged from a rather benign
 In nineteenth-century central Europe, intellectuals and poets had acquired the habit and responsibility of speaking on behalf of the nation . Poets and intellectuals had the habit of speaking for the nation in their poetry .
 Where once they had represented an abstract ‘people’ they were now little more than cultural mouthpieces for tyrants, they are now cultural mouthmoutsets for dictatorships .
 They would soon be the victim of choice—as cosmopolitans, ‘parasites’ or Jews—for those same tyrants in search of scapegoats for their errors . Worse, they would be the victims of choice, as cosmopolitanans, 'paras
 The division within Communist states was no longer between Communism and its opponents, it was between Communists and opponents . The division was not only between Communist states but between opponents of Communism .
 The Cold War fault-line fell not so much between East and West as within Eastern and Western Europe alike . In this sense, the fault-lines fell not as much between east and west as between the Cold War and West .
 In Western Europe the same fault-line found many intellectuals on both sides . enthusiasm for Communism in theory in theory was characteristically present in inverse proportion to direct experience of it in practice .
 This widespread ignorance of the fate of contemporary Eastern Europe, coupled with growing Western indifference, was a source of bewilderment and frustration to many in the East . Growing Western indifference to Eastern Europe has been a problem for many Eastern Europeans since the 1980s .
 The problem for East European intellectuals and others was not their peripheral situation, it was their fate . This was the fate to which they had long been resigned, they say .
 Stalin's success in gouging his defensive perimeter deep into the center of Europe had removed Eastern Europe from the equation . Stalin’s success in . gouging . into the . center of . Europe had been removed . from the . equation .
 European intellectual life after the Second World War took place on a drastically reduced stage, from which the Poles, Czechs and others had been summarily removed . European intellectual and cultural life after World War II was on a reduced stage .
 The intellectual condition of post-war Western Europe would have been unrecognizable to a visitor from even the quite recent past . The world's intellectual condition has been unrecognized by a visitor to Western Europe .
 German-speaking central Europe was the engine room of European culture for the first third of the twentieth century . It had ceased to exist in Germany . It was the first time central Europe had existed .
 Vienna was already a shadow of its former self after the overthrow of the Habsburgs in 1918 . Vienna was divided like Berlin among the four allied powers . The city was divided between the two sides of the war .
 It could hardly feed or clothe its citizens, much less contribute to the intellectual life of the continent . The continent's intellectual life could hardly contribute to its intellectual life, much more .
 Austrian philosophers, economists, mathematicians and scientists had either escaped into exile (to France, Britain, the British Dominions or the US), collaborated with the authorities or else been killed .
 The German intellectual emigration after 1933 had left behind almost no-one of standing not compromised by his dealings with the regime . The emigration of intellectuals after 1933 left behind little-known figures of standing .
 Martin Heidegger’s notorious flirtation with the Nazis was atypical only in its controversial implications for his influential philosophical writings . Tens of thousands of lesser Heideggers in schools, universities, local and national bureaucracies, newspapers and cultural institutions were similarly compromised .
 Many intellectuals and artists were tempted to throw in their lot with the Soviet Zone and its successor, the German Democratic Republic . Many artists and intellectuals were tempted by the move .
 East Germany proudly insisted upon its anti-Nazi credentials . Unlike the Federal Republic of Bonn, incompletely deNazified and reluctant to stare the recent German past .
 Some of the best talent that had survived from Weimar Republic days migrated east . The best talent from the Weimar republics migrated east.
 East Germany was the only state in the eastern bloc with a Western doppelganger . East Germany had access to a Western audience in a way not open to Romanian or Polish writers . One reason for this was that because Soviet-occupied East Germany .
 Berlin remained open until 1961 and the building of the Wall in 1961 . If censorship and pressure became intolerable, there remained the option of returning west, through Berlin crossing points .
 Berthold Brecht opted to live in the GDR; young writers like Christa Wolf chose to remain there; and younger writers still migrated east to study and write . What appealed to radical intellectuals from the ‘materialist’West was GDR’s self-
 The latter seemed at once heavy with a history it preferred not to discuss, and yet at the same time curiously weightless, lacking political roots . The United States above all, who had invented it, was dependent on the Western Allies, the United States .
 Intellectual life in the early Federal Republic lacked political direction . Intellectual life was lacking political direction in the Federal Republic .
 West Germany was, and for many years, peripheral to the mainstream of European intellectual life . And yet West Germany would remain, and would for many . years remain . peripheral to . the mainstream . of Europe .
 Raymond Aron was not the only person to recall that in earlier years this had looked to be Germany’s century . Aron: ‘In earlier years, it had looked like this would be Germany's century.’ Aron recalls that in later years this was Germany
 With so much of Germany’s cultural heritage polluted and disqualified by its appropriation for Nazi purposes, it was no longer clear just what Germans could now contribute to Europe . Germany's cultural heritage has been polluted by the appropriation of Nazi purposes .
 German writers and thinkers were obsessed, understandably enough, with peculiarly Ger3 Brecht . Brecht, characteristically, hedged his bets by retaining his Austrian passport .
 West German intellectuals’ studious avoidance of ideological politics did most to marginalize them in the first post-war decade . But it was studious avoiding ideological politics that marginalized them in that period . Public conversation in western Europe was intensely politicized .
 The British, too, were mostly peripheral to European intellectual life in these years, though for very different reasons . The British were largely peripheral to Europe's intellectual life .
 In inter-war Britain neither Fascists nor Communists had succeeded in translating social dissent into political revolution . But neither Fascism nor Communists were able to translate social dissent to revolution .
 By the election of 1951 the CPGB attracted just 21,000 voters in a population of some 49 million . By 1951 the election was held in the country's largest city, London .
 This in no way inhibited intellectual sympathy for Marxism, among the London intelligentsia and in the universities, he says . This was no way inhibiting sympathy for Marxist Marxism, he adds .
 The British mandarin Left had little time for the travails of the small countries between Germany and Russia, whom they had always regarded as something of a nuisance . And the Left, like their contemporaries in the Foreign Office, had little patience for the small nations .
 Communism did not mobilize or divide intellectuals in Britain to anything like the same extent as Communism . But whereas these matters would stir heated debate across the English Channel, Communism didn't stir debate in Britain .
 It is symptomatic of the ambivalent mood of post-war England that the country had just fought and won a six-year war against its mortal enemy . Yet cultural commentators were absorbed by intimations of failure .
 European politics and letters were regularly covered in weekly and periodical magazines, and British readers could be well-informed if they wished . European politics was regularly covered by European newspapers and magazines .
 The British were not unaware of the scale of the trauma that Europe had just passed through . Nor were the British unaware that the crisis had just been triggered by the fall of the Great Depression .
 With certain notable exceptions, 4 British intellectuals did not play an influential part in the great debates of continental Europe, but observed them from the sidelines . With certain exceptions, they were not influential in Europe's great debates .
 Affairs that were political in Europe were usually confined to academic circles in the UK . Broadly speaking, affairs that were politically relevant in Europe aroused only intellectual interest in Britain . Topics of intellectual concern on the Continent were usually limited to academic circle in UK .
 Of all the countries of western Europe, it was Italy that had most directly experienced the plagues of the age . Italy was the most directly directly affected by the plague .
 The country had been governed for 20 years by the world’s first Fascist regime . The country was governed for twenty years by . the world's first . fascist regime .
 It had been occupied by the Germans, then liberated by the Western Allies, in a war of attrition and destruction that had lasted nearly two years . It covered three quarters of the country, and reduced much of the land and its people to near-destitution .
 From September 1943 to April 1945 the north of Italy was convulsed in what amounted in all but name to a full-scale civil war . Moreover, from September 1943 until April 1945, Italy's north was convulsioned in a civil war.
 As a former Axis state Italy was an object of suspicion to West and East alike . Italy was once a point of suspicion in the eyes of both East and West .
 Until Tito's split with Stalin, Italy’s unresolved border with Yugoslavia was the most unsettled . The best-known of course was Arthur Koestler, but then he might as readily be described as Hungarian, or Austrian, or French .
 Intellectual life in post-war Italy was highly politicized and intimately tied to the problem of Communism . For all these reasons, intellectual life in Italy was closely tied to Communism .
 The overwhelming majority of young Italian intellectuals, including even some of those tempted by Fascism, had formed in the shadow of Benedetto Croce . Even some of the young intellectuals had been formed by Croce, the Italian poet .
 Croce’s distinctive blend of Hegelian idealism in philosophy and nineteenth-century liberalism in politics had provided an ethical reference for a generation of intellectual anti-Fascists . But in the post-war circumstances, it seemed manifestly insufficient .
 The PCI had a special quality that distinguished it from other Communist parties, East and West . The party's special quality was its ability to distinguish itself from the Communist Party .
 Togliatti’s strategy came under growing pressure with the division of Europe . But he says it is not the only solution to the problem .
 Togliatti’s post-war policy of working within the institutions of liberal democracy began to seem naive . Meanwhile, with the success of the Christian Democrats in the elections of 1948, it began to look naive .
 Togliatti had no option but to exercise tighter control and impose Stalinist norms . Whatever his doubts, then, he had no choice but to impose tighter control .
 As Vittorini, the editor of the Communist cultural journal II Politechnico, had reminded Togliatti in an Open Letter back in January 1947, ‘culture’ cannot be subordinated to politics, except at its own expense and at the price of truth
 Togliatti had spent the 1930s in Moscow and had played a leading role in the Comintern’s Spanish operations in 1937-38 . He had spent most of his life in Moscow, and had spent time in Spain .
 Togliatti’s critics on the non-Communist Left were consistently wrongfooted by the perception at home and abroad that the PCI was not like other Communist parties . Indeed, critics of the Communist Party were wrongfooted .
 As Ignazio Silone would later acknowledge, Italian Socialists and others had only themselves to blame . IgnazIO Silone had only himself to blame for the tragedy .
 The close relations between Communists and Socialists in Italy, at least until 1948, inhibited the emergence of a clear left-leaning alternative to Communism . Non-Communist Marxists were reluctant to criticize the Soviet Union until 1948 .
 Italy was unusual in Western Europe for the relatively simpatico quality of its Communists . But it was also atypical for another reason . The Communist Party of Italy was a relatively moderate Communist Party in Italy .
 The overthrow of Mussolini in 1943 could not obscure the complicity of many Italian intellectuals in his twenty-year rule . Many Italian intellectuals were complicit in the Italian dictator's rule .
 Elio Vittorini himself had won prizes in Fascist literary competitions . Elio won a series of prizes in the Fascist literature .
 Vittorio de Sica was a well-known actor in Fascist-era films before becoming the leading exponent of post-war Neo-Realism . De Sica is best known for his role in the post-Fascist films .
 His fellow Neo-Realist director Roberto Rossellini had just a few years before made documentaries and feature films in Mussolini’s Italy with help from the authorities, and his was not an isolated case .
 By 1943 Mussolini’s rule was the normal order of things for the many millions of Italians . Millions of Italians had no adult memory of any other peacetime government . Mussolini's rule was a normal order for many of the Italians .
 The moral standing of the vast majority of Italian intellectuals in the post-war years mirrored the rather ambivalent international position of the country as a whole, too uncomfortably implicated in its authoritarian past to take center stage in European affairs . Italy's moral standing in the 1950s mirrored the
 Naples, Florence, Bologna, Milan and Turin each formed little worlds of their own, with their own universities, newspapers, academies and academies .
 Rome was Rome's source of authority, the fount of patronage and locus of power . Rome was the source of power and source of patronage for Rome's rulers . The Roman capital was Rome .
 Its competitors were imprisoned, had destroyed themselves or or else were parochially absorbed . Its competitors had been imprisoned or destroyed themselves, or had been absorbed .
 Since the 1920s, as one European state after another fell to the dictators, political refugees and intellectual exiles had headed for France . Political refugees and intellectuals had headed to France .
 Some had remained during the war and joined the Resistance, where many had fallen victim to Vichy and the Nazis . Others had remained in the Resistance and joined it, but many had been killed in the war .
 Others, like Czeslaw Milosz or Francois Fejto, did not emigrate until the Soviet coups in Eastern Europe forced them to flee . They went straight to Paris .
 French intellectuals acquired a special international significance as spokesmen for the age of the age . The tenor of French political arguments epitomized the ideological rent in the world at large .
 It was historical chance that thrust French intellectuals into the limelight in these years, for their own concerns were no less parochial than anyone else’s .
 Post-war France was as much taken up with its own problems of score-settling, scarcity and political instability as any other country . The country's post-war problems include scarcity, scarcity, political instability and political problems .
 French intellectuals re-interpreted the politics of the rest of the world in the light of their own obsessions, and the narcissistic self-importance of Paris within France was projected un-self-critically onto the world at large .
 The divisions that would characterize the French intellectual community in later years were not immediately in evidence . The division that would define later French intellectual communities was not immediately evident .
 When Jean-Paul Sartre founded Les Temps Modernes in 1945 the editorial board included Simone de Beauvoir and Maurice Merleau-Ponty . The editorial board reflected a broad consensus around left-wing politics .
 Albert Camus was close friends with Sartre and De Beauvoir . He was the most influential French writer in post-war France . Camus is the author of the Combat daily newspaper Combat .
 Sartre and his generation claimed to have learnt from the war was the inevitability—and thus in certain measure the desirability—of political violence . Another lesson of the war is that political violence is inevitable, and therefore desirable, is that violence is necessary .
 Young people all across the continent were inured to a level of public brutality, in words and actions, that would have shocked their nineteenth-century forebears . Young people are inured now that public brutality is not as shocking as in the past .
 Emmanuel Mounier, editor of the magazine Esprit, argued that it was hypocritical to oppose violence or class-struggle when ‘white violence’ was practiced on the victims of capitalism every day .
 In France the appeal of violent solutions represented more than just a projection forward of recent experience . But in France, violent solutions are more likely to be seen as a result of recent experiences .
 Accusations of collaboration, betrayal and treason, demands for punishment and a fresh start did not begin with the Liberation of Palestine . The Liberation of the Arab Spring began in 1953 .
 No other country had such a long and unbroken experience of bipolar politics, says French historian . France has a long history of bipolar political bipolarity .
 France, more than any other Western nation-state, was a country whose intelligentsia approved and even worshipped violence as a tool of public policy . France's intellectuals approved and worshipped violence, even even worshipped it as a public policy, he says .
 French readers and writers had long since been familiarized with the idea that historical change and purgative bloodshed go hand in hand . French readers have long since learned of the idea of historical change .
 This familiarity of revolutionary violence in the French imaginaire, together with sepia-tinted memories of the old Franco-Russian alliance, pre-disposed intellectuals in France to greet Communist apologetics for Soviet brutality with a distinctly sympathetic ear . French intellectuals greet the apologetics of
 Marcel Peju reminded his readers that there is nothing wrong with killing one’s political enemies . Peju: Slansky trial for Sartre's Temps Modernes is a reminder of the importance of killing political opponents .
 ‘The ceremony with which they are killed seems a caricature of what it could be if this violence were justified in a Communist perspective. What was amiss in Prague was that ‘the ceremony with . which they were killed seems to seem a caricature,’ writes David Frum
 French intellectuals visiting the Soviet bloc waxed more lyrically enthusiastic than most at the sight of Communism under construction . French intellectuals visited the Soviet Union at the time .
 Engaged intellectuals were obliged to take a stand on the side of progress and History, whatever the occasional moral vicissitudes, they said .
 PCF in the immediate post-war years was even more electorally successful, with 28 percent of the vote in 1946 . PCF was never as large as the Italian party .
 The PCF was both stronger and more isolated than any other Communist party . And so was the PCF, which was both strong and isolated . It was the party's strongest and most isolated party in the world .
 'Poor things, it would just discourage them. As he explained to Claude Roy, ‘Poor things would just . discourage them,’ he said .
 Stalin’s most important quality was that he could be relied on to do what he was told and ask no questions . For Stalin, Thorez was relied on by the Soviets to do exactly what they wanted .
 Thorez deserted from the French army during the phony war of 1939-40 . He spent the next five years in Moscow . It was no coincidence that he spent the rest of his life there .
 The affinities of the Parisian intelligentsia are our soundest guide to the fault-lines of faith and opinion in Cold War Europe . For this reason, we look to the Parisians for a guide to our Cold War-era Europe .
 Intellectual schisms traced the contours of political ones, at home and abroad . In Paris, as nowhere else, intellectual schisms are traced to political ones . Parisians are divided by political differences, and in France, as well as the world .
 Laszlo Rajk had been interned in France after the Spanish Civil War . Artur London had worked in the French Resistance, was married to one prominent French Communist and was the future father-in-law of another . Traicho Rostov was well-remembered from
 Paris was even the site for two influential political trials of its own . Paris was the site of two influential trials of the 1930s and 1940s .
 In 1946 Victor Kravchenko, a mid-level Soviet bureaucrat who defected to the United States, published his memoirs . I Chose Freedom was published in 1946 . In 1946 he published his autobiography, I chose freedom .
 J’ai choisi la Liberte caused a sensation for their account of the Soviet purges, massacres, and the Soviet concentration camp system, the Gulag . When these appeared in France in May of the following year, under the title J'ai Choisi la Libte
 Kravchenko sued for libel when the paper repeated and amplified these charges in April 1948 . The paper repeated the charges, and Kravkovchenko sued the paper .
 In the judgment Kravchenko was awarded a single franc of insultingly symbolic damages . He was awarded the single franc .
 Kravchenko had been a less than ideal spokesman for many critics of the Soviet Union . Many critics say he was an ideal figure in Soviet politics .
 A longtime Soviet apparatchik who had chosen exile in the USA, he held no appeal for those anti-Communist European intellectuals, perhaps . Perhaps the majority, who were as concerned to keep their distance from Washington .
 David Rousset published in Le Figaro litteraire appeal to former inmates of Nazi camps to assist him in establishing an enquiry into Soviet concentration camps .
 Basing himself on the Soviet Union’s own Code of Corrective Labor, he argued that these were not re-education centers as officials asserted, but rather concentration camps .
 Communist writers Pierre Daix and Claude Morgan accused him of inventing his sources and caricaturing the USSR in a base calumny . A week later, again in Les Lettres fran^aises, the Communist writers accused him .
 The dramatis personae in this confrontation were unusually interesting . It was an unusually interesting moment in the life of a young man .
 He was French; a longtime socialist; a sometime Trotskyist; a Resistance hero and survivor of Buchenwald and Neuengamme . He co-founded with him in 1948 of a short-lived political movement, the Rassemblement democratique revolutionnaire .
 For such a man to accuse the Soviet Union of operating concentration or labor camps, it broke sharply with the conventional political alignments of the time . For such an accusation, it would have shocked the world .
 Daix, too, had been arrested for Resistance activities and deported, in his case to Mauthausen . Daix and Daix were both members of the German Resistance movement .
 Rousset’s witness list included a variety of highly credible first-hand experts on the Soviet prison system . Margarete Buber-Neumann testified to experience not only in Soviet camps but also in Ravensbriick .
 He even had some impact upon the conscience and consciousness of his contemporaries . He had impact on the conscience of his . contemporaries .
 Many Europeans first experience of political mobilization was in the anti-Fascist, Popular-Front leagues of the 1930s . For many Europeans their first experience was in anti-fascist, Popular Front leagues of 1930s.
 For most people the Second World War was remembered as a victory over Fascism . In France and Belgium especially in the post-war years, it was celebrated as such in the aftermath .
 They (the Fascists, Nazis, Franco-ists, Nationalists) are Right, we are Left. They (Fascist) are right, we (left) they are Left, they're Right, they are Right. They are Left . They are Fascists and Nazis,
 Most anti-Fascists’ opponents made a point of defining their own politics as above all anti-Communist . Nazism’s wartime appeal to conservative elites in countries as far apart as Denmark and Romania . This tidy symmetry worked to the Communists’ polemical
 Philo-Communism, or at least anti-communism, was the logical essence of anti-Fascism . The anti-fascism was the logic of the anti-Communist movement . The U.S. should not be afraid of fascism, it was the
 The Soviet Union had every interest in directing attention to its anti-Fascist credentials in the post-war years, especially once the U.S. replaced Germany as its enemy .
 Anti-Fascist rhetoric was now directed against America, accused first of defending revanchist Fascists and then, by extension, described as a proto-Fascism threat in its own right . America was now accused of being a prototype of Fascism .
 Edgar Morin: Stalingrad swept away all doubts, all criticisms . Morin says the battle swept away doubts and criticisms . The battle was held in 1944 in the Soviet Union .
 Paris was liberated by the Western Allies, whose sins loomed larger in local memory . It helped, too, that Paris had already been liberated by Western Allies .
 It is important to recall what was happening just a few miles to the east . It was important to remember what happened in the same area .
 Writers, professors, artists, teachers and journalists often admired Stalin not in spite of his faults, but because of them . Stalin's faults were not his faults but because they were, they were his faults .
 Stalin's show trials were displaying Soviet Communism at its most theatrically macabre . It was when he was murdering people on an industrial scale . Stalin's cult was most seduced by the man and his cult .
 It was the absurdly large gap separating rhetoric from reality that made it so irresistible to men and women of goodwill in search of a Cause .
 Communism excited intellectuals in a way that neither Hitler nor liberal democracy could hope to match . Neither Hitler nor democracy could have hoped to match the Communists .
 Jean-Paul Sartre, for one, was attracted to the Communists at precisely the moment when the ‘pyramid-builder’ was embarking upon his final, crazed projects . The 'pyramid builder' was most attracted to Communists at the time of his final
 The idea that the Soviet Union was engaged upon a momentous quest justified and excused its shortcomings was uniquely attractive to rationalist intellectuals . The Soviet Union's ambition justified the very ambition of its very ambition .
 Communism was directed towards impeccably universal and transcendent goals . But it was directed at impeccable universal goals . Communism was aimed at transcendent and universal goals.
 The crimes were excused by many non-Communist observers as the cost, so to speak, of doing business with History . Many non-communist observers said the crimes were carried out by the Communist Party .
 In the early years of the Cold War there were many in Western Europe who might have been more openly critical of Stalin, of the Soviet Union and of their local Communists . They were inhibited by the fear of giving aid and comfort to their political opponents .
 The cult of Mao in the West reached its zenith at the height of the Cultural Revolution, just when and just because Mao was persecuting writers, artists and teachers . This, too, was a legacy of ‘anti-Fascism’, the insistence that there
 By the early fifties it was a major calculation in European intellectual debates, above all in France . But by the early 1950s it had become a major political calculation in Europe .
 Anti-anti-Communism was becoming a political and cultural end in itself . Anti-communism was 'becoming an end to itself' in the United States .
 On the other side, far more numerous but also distinctly heterogeneous, were the anti-Communists . The anti-communist movement was particularly heterogeneous in the Soviet Union .
 Anti-Communists ran the gamut from Trotskyists to neoFascists . Critics of the USSR frequently found themselves sharing a platform or a petition with someone whose politics in other respects they abhorred .
 It was sometimes difficult to persuade liberal critics of Communism to voice their opinions in public for fear of being tarred with the brush of reaction . Such unholy alliances were a prime target for Soviet polemic .
 Genuinely reactionary intellectuals were thin on the ground in the first decade after the war . "Reactionist intellectuals" were thin in the early years of the war, but they are still alive today .
 Even those, like Jacques Laurent or Roger Nimier in France, who styled themselves as unashamedly of the Right, took a certain pleasure in acknowledging the hopelessness of their cause . They fashioned a sort of neo-Bohemian nostalgia for the discredited past .
 If the Left had the wind in its sails and History on its side, then a new generation of Right-wing literati would take pride in being defiant losers, turning the genuine decadence and death-seeking solipsism of inter-war writers like Drieu la Rochelle
 Intellectual conservatives in France and Britain dislike Communism little changed in 30 years . More representative were intellectual conservatives whose dislike of Communism had changed little in thirty years .
 In both countries, as in Italy, actively Catholic intellectuals played a prominent part in anti-Communist polemics . In Italy and Italy, Catholic intellectuals were prominent in the fight against the Communist Party .
 Francis Mauriac was drawn naturally into polemical exchanges with the political Left . The French Catholic was drawn to the political left by a French Catholic like Mauriac . Mauriac wrote a book about how to deal with modern life .
 Mauriac’s long post-war engagement with public affairs (he wrote regularly for Le Figaro into his eighties—he died in 1970 aged 85) His arguments were almost always cast in an ethical vein, often with the Communists .
 French Communists’justification for the Budapest show trial was ‘une obscenite de Vesprif.’ As he explained to the readers of Le Figaro on October 24th 1949, the French Communist Party’s justification for the show trial—then under way
 One is in the universe of free countries or else in that of lands placed under harsh Soviet rule . One is either in a free world or in a harsh Soviet state .
 Liberal intellectuals were always more comfortable than most conservatives with the American connection that history had imposed upon them . Liberal intellectuals, like Aron or Luigi Einaudi, were always distinctly more comfortable with history than conservatives .
 This was in part because of the memory of FDR was still fresh, and many of the American diplomats and policy-makers with whom Europeans dealt in these years were New Dealers . Many of the diplomats who dealt with the Europeans in the 1930s and 1940s were New FDRers .
 Violent clashes between Communist and Socialist workers’ unions turned many Western Social Democrats into confirmed foes of the Soviet bloc and ready recipients of covert U.S. cash .
 As the arteries of political and intellectual allegiance began to harden from 1947, Camus found himself increasingly prone to doubt the good faith of his political allies . Camus: "Doubts he at first stifled out of habit and for the sake of unity"
 He handed over control of the newspaper Combat in June 1947, no longer so politically confident or optimistic as he had been three years before . He handed control over to the Communist Party in 1947 .
 In his major novel La Peste, published the same year, it was clear that Camus was not comfortable with the hard-edged political realism of his political bedmates . Camus's major novel was published in 1944 . The novel, published in 1945, was one of the most
 Camus was reluctant to come out in public and break with his former friends . Nevertheless, Camus still refused to break with friends . Camus is still reluctant to release his autobiography .
 In public he still tried to balance honest criticism of Stalinism with balanced, ‘objective’ references to American racism and other crimes committed in the capitalist camp . In public, he still . tried to . balance honest . criticism with balanced . references to U.S. racism
 The Rousset trial and the East European show trials ended any illusions he might have retained . But the trial and show trials proved any illusions of his innocence .
 France must call something "concentrationnaire" if that is what it is, even if it is socialism . Today things are clear and we must call it a concentrationnaire, says French president .
 Camus became an ever more acerbic critic of 'progressivist' illusions . He condemned revolutionary violence in his 1951 essay L'Homme revolte that provoked the break with his erstwhile friends on the Parisian intellectual Left .
 For Sartre, the first duty of a radical intellectual was not to betray the workers, he says . He says: "First duty of an intellectual is to not betray workers" The French philosopher's first duty was to protect workers, not betray them .
 For Camus, like Silone, the most important thing was not to betray oneself . Camus: "For Camus ... the important thing to do is not betray oneself"
 It is difficult, looking back across the decades, to recapture in full the stark contrasts and rhetoric of the Cold War in these early years .
 As Maurice Thorez expressed it in July 1948, ‘people think they can insult us Communists by throwing the word ‘Stalinists” at us.’ ‘People think they . can insult [Communists] by throwing [Stalinist] at us
 Many gifted non-Communists were reluctant to condemn the Soviet leader, seeking out ways to minimize his crimes or excuse them altogether . And many non-communists, as we have seen, were likewise reluctant to .
 Hopeful illusions about the Soviet realm were accompanied by widespread misgivings—and worse, about America . America's hopes were dashed by the Soviet Union .
 The United States, together with the new Federal Republic of Germany, bore the brunt of Communist rhetorical violence . The U.S. and the new German Republic bore brunt of the rhetorical violence, historian says .
 The United States was not wildly popular in western Europe, despite and in some places because of its generous help in Europe’s economic reconstruction . The U.S. helped rebuild Europe's economic reconstruction in the 1980s .
 In July 1947 only 38 percent of French adults believed Marshall Aid did not pose a serious threat to French independence . The suspicion of American motives was fuelled by the war scares of 1948 and the fighting in Korea two years later .
 Communist charges that the U.S. Army was using biological weapons in Korea found a receptive audience . Fabricated Communist charges against the United States Army were used in the Korean War .
 In cultural matters, the Communists did not even need to take the initiative . The Communist Party did not need to be taken the initiative, it says .
 Fear of American domination, of the loss of national autonomy and initiative, brought into the ‘progressive’ camp men and women of all political stripes and none . Fear of U.S. domination brought into 'progressive' camp .
 In Russia everyone is happy, and we in Prague are very happy too, thanks to the government of Klement Gottwald . But in Russia, "everyone is happy," says the Czech Republic's president .
 An insidious American artifact was spreading across the continent . Meanwhile, the insidious American artifacts was spreading .
 Coca-Cola opened bottling plants in the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland and Italy between 1947 and 1949 . The company's first bottling plant opened in 1947 and 1950s .
 Within five years of its creation West Germany would have 96 such plants . West Germany became the largest market outside the United States itself .
 Some voices had been raised in protest in Belgium and Italy . Coca-Cola’s plans unleashed a public storm in France .
 There were rumours that the company planned to attach its logo, in neon, to the Eiffel Tower . The sentiments underlying it were serious, but the sentiments underlying were serious .
 The crassness of American culture, from films to beverages, was commonplaces for many Europeans of Left and Right . The self-interest and imperialist ambitions behind the U.S. presence in Europe were commonplaces .
 The Soviet Union might pose an immediate threat to Europe but it was America that presented the more insidious long-term challenge . U.S. posed a more insidious challenge to Europe in the 1960s, writes Peter Bergen .
 This view gained credence after the outbreak of war in Korea, when the U.S. began to press for the rearmament of the West Germans . The United States began pressing for West Germans to arm the West .
 Nationalist hostility to ‘Anglo-Americans’ was encouraged under the wartime occupation but silent since the liberation . It was dusted off and drafted into service in Italy, France and Belgium—and also in Germany itself .
 Stalin launched an international Movement for Peace . Stalin sought to capitalize on widespread fear of war and suspicion of things American among European elites . Stalin launched the movement in response to this fear .
 From 1949 to Stalin’s death ‘Peace’ was the centerpiece of Soviet cultural strategy . 'Peace' was the center of Soviet culture strategy from 1949 to 1949 .
 Movements main activity was gathering signatures, especially in France, where it had its strongest support .
 The Communists’ attitude towards their mass movements was strictly instrumental . The Peace Movement was only ever a vehicle for Soviet policy . It adopted the theme of ‘peaceful co-existence’ in 1951, taking its cue from Stalin’s international strategy .
 Communists had little but scorn for the illusions of their fellow-travellers . Privately, Communists were scornful of the illusions they had in the east .
 The Communists’ success in securing at least the conditional sympathy of many in Western Europe, and the great play that Communist parties in France and Italy especially made with their support among a cultural elite suspicious of America, prompted a response from Western intellectuals .
 Worried that in the cultural battle Stalin would win by default, they set about establishing a cultural ‘front’ of their own . Worried about the cultural 'front' of the Soviet Union, the Russians set about to establish their own.
 The founding meeting of the Congress for Cultural Freedom was held in Berlin in June 1950 . The first meeting was in Berlin, Germany .
 Congress was planned as a response to Moscow’s Peace Movement initiative of the previous year . It coincided with the outbreak of war in Korea, which gave it added significance . Congress planned as response to Russia's Peace initiative of previous year, but coincided with outbreak of Korea .
 The Congress for Cultural Freedom was formed under the official patronage of Bertrand Russell, Benedetto Croce, John Dewey, Karl Jaspers and Jacques Maritain, the French Catholic philosopher .
 Ayer, Margarete BuberNeumann, Ignazio Silone, Nicola Chiaromonte and Sidney Hook. Ayer . Ayer and Silone wrote the book .
 A group of younger men, mostly American, took responsibility for the day to day planning and administration of the CCF’s activities . They, in turn, were assisted by a group of young American men . The CCF was founded in 1973 and is now based in New York
 The CCF would eventually open up offices in thirty-five countries worldwide . The focus of its attention was on Europe, and within Europe on France, Italy and Germany .
 Encounter in Britain, Preuves in France, Tempo Presente in Italy and Der Monat in Germany . Encounter in the UK, Germany, Italy, Germany and Italy . Encounter is based in Britain and France .
 Encounter, Encounter, the most successful, boasted a circulation of 16,000 copies by 1958 . Preuves had just 3,000 subscribers in the same year . Encounter had just 16,500 copies of Encounter .
 Preuves provided the only liberal, anti-Communist forum in a cultural landscape dominated by neutralist, pacifist, fellow-traveling or straightforwardly Communist periodicals . But their contents were of an almost unvaryingly high quality, their contributors were among the best writers
 The Congress and its activities were publicly supported by the Ford Foundation and privately underwritten by the CIA . Nearly all activists and contributors were unaware of this until it became public many years later . The Ford Foundation, the CIA and Ford Foundation were also underwritten .
 U.S. government was covertly subsidizing antiCommunist cultural outlets in Europe . The implications were perhaps not as serious as they appear in retrospect, they say .
 American backing would certainly not have embarrassed some of the CCF writers . At a time when Communist and ‘front’ journals and all sorts of cultural products were covertly subsidized from Moscow, American backing .
 Arthur Koestler, Raymond Aron and Ignazio Silone did not need official American encouragement to take a hard line against Communism . There is no evidence that their critical views about the United States itself were ever toned down or censored to suit the paymasters in Washington .
 The Soviet Union established its ‘Society for Cultural Relations with Foreign Nations’ in 1925 . French, Germans and Italians had been actively underwriting overseas ‘cultural diplomacy’ since before 1914 .
 The Americans did not begin to budget for such activities until just before World War Two . It was only in 1946, with the establishment of the Fulbright Program, that they entered the field seriously . The Americans began budgeting such activities in 1946 .
 Until the autumn of 1947 American cultural and educational projects in Europe were directed towards ‘democratic reorientation’ Only then did anti-Communism become the primary strategic goal . Anti-Communistism became the primary goal of the U.S.
 By 1950 the U.S. Information Agency had taken overall charge of American cultural exchange and information programs in Europe .
 The Information Services Branch of the United States Occupation authorities in western Germany and Austria had full control of all media and cultural outlets in these countries . USIA was now in a position to exert huge influence in Western European cultural life .
 By 1953, at the height of the Cold War, U.S. foreign cultural programs employed 13,000 people and cost $129 million . Much of it was spent on the battle for the hearts and minds of the intellectual elite .
 Prominent Communist authors would travel to a variety of provincial cities to give talks, sign books and put on display the literary credentials of the Communist world . Elsa Triolet, Louis Aragon were among the Communist authors .
 The point was not so much to sell books as to remind readers that Communists stood for culture—French culture . But the point of the book was to remind people that Communists were French, not French .
 The American response was to set up ‘America Houses’, with libraries and newspaper-reading rooms, and host lectures, meetings and English-language classes .
 The study of English replaced French and classical languages as the first choice of Austrian highschool students . English replaced classical languages in the study of Austrian students .
 America House programs were sometimes undermined by the crude propaganda imperatives emanating from Washington . Radio Free Europe was inaugurated in Munich one month after the outbreak of the Korean War .
 At the peak of McCarthy years the directors of America Houses spent much of their time removing books from their shelves .
 Albert Einstein, Thomas Mann, Alberto Moravia, Tom Paine and Henry Thoreau were among those deemed inappropriate . Albert Einstein and Thomas Mann were among the authors whose works were considered inappropriate .
 American political ineptitude could do little to tarnish the West . Fortunately for the West, American popular culture had an appeal that American politics could tarnish .
 Communists were at a severe disadvantage in that their official disapproval of decadent American jazz and American cinema closely echoed the views of Josef Goebbels . Communists were also at a disadvantage because of their disapproval of American jazz, American cinema .
 Radio Free Europe was broadcasting into eastern Europe three hours of popular music every weekday afternoon, interspersed with news on the hour for ten minutes . East European Communist states were banning jazz as decadent and alien .
 Cinema, the other universal medium of the time, could be regulated in states under Communist control . But throughout western Europe the appeal of American films was universal .
 The French in particular took this line, echoing the early post-war efforts of their diplomats to trace an international policy independent of U.S. control . The French were among those who tried to trace a post-WWII foreign policy independent .
 Felix Lusset got on much better with his Soviet counterpart than he did with British or American representatives in occupied Berlin . He dreamed, like his masters in Paris, of a restored cultural axis reaching from Paris to Berlin and Leningrad .
 The United States spent hundreds of millions of dollars trying to win over European sympathies, but many of the resulting publications and products were heavy-handed and counter-productive . The U.S. spent . millions of pounds of money trying to . win over Europe .
 In Germany, America’s excessive attention to Communist crimes was seen by many as a deliberate ploy to forget or relativise the crimes of the Nazis . In Germany it was seen as an attempt to forget the Nazi crimes .
 In Italy the lurid anti-Communist campaigns of the Vatican undercut the anti-Stalinist arguments of Silone, Vittorini and others . The Vatican's anti-communist campaigns in Italy undercut those arguments . In Italy, the Vatican was leading a strong anti-
 Everywhere except Italy the Communist vote fell steadily from the late 1940s . Even those who did vote Communist often saw their vote either as a symbolic protest or else as an expression of class or communal solidarity .
 The Atlantic orientation of most Western Europeans had been decided before 1956 . Most European intellectuals would swing sharply away from the Soviet bloc .
 'I spent my early years in factory towns and their adjacent suburbs, amid bricks and soot and smokestacks and cobbled streets,' says Lodge . David Lodge .
 "My mother got up every morning in the chill and made a fire in the parlor stove," she says . "I got up in the morning every morning to make a fire," she adds .
 My early classrooms featured pot-bellied stoves and double desks with inkwells, into which we dipped our nibs . My early classroom was filled with pot bellies, stoves, double desks and ink wells .
 We boys wore short pants until the ceremony of communion solennelle, at age twelve . We boys wear short pants for the ceremony .
 In the same street the local grocery store had sawdust on the floor . Sainsbury's was staffed by beefy men in striped shirts and sprightly young women in starched aprons and caps .
 It looked exactly like the sepia photos on the wall taken when the store was first opened in the 1870s .
 Daily life in the first decade after World War Two would have been familiar to men and women of fifty years earlier . In many of its essential features, daily life in many of the first ten years after the war would be familiar to people living in Britain .
 Coal still met nine-tenths of Britain’s fuel requirements, 82 percent of the needs of Belgium and the other countries of the new European Coal and Steel 'Luc Sante'
 Winston Churchill used to remind audiences that he had ridden in the last cavalry charge of the British Army in 1898 . Winston Churchill, then Prime Minister at the time, used to say he rode in the charge at Omdurman in the Sudan .
 London was still periodically shrouded in the damp fog so familiar from images of the industrial city of late-Victorian times .
 British films from the Edwardian era have a distinctly Edwardian feel . The films from those years have a distinct Edwardian look .
 In The Man in a White Suit contemporary Manchester is depicted as nineteenth-century in all its essentials . Bosses and union leaders concur in treating entrepreneurial amateurism as a moral virtue, whatever the price .
 The same sense of suspended time hung over much of continental Europe too . Europe's most populous countries are in the middle of the year .
 Belgium and Britain hung in a sort of delayed Edwardian limbo . Like French provincial towns, where men in berets really did collect a baguette on their way home from the corner Cafe de la Paix . Spain sealed in aspic by Franco’s authoritarian rule .
 Post-war Europe was still warmed by the fading embers of the nineteenth-century economic revolution that had almost run its course, leaving behind sedimentary evidence of cultural habits and social relations at odds with new age of airplanes and atomic weapons .
 The modernizing fervor of the 1920s and even the 1930s had drained away, leaving behind an older order of life . The modernization fervor had been drained away from the modernizing era of life, the author says .
 In 1951 only one Italian child in nine attended school past the age of 13 . In Italy, as in much of rural Europe, children still entered the job market upon completing primary education .
 Religion, especially the Catholic religion, basked in a brief Indian summer of restored authority . The Catholic faith was restored to power by Pope Francis .
 In return the ecclesiastical hierarchy maintained and enforced the conservative conflation of religion with national identity . In return, the Catholic Church has maintained a conservative conflating of religion and identity .
 At the thousands of memorial sites dedicated to victims of anti-clerical Republicanism, the Spanish Church organized countless ceremonies and memorials . The Spanish Church has organized countless memorials and ceremonies .
 A judicious mix of religion, civic authority and victory commemoration reinforced the spiritual and mnemonic monopoly of the clerical hierarchy . The Catholic Church has a monopoly of power in the Catholic Church .
 Franco needed Catholicism even more than the Church needed him to maintain Spain’s tenuous post-war links to the international community . Franco gave it, in effect, unrestricted scope to re-create in modern Spain the ‘Crusading’ spirit of the regime .
 Even in Holland the Catholic hierarchy felt confident enough to excommunicate electors who voted for its Labour opponents in the first post-war elections . Elsewhere in Western Europe the Catholic Church had to reckon with competing claims on popular allegiance .
 As late as 1956, seven out of ten Italians regularly attended Sunday Mass . Two years before the death of Pius XII marked the end of the old order, 7 out of 10 Italians still attended Mass .
 As in Flanders, the Church in Italy did especially well among Monarchists, women and the elderly . The majority of the population as a whole supported the Church .
 In France, the Catholic hierarchy and its political supporters felt sufficiently confident to press for special educational privileges in a ‘guerre scolaire ’ that echoed the church-state struggles of the 1880s . The Catholic hierarchy pressed for special education privileges in France .
 The main battleground was the old issue of state funding for Catholic schools . Catholic schools are a traditional demand but well chosen .
 The cost and quality of their children’s education was one of the few issues that could be counted on to mobilize even the most intermittent churchgoers . While the energy that had fuelled nineteenth-century anti-clericalism, in France as in Italy or Germany, had mostly dissolved
 Of Europe’s traditional religions, only the Catholics were increasing the number of their active constituents in the forties and fifties . Only the Catholics increased their number of active constituents during those years .
 It was the Catholic Church’s association with the old order, indeed its firm stand against modernity and change, which gave it a special appeal in these transitional years .
 The various Protestant churches of north-west Europe had no such allure . They were found in North-West Europe in the 1930s .
 In Germany a significant segment of the non-Catholic population was now under Communist rule . In 1945 the Stuttgart Confession of Guilt by the Protestant leaders in 1945 half-conceded .
 Protestant churches did not offer an alternative to the modern world but rather a way to live in harmony with it . The main problem, in West Germany as elsewhere, was that Protestant churches didn't offer alternative to modern world . But the main problem was that Protestants were not offering an alternative but
 The spiritual authority of the Protestant pastor or the Anglican vicar was by convention offered not as a competitor to the state, but rather as its junior partner . The Protestant churches of central Europe were unable to withstand the pressure of the Communist state in these years .
 The distinction between church and state as arbiters of public manners and morals became rather blurred . But at a time when the West European state was embarking on a much enhanced role as the spiritual and material guardian of its citizens .
 The late forties and early fifties appear as a transitional age, in which conventions of social deference and claims of rank and authority still held sway, but where the modern state was beginning to displace church and even class as the arbiter of collective behavior .
 The character of the age is nicely encapsulated in an instruction booklet ( BBC Variety Programmes)
 Policy Guide for Writers and Producers published by the BBC for internal use in 1948 .
 ‘Spivs’ and ‘drones’ for louche types and minor criminals, the ‘black market’ as an all-purpose term for traders and customers circumventing rationing and other restrictions . These terms show how much Britain at least lived for
 Edwardian-era-era reformism was perhaps distinctive to Britain . Such strictures, and their accompanying note of high-collared, reformism, were perhaps distinctive .
 Europeans were still subject to the habits and regulations of an earlier time . In school, in church, on state-run radio, in the confident, patronizing style of the broadsheet and even the tabloid press, and in the speech .
 Clement Attlee would not have been out of place in a Victorian mission to the industrial slums . Attlee oversaw Britain’s transition to a modern welfare state should have begun his public career performing good works in the East End .
 We must set the unmistakably modern form of entertainment. Against this image of an older Europe—moving at the pace of earlier days, at once changed by the war and restrained by pre-war routines and habits. We must be at the heart of its modern form .
 1,700 million seats sold in the country’s five thousand cinemas in 1946 . In Britain, cinema attendance peaked soon after the end of the war .
 In 1950, the average English man or woman went to the cinema twenty-eight times a year, a figure that was nearly 40 percent higher than in the last year before the war . Even in 1950, attendance had already started to decline, but attendance was still high .
 British cinema audience was to slip steadily through the fifties . In continental Europe it continued to grow .
 One thousand new picture houses opened in France during the first half of the 1950s . In Italy three thousand new cinemas appeared, bringing the national total to some 10,000 by 1956 .
 France had more publications devoted to cinema than the other two combined . West 6 and West 6 were not among the publications dedicated to cinema .
 Cinema attendance per head of the adult population in Spain in 1947 was among the highest in Europe . But by any other measure audiences were large indeed .
 American domination of post-war European cinema did not come about through the vagaries of popular taste alone, however, however . American domination came about through popular taste, not through popular tastes, but through American domination .
 In general, American films were part of America’s appeal, and as such significant assets in the cultural Cold War . American films are part of the American appeal in the Cold War.
 Only intellectuals were likely to be sufficiently moved by Sergei Eisenstein’s depiction of Odessa in the Battleship Potemkin to translate their aesthetic appreciation into political affinity . But everyone—intellectuals included—could appreciate Humphrey Bogart's work .
 American cinema’s drive into Europe was above all prompted by economic considerations . However, American cinema's drive to Europe was not all about economic considerations, it says .
 U.S. films had always been exported to Europe and made money there . United States films made money in Europe . Films were exported to the continent .
 After World War Two American producers pressed especially hard for access to European markets . American producers squeezed between falling domestic cinema attendance and rising cost of film-making .
 As early as 1927 the UK Parliament had passed a law instituting a British quota system . 20 percent of all films released in Britain by 1936 had to be British made .
 After World War Two the British Government’s goal was to set this quota at 30 percent for 1948 . The British Government was aiming for this quota to be 30 percent in 1948 .
 Hollywood lobbying kept State Department pressure on European negotiators . Agreement to allow entry for U.S. films was part of every major bipartite trade deal or loan agreement reached by the United States and its European allies .
 Under the terms of the Blum-Byrnes accords of May 1946, the French government very reluctantly reduced its protectionist quota from 55 percent French-made films per annum to 30 percent .
 British Labour Government failed to keep out U.S. imports from the U.K. The British Labour government failed to stop the import . The Labour government has failed to act as a result .
 Franco succeeded in restricting U.S. film imports into Spain (despite an attempted ‘boycott’ of the Spanish market by United States producers from 1955 to 1958 . Franco had no need to respond to public opinion or anticipate the political fall-out of his decisions .
 Even in Spain, as we have seen, American movies vastly outnumbered home-grown products . But even in Spain as well as Spain, U.S. movies vastly outnumber home-made products .
 In time, European governments found themselves indirectly subsidizing Hollywood itself, via local intermediaries .
 By 1952,40 percent of the United States film industry’s revenue was generated overseas . Most of the U.S. film industry's revenue was in Europe .
 As a result of American domination of the European market, the European films of this period are not always the most reliable guide to European filmgoers’ experience or sensibilities .
 The British viewer especially likely to form a sense of contemporary Englishness as much from Hollywood’s presentation of England as from his or her own direct experience, says the author .
 Mrs Miniver is a very English tale of domestic fortitude and endurance, of middle-class reticence and perseverance . Set symptomatically around the disaster at Dunkirk where all these qualities were taken to be most on display, it was a pure product of Hollywood .
 For the English generation that first saw it the film would long remain the truest representation of national memory and self-image . Yet for the . English generation, it would remain the . truest . representation of . national memory .
 They were well-made, usually on canvas far beyond the resources of any European producer . They were usually on a canvas far from any European production .
 They were not, however, ‘escapist’ in the manner of 1930s ‘screwball’ comedies or romantic fantasies . The films were not 'escapist' in the way of the 1930s .
 The mood and cinematographic texture of American films were darker and more sombre than American films of earlier decades . Their setting might be a detective story or social drama .
 Their Italian and French counterparts were usually updated costume dramas, with peasants and aristocrats occasionally replaced by mechanics or businessmen . Their no-less-forgettable Italian, French and Italian equivalents were usually .
 The best European films of the post-war decade dealt with one way or another with the war . The best film of the decade dealt in one way with the conflict .
 Three of these films, Open City, Paisan and Germania anno zero were by Roberto Rossellini . Three of the films were by the Italian director .
 Rossellini was responsible for the cycle of neorealist films made in the years 1945-52 that propelled Italian filmmakers to the front rank of international cinema . Together with Vittorio De Sica, he directed Sciuscia , Bicycle Thieves and Umberto D .
 Neorealist films took the damage and destruction of war, especially in the cities, as the setting and subject for post-war cinema . Like one or two of the contemporary English comedies made at the Ealing Studios .
 Even the best of the English films never approached the sombre humanism of the Italian masterpieces . But even the best film in the world was never as good as the best in Italy .
 The simple ‘verities’ of these films reflect not so much the European world as it was as it then was as that same world passed through the grid of wartime memories and myths .
 Like other amusements of its era, cinema-going was a collective pleasure . Film-goers were able to enjoy it as a shared pleasure .
 In small Italian towns the weekly film would be watched and commented on by most of the population, a public entertainment publicly discussed . In small towns people would watch and comment on the weekly films .
 In England, at Saturday morning shows for children, songs were flashed on the screen . The audience was encouraged to sing along in harmony with a little white ball that bounced from word to word .
 As members of the Odeon we all intend to be Good citizens when we grow up . And champions of the Free. We are proud to be part of the 'Odeon'
 The didactic tone was not representative—at least not in so overt a form, and would disappear within a few years . It would disappear in the next few years, but the tone would be different .
 Popular workingmen’s recreations like pigeon-raising, speedway and greyhound racing reached their peak in these years before entering upon a steady decline that accelerated from the later 1950s .
 Boys still dressed like their grandfathers, except for the ubiquitous short trousers . Short trousers are still a thing of the past .
 Christian Dior’s ‘New Look’ of February 1947 was meant to contrast with wartime shortages of cloth, with ankle-length skirts, stuffed ‘leg of mutton’ shoulders and a plethora of bows and pleats . The 'New Look' was favored
 Trevor Grundy, Memoir of a Fascist Childhood , page 19. During the war, American Americans fought for fascism . During the War, American soldiers fought for the Nazis .
 Most people in post-war Europe were chiefly concerned with making do . Most people were concerned about making do with their possessions . In post-WWII Europe was mainly concerned about how to survive .
 At the beginning of the 1950s, one Italian family in four lived in poverty and most of the rest were little better off . At the same time, one of the most Italian families in Italy was in poverty .
 Less than one house in two had an indoor toilet, only one in eight boasted a bathroom . Less than a third of homes in the country had indoor toilets .
 17 million of the country’s 47 million residents were still classed as ‘needy’ in 1950 . In West Germany in 1950 17 million people were classed 'needy' because they had nowhere to live .
 Consumption patterns of post-war Europe reflected the continuing penury of the continent and the enduring impact of the Depression and the war . Europe's consumption patterns reflected penury and the impact of war and the Depression .
 Rationing continued longest in Britain, where bread rationing was introduced between July 1946 and July 1948 . Food rationing on meat and many other foods was not finally ended until the summer of 1954 . Clothing rationing and furniture rationing continued until 1952 .
 Even in France, rationing (and therefore the black market) disappeared rather sooner than sooner . The wartime obsession with food supply did not abate until 1949 at the earliest .
 Rationing in Eastern Europe was not abolished until 1953 in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and Bulgaria; 1954 in Romania, 1957 in Albania and 1958 in East Germany . In 1953 in Hungary, Hungary and Poland, Poland, Bulgaria, Romania, Albania and Albania, it was abolished
 Working-class women in the UK shopped twice a day for food, either on foot or by public transport, much as their mothers and grandmothers had done before them . Very few Europeans possessed a car or a fridge, and few Europeans had a car .
 In many ways, Europe in the late 1940s and early 1950s was less open, less mobile and more insular than it had been in 1913 . Europe in many ways was less mobile, less open and less mobile than it was in 1913, historian says .
 Only one quarter of the rubble of battle had been cleared in Berlin by 1950 . It was certainly more dilapidated, and not just in Berlin, where only one quarter was cleared .
 In the United States by the end of the 1940s most industrial equipment was under five years old . In post-war France the average age of machinery was twenty years . In the U.S. in the 1950s most equipment was less than five-year-old .
 A typical French farmer produced food for five fellow Frenchmen . The American farmer was already producing at three times this rate . The French farmer produces food for three times that rate .
 Few Europeans in that time, well-informed or otherwise, anticipated the scale of change that was about to break upon them . Few Europeans expected the change in Europe in the early 1900s .
 The experience of the past half-century had induced in many a skeptical pessimism . The experience has induced in some of the world's most pessimistic thinkers to doubt the future .
 Europe was an optimistic continent in the years before World War One . Europe's statesmen and commentators looked to a confident future .
 Thirty years on, after World War Two, people had their eyes firmly and nervously fixed upon the terrible past . Thirty years after the war, people still had eyes firmly fixed upon a terrible past. Thirty years later, people were looking for answers .
 The implications of this could be discerned only vaguely at the time, but could not be seen at all . The implications were in the failure of Fascist or Communist parties to cash in upon the difficulties of daily existence .
 For the first time in many years, Europeans are starting to have babies again . Europeans are having babies again after a decade of fertility problems .
 In the UK the birthrate in 1949 was up by 11 percent on 1937 . In France it had risen by an unprecedented 33 percent . In 1949, the birth rate in the UK was up 11 percent .
 Africa's leading demographic marker since 1913 had been premature death, premature death . The implications of this burst of fertility, in Africa, were momentous . It was the first time premature death had been a factor in fertility since 1913 .
 In more ways than most contemporaries could possibly have foreseen, a new Europe was being born . New Europe was in the midst of a new era in history .
 Max Frisch: ‘Because we have had our troops there, the Europeans had not done their share. We have had to do our share. The Europeans were not doing their share,’ he said . Max Frischer: 'Because of our troops, we have not done
 From 1945 until early 1953, Europeans lived in the shadow of the Second World War and in anxious anticipation of a third . Europeans lived, as we have seen, in the shadows of the war and in anticipation of another .
 The failed settlement of 1919 was still fresh in the minds of statesmen and public alike . It was the first time a settlement had been reached in the warring parties had reached an agreement .
 The imposition of Communism in Eastern Europe was a pointed reminder of the revolutionary instability that had followed World War One . Communism was imposed in the aftermath of the war .
 The Prague coup, the tensions in Berlin and the Korean War in the Far East seemed uncomfortably reminiscent of the serial international crises of the thirties . The Korean War and the Prague coup were the key events of the 1930s .
 In July 1951 the Western Allies declared their ‘state of war’ with Germany to be over . In the circumstances of a rapidly intensifying Cold War there was still no Peace Treaty, and little prospect of one to come .
 Fascism would not once again find fertile soil in the unresolved problem of Germany, or indeed anywhere else . Nor could anyone be confident that Fascism . would not find fertile ground in Germany or anywhere else. Fascism found fertile soil .
 The expanding web of international alliances, agencies and accords offered little guarantee of international harmony .
 The Council of Europe, the European Coal and Steel Community and the European Payments Union were the germ of a new and stable system of inter-state relations . With the benefit of hindsight we can now see that between them they were the basis of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization .
 At the time such documents, like the agencies that published them, rather closely resembled the well-meaning but doomed pacts and leagues of the 1920s .
 Skeptical contemporaries could be forgiven for paying them little attention . Skeptics will pay little attention to the claims made by the world's leading thinkers .
 With the death of Stalin and the end of the Korean War, Western Europe stumbled half unawares into a remarkable era of political stability . The death of the Soviet Union and the fall of the Cold War led to a remarkable period of stability in Europe .
 For the first time in four decades the states of the continent’s western half were neither at war nor under the threat of imminent war, at least among themselves . The states of Europe's western half are not at war or under threat of war .
 Communist parties everywhere except Italy began their slow retreat to the political margins . Communist parties in Italy have seen a slow decline in the political landscape .
 The threat of a Fascist revival no longer carried conviction, except perhaps at Communist political rallies . And the threat of an Fascist resurgence no longer carries conviction except perhaps from Communist rallies .
 Western Europeans owe their newfound well-being to the uncertainties of the Cold War . Western Europeans owed their newfound prosperity to the uncertainty of Cold War. Western Europeans are now more secure in the world .
 The internationalization of political confrontations and the U.S. engagement of the United States helped draw the sting from domestic political conflicts, says historian John Avlon .
 Political issues that in an earlier age would almost certainly have led to violence and war were all contained, and would in due course be addressed . The unresolved problem of Germany, territorial conflicts between Yugoslavia and Italy, the future of occupied Austria would all be addressed in the context of Great Power confront
 Even after the panic of 1950 had subsided, Western leaders recognized that Stalin had no immediate plans to ‘do a Korea’ in central Europe, the two sides were no closer to agreement .
 Until all Germans were free to choose for themselves the political regime under which they would live, such reunification was not possible . But until all Germans chose for themselves, such a regime would not be possible, he says .
 The Federal Republic of Germany would be treated as the representative of all German citizens . In the meantime, the German government would be treating all citizens as representatives .
 Unofficially, the Americans, like the West Europeans, were not at all unhappy to see Germany divided indefinitely . The West Europeans were also unhappy with the outcome of the war .
 In his last years Stalin continued to maintain the official Soviet stance, that Moscow sought a united Germany . He would even accept that such a Germany be neutral, so long as it was unarmed . In his final years Stalin would even be willing to accept a neutral neutral Germany, as long as
 In a series of Notes in the spring of 1952 Stalin proposed that the four occupying powers draw up a Peace Treaty aimed at establishing such a united Germany, neutral and demilitarized . All occupying forces removed and its government chosen by free, all-German elections .
 Historians have criticized Washington for its failure to take Stalin’s proposals up on these proposals .
 Western leaders did not take Stalin’s Notes very seriously and refused to take the Soviet Union up on its offer . Western leaders didn't take Stalin's Notes seriously .
 The Soviet leaders attached little importance to their own proposals and didn’t seriously expect the Americans, British and French to withdraw their occupying troops and allow a neutral, unarmed Germany to float loose in the middle of Europe .
 Stalin and his successors were not unhappy to see a continuing U.S. military presence on German soil . The presence of United States troops in West Germany was one of the more reliable guarantees against German revanchism, he says .
 Moscow would happily have abandoned its East German clients and their Democratic Republic, but not for anything short of that . It was worth risking that guarantee in exchange for a demilitarized Germany in the Soviet shadow .
 Russia did not want at any price was a re-militarized West Germany . What the Russians wanted at any cost was a new-style German state . The Russians wanted a new state of Germany .
 The point of the Soviet demarches was not to reach an agreement with the West on German reunification, but to head off the impending prospect of German rearmament, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: The point was to prevent the prospect of rearmaments in Germany .
 The Americans raised the matter, a mere five years after Hitler’s defeat, as a direct consequence of the Korean War . The Americans had raised the issue, a matter five years later, as well as the Korean war .
 If Congress were to accede to the Truman Administration’s requests for increased military aid overseas, the allies would have to be seen to make their own contribution to their continent's defense . Germany included in the Truman administration's request for increased aid overseas .
 U.S. Secretary of State Dean Acheson first initiated discussions about German rearmament with Britain and France, in September 1950 . The French vehemently opposed the idea .
 Bonn would insist upon full international recognition of the FRG and an amnesty for German war criminals held in Allied custody . Bonn also would insist on full recognition of FRG, amnesty for war criminals .
 The French pre-empted further discussion of a German military contribution to NATO by making a counter-proposal of their own . Anticipating some such deal being cut behind their back, the French made their own counter proposal .
 In October 1950, Rene Pleven, the French Prime Minister, suggested that a European Defense Community be established, analogous to the Schuman Plan . Pleven suggested that the community be established in a similar way to Schuman's .
 The Americans, like the British, were not happy with the idea but agreed to go along with it as a second-best solution to the problem of defending Europe .
 The European Defense Community Treaty was signed on May 27th 1952, along with contingent documents affirming that once all the signatory countries had ratified the Treaty, the U.S. and Great Britain would cooperate fully with an EDF and that the military occupation of Germany would come to an
 The Soviet Union had tried unsuccessfully to derail with its offers of a Peace Treaty demilitarizing Germany . It was this accord that the Soviet Union unsuccessfully tried unsuccessfully .
 The West German Bundestag ratified the EDC Treaty in March 1953, and the Benelux countries followed suit . The EDC treaty was ratified by West Germany in 1953 .
 Western Europe would have acquired something resembling a European army, with integrated and intermingled national contingents, including a German one . It only remained for the French National Assembly to ratify the Treaty .
 At NATO Council meeting in December 1953 John Foster Dulles threatened an ‘agonising reappraisal’ of U.S. policy if EDC were to fail . France’s hesitations frustrated the Americans .
 The Pleven Plan was the brainchild of a French prime minister . But public debate had revealed the extent of French reluctance to countenance German rearmament under any conditions .
 The plan for a European Defense Community, and with it a re-armed Germany in a European army, was finished . The plan with it was finished, with Germany joining a European defense community .
 Adenauer attributed Mendes’s behavior to his ‘Jewishness’—for which he was, according to the German Chancellor, overcompensating by aligning himself with French nationalist sentiment . Adenauer said Mendes's behavior was due to his 'Jewishness'
 The Korean War was over, Stalin was dead, NATO was a fixture on the international scene . NATO was an international force in the 1950s and '60s .
 The French had successfully postponed the problem of European defense for a while but they could not put it off much longer . The French government has been forced to accept responsibility for Europe's defence .
 Within a few weeks of the National Assembly vote on the EDC the Western Allied powers met twice, at hastily convened conferences in London and Paris . The US, Britain and France met twice in the weeks following the vote on EDC .
 The so-called London Agreements were to form the basis of European defense policy for the next half century . At the initiative of the British foreign secretary Anthony Eden a set of proposals was rapidly approved . The Paris Treaties were to be finalized in the following years .
 France would agree to allow the Federal Republic an army of no more than half a million men; and Germany would join NATO as a sovereign state . In return, the French agreed to allow Germany to join NATO, but would only have a small army of less than 500,000 .
 When these treaties were ratified and went into effect, the German occupation statute would lapse . In all but name, the Western Allies would have made formal peace with their erstwhile enemy .
 Allied troops would remain in the Federal Republic to guard against German recidivism, but as part of a European presence and by mutual agreement . Allied troops to remain in Germany would be part of the European presence in the country .
 The French were by no means unanimous in welcoming these new plans, but having shot down their own alternative proposals they were ill-placed to protest . West Germany achieved more generous terms with the French in the 1970s . Based, according to Eden, on an idea dreamed up in his morning
 France was its own worst enemy. Not for the first time in international disputes over Germany, France was itself itself worst enemy .
 Understandably, French support for the Paris Treaties was more than a little ambivalent . The French was ambivalent about the Treaties . The Treaties were the result of the Treaty of Versailles .
 On May 15th 1955, ten days after the formal incorporation of West Germany into NATO and the abolition of the Allied High Commission in the Federal Republic, the Soviet Union announced the formation of its Warsaw Pact .
 Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Albania, Albania and the Soviet Union formed an alliance of ‘friendship, cooperation and mutual assistance’ under a unified command . The Soviet Union was formed under the name of the Polish Republic .
 Moscow abrogated its wartime treaties of alliance with Britain and France . It asserted the full sovereignty of the East German Democratic Republic and incorporated it into the Warsaw Pact .
 The German Question had not exactly been answered, but with both parts fully integrated into their respective international alliances it would now be set aside for a while . Berlin's place to be taken in due course by the still unresolved dilemma of the divided former capital, Berlin .
 Now that the immediate future of Germany has been resolved, both sides hastened to address secondary conflicts and tensions . Germany's future is in the hands of the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 The new men in the Kremlin, Nikita Khrushchev in particular, took seriously their own agenda for ‘peaceful coexistence’ in Europe . They shared the American desire to minimize the risk of future confrontations .
 The day after the Warsaw Pact was announced, the four occupying powers signed the Austrian State Treaty . The treaty was signed by the occupying powers the day after it was announced . It was the first of the four countries to sign the treaty .
 Austria was to be independent and neutral, attached neither to NATO nor the Warsaw Pact . Austria was free to choose its own path and to be attached to NATO or Warsaw Pact, it was ruled out of NATO .
 Soviet Union had already extracted about $100 million from its Zone of Occupation in eastern Austria . Austria to ‘buy out’ Soviet economic interests in the country’s eastern sector for a further $150 million .
 Yugoslavia and Italy agree to end their standoff over Trieste . Yugoslavia, Italy and Yugoslavia agree to an end to their standoff in Trieste, Italy .
 Trieste would remain with Italy while its surrounding hinterland, overwhelmingly populated by Slovenes, would revert to Yugoslavia . The city of Trieste was brokered by the Americans and the British in 1954 .
 Austrian neutrality was not in the original text; it was inserted by the Austrian parliament during the debate over the State Treaty . The accords over Austria, Yugoslavia and Italy were made possible by a new mood of ‘detente’ in European affairs .
 Most important issue resolved was fate of 10,000 German prisoners of war still in Soviet hands . The fate of the prisoners was the most important issue at Geneva .
 Germany’s small western neighbors also achieved some degree of closure with Bonn . Bonn. Meanwhile Germany's small western . neighbors .
 The book was closing on the crimes and punishments of the European war and its aftermath . Without anyone actually saying so, the book was closed on the war and aftermath .
 These reassuring developments are unfolding against the backdrop of a major international arms race . The reassuring developments were unfolding against a major arms race, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The two Great Powers of the day were arming themselves to the hilt and preparing for the eventuality of a thermonuclear war . This paradox was not so bizarre as it might appear, but it was not as odd as it may appear .
 The growing emphasis in U.S. and Soviet strategic thinking on nuclear weapons, and intercontinental missiles with which to deliver them, released European states from the need to compete in an arena where they could not hope to match the resources of the superpowers . Central Europe remained the most likely
 The United States’ nuclear arsenal had grown rapidly through the 1950s . The U.S. had a nuclear arsenal of more than 100 nukes .
 The U.S. Air Force had a fleet of forward-based B-29 bombers . The fleet grew from around 50 at the onset of the 1948 Berlin blockade to well over 1,000 five years later . The first intercontinental B-52 bombers entered service in June 1955 .
 President Truman’s secret order of March 10th 1950 to accelerate development of a hydrogen bomb . President Truman ordered the development of the hydrogen bomb in 1950 .
 Truman's decision was prompted by the Soviet Union's successful test in August 1949 of a Soviet atomic bomb . Truman’s decision to test a nuclear weapon was prompted in 1949 by the test .
 The next January Dulles announced Eisenhower’s ‘New Look’ policy . American battlefield nuclear weapons first began arriving in West Germany the following month . The next year, the next January, Eisenhower announced his 'New Look'
 In order for the Soviet Union to believe that the West might really fire them, the distinction between nuclear and conventional arms was to be abolished . The distinction between the two arms was abolished in order to make the West believe they might fire them .
 The coincidence of NATO’s nuclearization with the stabilization of the Continent was no accident . NATO's nuclearization and stabilization of Europe is no accident, he says .
 From the Soviet point of view as well, conventional warfare in central and Western Europe was of diminishing strategic interest . "Conventional warfare in Western Europe is of diminishing interest," says the Soviet Union .
 Moscow too was stockpiling nuclear weapons in 1950s, starting with just 5 in 1950 . It had built some 1,700 by the end of the decade . Moscow also stockpiled nuclear weapons .
 Soviet emphasis was on developing the means to deliver them not on the European battlefield but across oceans, to compensate for U.S. plans to base nuclear weapons in Germany .
 The notorious ‘missile gap’ of which John F Kennedy spoke when campaigning for the United States presidency in i960 was a myth, a successful exercise in Soviet propaganda . The same was true of widespread accounts of Soviet educational and technical superiority .
 The USSR was expending great efforts on the development of its ballistic capabilities . But the USSR certainly was expiring great efforts to develop its own ballistic capability .
 The first successful Soviet test of an intercontinental ballistic missile came in August 1957 . It was five months ahead of the Americans, five months before they tested .
 Nikita Khrushchev wanted to deliver nuclear warheads from the Soviet hinterland to U.S. targets . He wanted to be able to deliver nukes to the United States . The Soviet leader wanted to strike back at the United Nations .
 Khrushchev maintained good relations with heavy industry and the military while diverting resources to consumer goods production . They allowed the government to maintain good relations .
 The Americans were not the only ones panicked by displays of Soviet hardware . And they had the curious consequence, as both sides would come to appreciate .
 In i960 the British Conservative Prime Minister Harold Macmillan privately concluded that ‘They are no longer frightened of aggression.’ In 'i960' he concluded that the British Conservatives were no longer ‘frightened of aggression’
 Nuclear weapons made both Moscow and Washington more belligerent in form, but far more restrained in practice . It was important to seem ready and willing to use them, but not in practice.
 The United States was still trying to find a way to extricate itself from the European entanglement into which it had slipped into . The U.S. still has a way of extricating itself from Europe despite leaders' best intentions .
 It would no longer be necessary to envisage a huge American military presence indefinitely stationed in the heart of Europe . Statesmen and military strategists alike looked forward to the day when Europe would be able to defend itself virtually alone .
 There are various reasons why the Americans were never able to realize their plans for quitting Europe . The Americans never realized their plans to leave Europe .
 Towards the end of the 1950s the U.S. pressed the case for a European nuclear deterrent, under collective European command .
 This was not because their governments were opposed in principle to nuclear weapons, it was because they were opposed to them in principle . This is not because they are opposed to nuclear arms, it is because of their governments' policies .
 The British exploded their first plutonium bomb in the Australian desert in August 1952 . 14 months later the first British atomic bomb was delivered to the Royal Air Force .
 The French also had an atomic weapons program, approved by Mendes-France in December 1954 . The first independent French bomb was not successfully exploded until February i960 . Mendes France also had a nuclear bomb program, but it was not detonated .
 Neither the British nor the French were willing to relinquish control of nuclear weapons to a European defense entity . The French especially were suspicious of any hint that the Americans might allow Germans access to a nuclear trigger .
 The U.S. reluctantly conceded that their presence in Europe was indispensable . That's just what their European allies wanted to hear . The Americans reluctantly conceded to the Europeans .
 A second issue binding the U.S. to Europe was the problem of Berlin, Berlin . Berlin was a key issue in America's decision to join the EU .
 Thanks to the defeat of the blockade in 1948-49, the former capital of Germany re-opened . It was left unclear what say, if any, the British would have in their use .
 Germans fleeing west could come to East Berlin from anywhere in the German Democratic Republic . The road and rail corridor linking West Berlin to the rest of the Federal Republic was opened in 1961 .
 They were automatically entitled to citizenship in West Germany . Once there, they were automatically eligible for citizenship .
 The journey was not entirely risk free, and refugees could bring only what they could carry . But neither consideration inhibited younger East Germans from undertaking it . East Germans were able to leave East Germany in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Between the spring of 1949 and August 1961 between 2. and 3 million East Germans went through Berlin to the West, around 16 percent of the country’s population . Between 1949 and 1961 around 2.5 million East German went through the doors of the West .
 Thousands of farmers and workers abandoned the regime after the violent repression of June 1953 . Many of them were professional men and women .
 Berlin's curious status was a standing embarrassment and public-relations disaster for East Germany’s Communist regime . East Germany's Communist regime was embarrassed by its curious status in Berlin .
 Berlin had become the primary listening post and spy center of the Cold War . Some 70 different agencies were operating there by 1961, and some of their greatest successes were in Berlin .
 Soviet leaders had accepted the division of Germany and elevated the eastern zone into a fully fledged sovereign state . However, they could not continue indefinitely to ignore the steady haemorrhage of its human resources .
 Moscow generated a three-year international crisis over Berlin's status over the city’s status . It was not out of consideration for the wounded sensibilities of the East German rulers . Nevertheless, when Moscow did once again direct international attention to Berlin, it was not .
 By 1958 the Soviet Union was once again worried that the Americans might be planning to arm their West German clients with nuclear weapons . This time the Soviets were worried about the Americans' plans for West Germany .
 This, as we have seen, was not an entirely unreasonable fear—it was, after all, shared by some West Europeans . This fear was not entirely unreasonable, but it was shared by many West Europeans.
 Khrushchev set out to use Berlin as a lever to block the nuclearization of Bonn . Bonn was about which they felt very strongly indeed, about what they felt strongly .
 The imperialists have turned the German question into an abiding source of international tension . The German question is a source of tension in the world .
 The time has obviously arrived for the signatories of the Potsdam Agreement to give up the remnants of the occupation regime in Berlin . Signatories should give up remnants of occupation regime and thereby make it possible to create a normal situation in the German Democratic Republic .
 The Soviet Union would hand over to the sovereign German Democratic Republic the functions in Berlin that are still exercised by Soviet agencies . The West would also hand over the functions of the Soviet Union in Berlin .
 If they did so, the credibility of their commitment to the defense of Western Europe would be seriously dented . Neutralist, anti-nuclear sentiment in West Germany and elsewhere would probably grow, he says .
 The USSR might be able to exchange its consent to this for a firm Western commitment to deny Bonn any nuclear weapons .
 When Western leaders refused any concessions over Berlin, Khrushchev tried again . Western leaders claimed that the Soviet Union itself had broken its Potsdam undertakings by integrating East Berlin fully into the government and institutions of the East German state .
 He repeated his demands, first in i960 and then again in June 1961 . Following an unsuccessful series of foreign ministers’ discussions in Geneva in the summer of 1959, he repeated his demand .
 The Soviet Union would unilaterally withdraw from Berlin, conclude a separate Peace Treaty with the GDR and leave the West to negotiate the fate of its zones of occupation with an independent East German state . The West would then have to negotiate with the Soviet Union to end its occupation of Berlin .
 From November 1958 through the summer of 1961 the crisis over Berlin simmered, diplomatic nerves frayed and the exodus of East Germans grew to a flood . East Germans began to leave Berlin in November 1958 .
 Khrushchev’s June 1961 ultimatum was delivered at a summit meeting with John F Kennedy, the new American President, held in Vienna, Austria .
 In his talks with Kennedy, Khrushchev threatened to ‘liquidate’ Western rights in Berlin if there was no settlement there by the end of the year . In the 1950s, the Soviet leader threatened to 'liquidate' Western rights .
 In public Kennedy, like Eisenhower before him, took a hard line, insisting that the West would never abandon its commitments . Kennedy: "In public, I'm sure we'll never abandon our commitments. In public, we're committed to the West," he said .
 The Americans accepted the reality of an East German state, and understood Soviet anxiety over the aggressive tone of recent speeches by Adenauer and Strauss . The Americans, unlike their West German clients, accepted that the West German state existed .
 Shortly after Kennedy returned to Washington, the East German authorities began imposing travel restrictions on would-be emigrants . Shortly after JFK's return, the restrictions began to be imposed .
 In direct response, the U.S. President publicly re-asserted the Western commitment to West Berlin . Thereby implicitly conceded that the city’s eastern half was in the Soviet sphere of influence .
 Moscow authorized the East Germans to draw a line, literally, separating the two sides once and for all . Allied foreign ministers rejected yet another Soviet note threatening a separate Peace Treaty with the GDR if a settlement was not reached .
 East Berlin authorities set soldiers and workmen to the task of building a partition across the city . On August 19th 1961, the Berlin wall was built in East Berlin .
 Within three days a rough wall had been erected, sufficient to foreclose casual movement between the two halves of Berlin .
 Doors and windows of buildings abutting the wall were blocked off, and then bricked up . Searchlights, barbed wire and guard posts were added to the wall .
 Streets and squares were cut in half and all communications across the divided city were subjected to close policing or else broken off altogether . The streets and squares of the city were closed and the communications were closed .
 Soviet and American tanks confronted one another across the checkpoint separating their respective zones in October 1961 . The checkpoint was one of the last remaining links between the two zones .
 ‘Kennedy’s remark was not only confidential at the time, it was even kept out of the documents from the summit meeting when they were first published thirty years later . Faced with the intransigence of the local American military commander, ‘’Kenn
 Behind the scenes many Western leaders were secretly relieved at the appearance of the Wall . The Wall was built in the 1930s and 1940s, and the Wall was erected in France .
 Berlin had threatened to be the flashpoint for an international confrontation, just as it had been in 1948 . For three years Berlin had been the flash point for three years . Berlin was a flashpoint in Berlin's history, as it was in 1948, when Berlin was occupied .
 The outcome of the Berlin crisis showed that the two Great Powers had more in common than they sometimes appreciated . Berlin crisis was the result of a crisis between Germany and the United States .
 If Moscow undertook not to raise again the question of Allied status in Berlin in Berlin, Washington would accept the reality of East German government there . Washington would resist West German pressure for nuclear weapons .
 Both sides had an interest in stability in central Europe . The U.S. and the USSR were tired of responding to the demands and complaints of their respective German clients .
 The first decade of the Cold War had given German politicians unparalleled leverage over their patrons in Washington and Moscow . First decade of Cold War gave German politicians unprecedented leverage .
 Moscow had never set out to establish a client state in the eastern zone of occupied Germany, but had settled for it as a second best . Moscow devoted inordinate effort to shoring up a weak and unloved Communist regime in Berlin .
 The East German Communists in turn were always half-afraid that their Soviet patrons would sell them out . The East Germans in turn feared that they would be sold out to the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev’s refusal to keep pressing for a Peace Treaty after the barrier had gone up . The Wall thus offered them some reassurance, although they were disappointed by his refusal to press for peace .
 As for Bonn, there was a longstanding fear there was that the ‘Amis’ would just get up and walk away . Bonn’s fear that the 'Amis' would just walk away has been quashed .
 Washington had always bent over backwards to reassure Bonn that it had America’s unswerving support . But after the Wall went up and the Americans conspicuously acquiesced, West German anxiety only increased .
 Kennedy’s famous ‘Ich bin ein Berliner’ declared in June 1963 . Post-Wall promises from Washington that the US would never quit their zone .
 With 250,000 troops in Europe by 1963, the Americans like the Russians were clearly there for the duration of the war . The U.S. and Russia were both involved in the war in Europe .
 The Wall ended Berlin’s career as the crisis zone of world and European affairs . The Wall was Berlin's first crisis zone in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Kennedy and his advisers were convinced that Khrushchev was engaged in a complex, Machiavellian ploy to achieve his longstanding German objectives . When the Cuba crisis broke out the following year, Kennedy was convinced that the Soviets were behind the Cuban crisis .
 Kennedy and his colleagues saw in the missile emplacements in Cuba as a Soviet device to blackmail a vulnerable America into giving way in Berlin . Just as Truman and Acheson had seen the Korean incursion as a possible prelude to a Soviet probe across the divided frontier of Germany,
 Hardly an hour passed during the first ten days of the Cuba crisis without American leaders reverting to the subject of West Berlin, and the need to 'neutralize' Khrushchev’s anticipated countermove .
 The problem was that Kennedy had taken recent Soviet bluster and propaganda all too seriously seriously . Kennedy had built his understanding of US-Soviet relations around the Berlin question .
 Berlin is a key part of Germany's relationship with the United States, says President Obama . Obama says the U.S. recognizes the importance of Berlin to Europe, and its allies .
 The Soviet Union had indeed maintained a vast superiority of conventional forces in Europe and could have occupied West Berlin any time it wished . The Soviets could have taken the city any time they wished .
 Khrushchev had no intention of risking nuclear war for Germany . Now that the U.S. had sworn to defend the freedom of West Berlin by all means .
 On June 20th 1963 a ‘hotline’ was established between Washington and Moscow . Talks in Moscow between the US, Soviet Union and the UK culminated in a Limited Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty .
 This Treaty, which came into force on October 10th, had considerable significance for Europe . It was less significant because of its overt objectives than on account of the ‘sub-text’ underlying it .
 Both great powers wanted to keep nuclear weapons out of the hands of China and West Germany . This was the real purpose of the Treaty . Both countries wanted to stop nuclear weapons from reaching China and Germany .
 The promise of a non-nuclear Germany was the quid pro quo Moscow sought for the Berlin compromise . That is why the Americans were willing to court unpopularity in Bonn in order to achieve it . The U.S. was willing to be unpopular in order for it to achieve
 The West Germans resentfully accepted the veto on German nuclear arms, just as they had accepted the division of Berlin, as the price of a continued U.S. presence . West Germans somewhat resentfully accept the veto .
 Treaty confirmed shift in Soviet strategic concerns, away from Europe and towards other continents . Treaty confirmed a distinct shift in Russia's strategic concerns .
 The stabilization of the Cold War in Europe, the reduced likelihood of it ever becoming ‘hot’, and the fact that these matters lay largely out of their hands, induced among West Europeans the rather comfortable conviction that conventional armed conflict was obsolete .
 If war were to come, the huge nuclear arsenals of the Great Powers meant that it must surely entail unimaginably terrible consequences . War could only therefore be the result of a miscalculation on someone’s part .
 In that case, there would be very little that Europeans could do to mitigate the consequences of the situation, says Simon Tisdall .
 Evidence inspired movements calling urgently for nuclear disarmament . Among a minority, the evidence inspired movements for disarmament, including those in a minority .
 The British Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament was launched in London on February 17th 1958 . The campaign was launched by the British Committee of British Nationalists .
 At its peak, the CND was able to turn out 150,000 supporters on the annual protest march to the Atomic Weapons Establishment at Aldermaston .
 The British campaign shriveled in the course of the sixties . It was joined by like-minded disarmament movements in West Germany and the Benelux .
 The anti-nuclear campaigners lost their relevance after the Test Ban Treaty . It was increasingly difficult to claim with any credibility that Europe faced imminent annihilation .
 The French were somewhat less overwhelmingly abolitionist . Germans and British were divided, though with a clear anti-nuclear majority in each case .
 The nuclear question in Europe did not move people much much in the 1920s and early ’30s . But in contrast with the fraught debates over disarmament, the nuclear question was not moved much .
 Only the British and French had nuclear arms, and of the others only a minority sought them . Only a minority of the West German political establishment sought them, according to the historian .
 Italians, Danes and the Dutch worried about having U.S. bases on their soil, which exposed them to danger should a war break out . The Dutch, Italians and Danes worried on occasion about having United States .
 Most Europeans concluded that they could do nothing to influence decisions made in Moscow and Washington . But the weapons that caused concern belonged to the superpowers, they said .
 The hard ideological edge of American Cold War rhetoric allowed many in Western Europe to tell themselves that they were in effect doing the United States a favor by allowing it to defend them .
 Rather than engage one way or the other in debates over disarmament, they cultivated their gardens instead . And so, rather than engage in such debates, they cultivate their gardens .
 The most remarkable aspect of the European political scene in the 1950s was not the changes it saw but the ones it didn't see . The most notable aspect of Europe's political scene was the change it saw was that it did not see as much as it did in Europe .
 The re-emergence in post-war Europe of self-governing democratic states came as something of a surprise . Self-government democratic states are led by elderly men whose common if unstated political creed was ‘No experiments’
 The political temperature of Western Europe has retreated from the fevered heights of the past forty years . Despite widespread expectations to the contrary, the political temperature has retreated in recent years .
 With the calamities of the recent past still fresh in public memory, most Europeans turned away with relief from the politics of mass mobilization .
 Italy became a democracy, however imperfect, and remained a democracy throughout the post-war decades . Unlike Europe’s other Mediterranean states—Portugal, Spain and Greece—Italy became a democratic state .
 The country's very existence as a country had long been a controversial issue . Indeed, its very existence was long been controversial, and would become so again in later years .
 This was especially true of those who did not have a secondary-school education . The overwhelming majority of the population in those years didn't have secondary school education .
 Carlo Levi, a doctor from Piedmont exiled by Mussolini as punishment for his activities in the Resistance, recorded similar observations in Christ Stopped .
 A parliamentary enquiry of 1954 revealed that 85 percent of Italy’s poorest families lived south of Rome . A parliamentary inquiry of 1954 revealed 85 percent of the poorest families live in Italy .
 A rural laborer in Apulia, in south-eastern Italy, could expect to earn at best half the wages of his counterpart in Lombardy . A rural Italian laborer could earn at least half the wage of a rural worker in the region .
 Piedmont, in Italy’s wealthy North-West, was 174; Calabria, in the far South, was just 52. Taking the average Italian per capita income in that year to be 100, the figure was 174. Taking average income in Italy's wealthy North
 In the Mezzogiorno the social and administrative structures inherited from the Fascists survived unscathed the bloodless coup that replaced Mussolini by one of his generals . Mussolini was replaced by a general general by a military coup .
 To the longstanding political and economic contrasts between northern and southern Italy were now added markedly different memories from the war . Northern Italy has long been divided between the two regions .
 In August 1950 the Italian Parliament established a Cassa per il Mezzogiorno , a Southern Fund, to channel national wealth to the impoverished South .
 Efforts by Rome to address poverty and hopelessness of the South date back at least to the reform-minded early-twentieth-century governments of Giovanni Giolitti .
 The only effective solution to the woes of Italy’s southerners was still, as it had been ever since the birth of modern Italy, emigration . But previous efforts had achieved little. But previous . efforts had failed to achieve little .
 The Cassa represents a far greater commitment of resources than any previous plan . However, the Cassa had a better prospect of success because it fitted rather well into the core political mechanisms of the new Italian republic .
 Whatever the economic arguments against such a strategy, its social and political advantages were clear . Social and political benefits of the strategy were clear, and it was not only possible in the 1930s .
 At the beginning of the 1950s the IRI employed 216,000 people . Other agencies, including the many branches of the national bureaucracy, employed hundreds of thousands more . The IRI was the largest intelligence agency in the world .
 The Republic sat squarely in a tradition dating from the early years of the unified state . The opportunities that these arrangements afforded for corruption and crime were considerable; here too .
 Whoever controlled the Italian state was peculiarly well placed to dispense favors, directly and indirectly . Whoever controlled Italy's state was well placed in the way of its power, he says .
 Politics in post-war Italy were primarily a struggle to occupy the state, to gain access to its levers of privilege and patronage . Politics in Italy was a struggle for the state to occupy and gain power, not religious or ideological .
 Christian Democrats under Alcide De Gasperi and successors demonstrated unmatched skill and enterprise . The Christian Democrats were in charge of securing and operating levers of power . The U.S. House of Representatives has been in the Senate since 1996 .
 In coalition with small parties of the Center they ran the country without interruption until 1963, when they switched to a partnership with the minority parties . In coalition until 1963 they ran with minority parties of nonCommunist Left .
 Christian Democrats have kept smalltown voters loyal to the Christian Democrats for generations . It was not faith but services that drew small town voters to the Democrats .
 Christian Democracy in Italy resembled in many respects similar parties in West Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium . Christian Democracy was formed in Italy in the 1970s .
 Post-war Italy was in some respects the Church’s moment of revenge for the aggressively anti-clerical secularism of the new Italian state after 1861 . De Gasperi and his successors took care to meet regularly with the Vatican authorities and never to propose or support any legislation
 The active role of the Catholic Church in Italian politics was smaller than its defenders and critics liked to assert . The Catholic Church's active role in Italy's politics was less than its critics said it was .
 The main vehicle for social control was the powerful central ministries . De Gasperi, like Communist parties of eastern Europe in the immediate post-war years, took care to keep the Interior Ministry securely under CD direction .
 In time, the clientelistic system of patronage and favors put in place by the Christian Democrats came to characterize national Italian politics as a whole . In time it became part of a system that characterized Italy's politics .
 Communists emphasis upon propriety and honesty of municipal administration, in contrast with the widely acknowledged corruption and rumored Mafia links of CD municipalities of the South .
 In the 1950s, large-scale corruption was a nearmonopoly of Christian Democrats . Socialists who governed the great cities of the North emulated them with considerable success .
 Over time whole areas of public and civic activity were carved up de facto into political families . Over time, public activity was carved up by de facto political families.
 Control and employment at newspapers and radio was divided among Christian Democrats, Socialists and Communists . Sometimes allowance was made for old-school anti-clerical liberals .
 Jobs and favors were created and delivered proportional to local, regional and national political clout . Jobs and favours were created in response to local and regional political clout, the author says .
 Every social organism from trade unions to sporting clubs was split among Christian Democrat, Socialist, Communist, Republican and Liberal variants . Every social organisation from trade union to sporting club was split between .
 From the point of view of Economic Man the system was grossly wasteful, and inimical to private initiative and fiscal efficiency, says Economic Man . Economic Man: "The system was ... grossly wasteful" Economic Man says .
 The Italian 'economic miracle' happened in spite of it rather than because of it . The Italian ‘economic miracle’ (as we shall see) happened in . spite of . it, as we will see .
 Italy's post-war stability was crucial permissive condition for the country’s economic performance and subsequent social transformation . Post-war instability was the crucial condition for Italy's economic growth and social transformation, says Raffino .
 Stability rested upon the rather peculiar institutional arrangements just described . And that stability rested, paradoxly as it may appear, upon the institutions just described.
 Historians have treated the Italian political system with some disdain . This distinctly un-democratic outcome has led historians to treat it with disdain . Historians say the system is not democratic and should be abolished .
 The opportunities for graft, bribery, corruption, political favoritism and plain robbery were extensive . The opportunities were extensive and they worked above all to the advantage of the Christian Democrats . Christian Democrats have a virtual one-party monopoly of the country .
 Under the umbrella of these arrangements, state and society in Italy in Italy proved remarkably resilient in the face of inherited challenges and new ones ahead .
 When measured by the standards of Canada or Denmark, Italy in the 1950s might appear wanting in public probity and institutional transparency . The 1950s was Italy's most successful period of democracy, but it was not as much as Canada, Denmark .
 Italy has taken a remarkable leap forward in recent years . But by the standards of Italy’s strife-ridden national past, or by those prevailing in the other states of Mediterranean Europe with which the country was traditionally compared, Italy had taken a significant leap forward .
 In important respects Italy’s condition after the war stood comparison with that of Austria, says historian . ‘In important respects it’ll be compared to Austria,’ he says .
 Austria's post-war renaissance could hardly have been predicted from her recent past . Like Italy, Austria was a poor and unstable country whose post-WWII renaissance was hardly predicted from its recent past.
 The country’s two dominant political groupings had spent the inter-war years in bitter conflict . The country's two dominant parties had spent bitter conflict in the interwar .
 Most Austrian Social Democrats had regarded the emergence in 1918 of a truncated Austrian state out of the ruins of the Habsburg Empire as an economic and political nonsense . Most of the Social Democrats were opposed to the emergence of the Austrian state .
 In their view the German-speaking remnant of the old Dual Monarchy ought logically to have joined its fellow Germans in an Anschluss . The selfdetermination clauses of the Versailles agreements were applied consistently .
 The Austrian Left had always received its strongest backing from working-class Vienna and the urban centers of eastern Austria . Austria's Left has always received the support of the working class .
 During the inter-war years of the First Austrian Republic, most of the rest of the country voted for the Christian Socials . Most of Austria's population voted for a provincial and conservative party .
 Unlike the Social Democrats, the Christian Socials had no pan-German urge to be absorbed into an urban and mostly Protestant Germany . Unlike the socialists, they were opposed to being absorbed into a mostly Protestant country .
 The Viennese workers’ movement was created by the Social Democrats in 1934 . The Social Democrats had no sympathy for their policies of the Vienna workers' movement . But in 1934 a coup engineered by the Right destroyed the social Democrats’ .
 From 1934 until the Nazi invasion Austria was ruled by an authoritarian clericalist regime . The Catholic party exercised a monopoly of power in Austria .
 The legacy of Austria’s first, unhappy experience with democracy lay heavily on American foreign policy . Austria's history of institutional corruption is not entirely fair to lay the blame for the country's institutional corruption on U.S. foreign policy.
 This obscured, however, was their erstwhile enthusiasm for the Anschluss . What this obscured is that they were enthusiastic about the 'Anschloss'
 Dr Karl Renner maintained his enthusiasm for a union of Austria and Germany as late as 1938 . Dr Renner was the Socialist leader and first president of the independent Republic established by the Austrian State Treaty of 1955 .
 Both parties had an interest in putting the past behind them . We have seen what became of initial attempts at de-Nazification in post-war Austria . Both parties were interested in putting past behind .
 These uniquely narrow margins recalled the similarly close elections of the inter-war Republic . The result of the election was a repeat of the close election of the 1930s .
 Catholic Austria faced the renewed prospect of parliamentary politics degenerating into a cultural civil war . Catholic Austria and Socialist Austria faced a renewed prospect for a cultural war .
 Neither Austrian party could hope to form a stable government . Even with the help of a third party, the Liberals depend heavily on the vote of ex-Nazis . Any controversial legislation would risk resurrecting bitter memories .
 Austria's vulnerable location made it prudent to pursue conciliatory and uncontentious policies at home and abroad . In part this was due to the uncomfortable proximity of the Red Army, occupying Lower Austria until 1955 . Austria’s neighbors now included three Communist states .
 Cold War assigned Austria an identity by association as Western, free, democratic . Austria might have been hard put to generate from within from within .
 Austria avoided ideological confrontations of the sort that had torn the country apart before the war . The main source of Austria’s successful post-war political settlement lay in the need to avoid ideological confrontation . Austria's successful political settlement was achieved in 1945 .
 The solution on which the country’s leaders settled was to eliminate the very possibility of confrontation by running the country in permanent tandem . The solution to the problem was to run the country with a permanent tandem, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 In post-war Austria, Austria comprised all public services, most of the media and much of the economy . In public administration, a similar division of responsibilities was reached, known as Proporz . In post war Austria, the division of responsibility was reached .
 At almost every level jobs were filled, by agreement, with candidates proposed by one of the two dominant parties . At nearly every level, candidates were proposed by the parties .
 Austrian life was a chain of interlocking patrons and clients who settled virtually every argument by negotiation or else through the exchange of favors and appointments . Over time this system of ‘jobs for the boys’ reached deep into Austrian life, forming a chain .
 Labor disputes were handled by arbitration rather than confrontation . The bi-cephalous state sought to head off dissent by incorporating contending parties into its shared system of benefits and rewards .
 The unprecedented prosperity of these years allowed the Grand Coalition to paper over disagreements or conflicts of interest and, in effect, purchase the consensus on which the country’s equilibrium rested . The unprecedented prosperity of the past few decades allowed the coalition to paper .
 Small shopkeepers, independent artisans, isolated farmers were left out of Austrian society . Anyone whose work or opinions placed them outside the grid of allocated benefits and positions was left out .
 In districts where one or other side had an overwhelming advantage, proportionality would sometimes be ignored in favor of a monopoly of posts and favors for members of that party .
 The pressure to avoid confrontation usually triumphed over local self-interest . But the pressure on avoiding confrontation usually overrides local self interest .
 Austria's neutrality was adopted as the country’s identity tag, displacing awkward memories of more contentious identities from the past . 'Habsburg', ‘German’, 'Socialist’ and ‘Christian’ were also adopted as national identities .
 Italy, too, was administered through a system of favors and jobs that bore a certain resemblance to Proporz, albeit skewed heavily to the advantage of one side . And Italy's political system was similar to that in the 1930s, with a system that favors and favors favored one side
 Italy paid a price for political stability in an intolerable level of public corruption, the cost to Austrians was less tangible but just as pernicious . Austrians paid the same price for stability in Italy, but also for political instability in Italy .
 A Western diplomat once described post-war Austria as ‘an opera sung by the understudies’ and the point is well taken . Austria is now an 'opera sung by understudy'
 As a result of the First World War Vienna lost its raison d’etre as an imperial capital . The city lost its Jews, a significant proportion of its most educated and cosmopolitan citizens .
 Once the Russians left in 1955, Vienna lacked even the louche appeal of divided Berlin . The city was divided between the Soviet Union and the Republic of Austria .
 Austria’s remarkable success in overcoming its troubled past was that to many visitors its most distinctive feature was its reassuringly humdrum quality . Austria's remarkable success was to overcome its troubles in overcoming it troubled past .
 Behind the tranquil appeal of an increasingly prosperous ‘Alpine Republic, however, Austria too was corrupt in its own way . Austria also had a reputation for corruption in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Like Italy, it won its newfound security at the price of a measure of national forgetting . Italy's security comes at the cost of being forgotten .
 Austrians could not plausibly put their wartime experience to any such service . But whereas most other European countries could boast at least a myth of national resistance to the occupying Germans .
 Unlike the West Germans, they had not been constrained to acknowledge, at least in public, the crimes they had committed or allowed . Unlike West Germans they did not have to acknowledge crimes they committed or allow, unlike West Germans .
 Austria resembled East Germany in its civic facilities . Austria resembled the East Germany, and not only in its bureaucratic quality of its facilities .
 Both countries were arbitrary geographical expressions whose post-war public life rested on a tacit agreement to fabricate for common consumption a flattering new identity . The exercise proved considerably more successful in the Austrian case .
 A reform-minded Christian Democrat party, a parliamentary Left, a broad consensus not to press inherited ideological or cultural divisions to the point of political polarization and destabilization, and a de-politicized citizenry . These were the distinctive traits of the post-World War Two settlement in
 In various configurations the Italian or Austrian pattern can be traced almost everywhere . The pattern is used in various configurations around the world .
 In the Benelux countries the various constitutive communities (Catholics and Protestants in Holland, Walloons and Flemings in Belgium) had long been organized into separate community-based structures —zuilen .
 On the eve of the 1938 Anschluss there were 189,000 Jews in Vienna . Catholics in predominantly Protestant Holland not only prayed differently and attended a different church from their Protestant counterparts .
 Of Dutch Catholic children in 1959,90 percent attended Catholic elementary schools; 95 percent of Dutch Catholic farmers in that same year belonged to Catholic farmers’ unions . Of Dutch Catholics in 1959 90 percent attended elementary schools .
 Catholics traveled, swam, cycled and played football in Catholic organizations . They were insured by Catholic societies . When the time came, they were buried separately as well .
 Similar lifelong distinctions shaped the routines of Dutch-speakers in northern Belgium and marked them off from the French-speaking of Wallonia . Both communities were overwhelmingly Catholic .
 Liberal tendency in both countries was less emphatically communitarian . Appropriately enough, the smaller Liberal tendencies in both cases were less communitarian.
 The experience of war and occupation, and the memory of contentious civic divisions in earlier decades, encouraged a greater tendency towards cooperation across these communitarian divides . The experience and occupation of the British military has encouraged cooperation across communitar divides .
 The more extreme movements, notably the Flemish nationalists, were discredited by their opportunistic collaboration with the Nazis . In general the war served to diminish people’s identification with the established political parties, though not with the community services associated with them .
 The Catholic parties of the Benelux countries were moderately reformist in rhetoric . They functioned very much like Christian Democrat parties elsewhere . They protect the interests of the Catholic community, colonize government at every level from state to municipality .
 Both of these approximated more closely to the northern European model of a trade union-based labor movement . Mediterranean socialist parties with their more radicalised heritage and frequently anti-clerical rhetoric .
 Belgium especially had seen serious political violence in the 1930s when the Flemish separatists and Leon Degrelle’s Fascist Rexistes had threatened the parliamentary regime . The country would experience a new and even more disruptive bout of intercommunity strife beginning in the 1960s .
 The old political and administrative elites, whose rule had been briefly threatened in 1945, regained their power while allowing considerable latitude for welfare and other reforms . But the old political, administrative elites had to be re-elected .
 The pillars survived into the 1960s—anachronistic echoes of a pre-political age . They lasted just long enough to serve as cultural and institutional stabilizers during a period of hectic economic transformation . The pillars of the pillars are still alive today .
 The most dramatic instance of political stabilization in post-war Europe, and certainly the most important, is also in retrospect the least surprising, says David Frum . Frum says the most dramatic moment of political stability in Europe was also the most surprising .
 By the time it joined NATO in 1955, the Federal Republic of Germany was well on the way to the Wirtschaftswunder for which it liked to be known .
 The Bonn Republic was even more noteworthy for its success in wrongfooting the many observers in both camps who had anticipated the worst . But it was also notable for its failure to anticipate the worst for both sides .
 Under Adenauer’s direction West Germany had navigated safely between neo-Nazism and the Charybdis of philo-Soviet neutralism . West Germany was anchored securely within the Western alliance, despite the misgivings of critics at home .
 The institutions of post-war Germany were deliberately shaped so as to minimize the risk of a re-run of Weimar . The institutions were designed to avoid a repeat of the Weimar crisis .
 Bavaria corresponded to once-independent German states that had been absorbed into Imperial Germany in the course of the nineteenth century . Some of these, like Bavaria or Schleswig-Holstein, corresponded with former independent states .
 Others, like Rhineland-Westphalia in the north-west, were administrative conveniences that combined or bisected older territorial units . Some of the most important territorial units in Germany were formed in the 1930s .
 Western Allies blamed the rise of Hitler upon the Prussian tradition of authoritarian government and set out to prevent any recurrence . The powers of the central government were considerably restricted when compared to those of its predecessors .
 The Bundestag could not casually unseat a Chancellor and his government once elected . To do so they were obliged to have ready in advance a candidate for the succession with sufficient parliamentary votes to assure his success .
 Bonn's concern to deflect or contain conflict shaped the whole public culture of the Bonn Republic . The Bonn republic was known for its public concern to contain conflict .
 Under a CoDetermination Law of 1951, large firms in the heavy industries of coal, steel and iron were obliged to include employee representatives on their supervisory boards . The practice was later extended to other sectors and smaller businesses .
 The Christian Democratic-run state of the fifties owned or controlled 40 percent of all coal and iron production, two-thirds of electricity-generating plants, three quarters of aluminium manufacturing and, crucially, a majority of German banks .
 The decentralization of power, in other words, did not mean hands-off government . The government is decentralizing power, but not necessarily hands off government, experts say .
 West German regional and national governments were in a position to encourage policies and practices conducive to social peace as well as private profit . By maintaining an active economic presence either directly or indirectly, West German .
 Banks acted as intermediaries between government and businesses on whose boards bankers typically sat, played a crucial role . Banks were often used as an intermediary between the government and the businesses on which they sat .
 Older German economic practices returned, notably price-setting and consensual marketsharing . Prices set to be set up in Germany for the first time in decades .
 By the 1950s much of the West German economy was run in a manner familiar to the giant trusts and cartels of earlier decades . At the local level especially there had been very little stripping out of Nazi-era bureaucrats, businessmen or bankers .
 De facto corporatism was not perhaps what its American overseers had in mind for the new German republic . Trusts and their powers were widely believed to have contributed to the rise of Hitler and were anyway inimical to the free market .
 Ludwig Erhard was leader of the Free Democrats, Germany’s third political party . Erhard led the West German economy and with it West German social relations might have looked quite different .
 But regulated markets and close government-business relations sat comfortably in the Christian Democratic Schescheme .
 Trade unions and business groups cooperated for the most part . The economic cake grew fast enough in these years for most demands to be accommodated .
 The Christian Democrat Union ruled without interruption from the first FRG elections in 1949 until 1966 . Konrad Adenauer resigned in 1963 at the age of 87, he had unbroken charge of the affairs of the Bonn Republic .
 Adenauer's CDU enjoyed a long period of continuous power with Adenauer as Chancellor . Adenauer was the Chancellor of the CDU until the end of the 1990s .
 In Bavaria, conservative Catholics constituted the overwhelming majority of the voters . Christian Social Union had an impregnable power base and used it to secure for itself a permanent place as junior coalition partner in the Adenauer governments .
 Adenauer himself was old enough to remember the early years of the Wilhelminian Empire when the Catholic Church had been the target of Bismarck’s Kulturkampfi .
 From the outset, he sought to make of his party a nationwide Christian electoral vehicle rather than an exclusively Catholic one, emphasizing the socially ecumenical appeal of Christian Democracy . From the start, therefore, he . sought to . make of himself a . Christian Democracy, he said .
 A related reason for the success of the CDU/CSU alliance was that it appealed to a broad electorate . The two parties would always secure 44 percent or more of the national vote in Germany .
 Bavarian Christian Socials had a restricted appeal, attracting votes from a conservative, church-going community in a single region . Like their homologues in the Low Countries, they had a limited appeal .
 Germany’s Christian Democrats established a trans-regional, cross-denominational base in German politics . In this way, Germany's Christian Democrats have established a cross-religious base in politics .
 They could count on votes from the countryside and the towns, from employers and from workers . The Labour Party is seeking to win a majority of the vote in the next election .
 The Italian Christian Democrats colonized the state, in Germany the CDU colonized issues . Whereas the Italian . Christian Democrats . colonized . the state .
 The CDU under Adenauer was firmly entrenched as an umbrella party of the majority center . On economic policy, on social services and welfare, and especially on the still sensitive topics of the East-West divide and the fate of Germany’s many expellees, the CDU
 On the face of things, the SPD ought to have been better placed, even allowing for the loss of traditionally Socialist voters in northern and eastern Germany . The SPD should have been able to win more voters in the region, even if it lost some of its traditional Socialist voters .
 The Socialist leader Kurt Schumacher, on the other hand, had been a resolute anti-Nazi from the outset . He had been an opponent of the Nazi regime from the beginning .
 Arrested in July 1933 he spent most of the next twelve years in concentration camps, which permanently damaged his health and shortened his life . Arrested at the end of July 1933, he spent 12 years in a concentration camp .
 Schumacher was not just the natural leader of the Socialists but the only national politician in postwar Germany who might have provided his fellow Germans with a clear moral compass . Gaunt and stooped, he was the only politician to provide Germany with a moral compass after the war .
 Schumacher was curiously slow to grasp the new international regime in Europe . The former F1 world champion was slow to accept the new regime in the sport .
 He was reluctant to abandon the prospect of a united, neutral Germany . He was born in Kreisstadt, in Prussia, in Germany .
 He disliked and distrusted Communists and had no illusions about them . But he seems seriously to have believed that a demilitarized Germany would be left in peace to determine its fate, and that such circumstances would be propitious .
 He opposed Adenauer’s Western orientation and his apparent willingness to countenance an indefinite division of Germany . He was thus virulently opposed to Adenauer .
 For the Socialists, the restoration of a sovereign, unified and politically neutral Germany must take precedence over all international entanglements . The Socialists want to restore a sovereign Germany to a politically neutral, independent Germany .
 Schumacher was aroused by Adenauer’s enthusiasm for the project of West European integration . Adenauer was particularly aroused by his enthusiasm for West European unity .
 The trouble was that Schumacher’s Social Democrats had nothing practical to offer instead . The trouble is that they’ve got nothing practical instead .
 By the mid-fifties, West Germany was tied to the Western Alliance and the incipient project of European union, the Socialists’ doom-laden economic prophecies were demonstrably falsified . The SPD was stymied by the West, with West Germany firmly tied
 In 1953 and 1957 the Socialist vote increased only slightly and their share of the electorate stagnated . In 1957 and 1953 the Socialist Party's vote was only slightly higher .
 Only in 1959, seven years after Schumacher’s premature death, a new generation of German Socialists formally abandon the party's commitment to Marxism and make a virtue of compromise with West German reality .
 The function of Marxism in post-war German socialism had only ever been rhetorical . SPD had ceased to harbor genuinely revolutionary am268 THE POLITICS OF STABILITY by 1914 .
 Germany's Socialists relinquish the ageing formulas of Socialist maximalism . But the decision also released Germany’s Socialists to adapt the substance of their thinking . German Socialists have been forced to adapt their thinking in recent years .
 Many remained unhappy with Germany’s role in the new European Economic Community . They did reconcile themselves to Germany's participation in the Western Alliance and to the need to become a cross-class Volkspartei .
 The City of London has been in the spotlight for a decade . But they would pay an ironic price for this improvement in their prospects . They would pay the ironic price of this improvement .
 Germany’s Social Democrats contributed inadvertently to the political stability of the West German Republic . So long as they opposed most of Adenauer's policies, they contributed to the stability of West Germany .
 SPD absorbed within itself whatever youthful and radical dissent there was at the time . SPD thus had a monopoly on the political Left and absorbed whatever youthful dissent there there was . The SPD was a party that dominated the 1960s .
 SPD lost the allegiance of the far Left when it joined the Christian Democrats in office . But once it adopted a moderate and reformist agenda, the SPD lost its allegiance . The SPD is now a centrist party with a moderate agenda .
 A space would now open up outside parliament for a new and destabilizing generation of political radicals . A new generation of radicals would now be destabilizing for the country's political radicals, it says .
 West Germany’s political leaders did not need to worry about the rise of a direct successor to the Nazis, since any such party was explicitly banned under the Basic Law of the Republic . West Germany's political leaders were not worried about a successor party .
 There were, however, many millions of former Nazi voters, most of them divided among the various parties of the mainstream . Most of the former Nazis were divided among political parties .
 Of the approximately thirteen million German expellees, nearly nine million had initially settled in the western zones . By the mid-1960s, with the steady flow of refugees west through Berlin, with a further 1. million Germans expelled from the eastern lands had arrived .
 As ‘ethnic Germans’ their rights as citizens and refugees were enshrined in the 1949 Basic Law . Predominantly small farmers, shopkeepers and businessmen, the Vertriebene were too numerous to ignore .
 In addition to the Vertriebene there were millions of war veterans . Khrushchev agreed to return the remaining POWs in 1955 .
 Any suggestion that Germany, and especially the German armed forces, had behaved in ways that precipitated or justified their suffering was angrily dismissed . Any suggestion of Germany's behavior precipitating or justified the suffering of the German people was angrily rebuffed .
 In the early years of the Federal Republic there were some indications that these sentiments might translate into a significant political backlash . In the 1970s, there were indications that this might translate to a significant backlash .
 48 parliamentary seats -- three times as many as the Communists -- went to populist parties of the nationalist Right . Already at the 1949 elections 48 seats went to various populist parties, including the Free Democrats .
 The following year, in nearby Lower Saxony, a Sozialistische Reichspartei — appealing to a similar constituency—scored 11 percent . The next year, a similar party scored 11 percent in the state .
 Konrad Adenauer took great care to avoid direct criticisms of the recent German past . He explicitly blamed the Soviet Union and the Western Allies for Germany’s continuing problems .
 Adenauer and the CDU kept a hard fine towards the East . To assuage the demands of refugees and their supporters, Adenauer kept the fine .
 Bonn insisted that Germany’s 1937 frontiers remain legally in force until a final Peace Conference . In international relations Bonn. insisted that the 1937 frontier . frontiers . remain legally . in force .
 Adenauer broke off diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia after Tito recognized East Germany . Bonn’s rigidity was demonstrated in 1957 when Adenauer split with Yugoslavia over recognition of East Germany.
 For the next ten years Germany’s relations with eastern Europe were effectively frozen . For the rest of the 1990s, relations between Germany and eastern Europe was effectively frozen in Germany .
 In domestic affairs, the governments of the nineteen-fifties encouraged a distinctly uncritical approach to Germany’s recent past . In addition to devoting considerable resources to helping refugees, returning prisoners and their families integrate into West German society, the government of the 1950s encouraged a
 Foreign Ministry protested against showing at Cannes Film Festival of Alain Resnais’s documentary Night and Fog . In 1955 the Foreign Ministry formally protested against the showing at that year’�s Cannes film festival .
 Until 1957 the West German Ministry of the Interior banned any screenings of Wolfgang Staudte’s film of Der Untertan . Objected to its suggestion that authoritarianism in Germany had deep historical roots .
 This might seem to confirm the view that post-war Germany was suffering from a massive dose of collective amnesia; but the reality was more complex . The reality is more complex than it seems to have been .
 West German officialdom encouraged a comfortable view of the German past in which the Wehrmacht was heroic, while Nazis were in a minority and had been properly punished . In the fifties West Germany encouraged a view that Nazis were a minority .
 In the course of a series of amnesties, hitherto-imprisoned war criminals were steadily released back into civilian life . War criminals have been steadily released from prison in recent years .
 Most of the worst German war crimes committed in the East and in the camps were never investigated . Meanwhile, the worst war crimes were not investigated, and most of them were never found guilty .
 A Central Office of Land Justice Departments was set up in Stuttgart in 1956, but local prosecutors studiously failed to pursue any investigations until 1963 . Bonn began to pressure them to do so after 1965, when the Federal Government extended the twenty-year statute of limitations on murder
 Germany was too morally compromised for democracy to work, except at this price, says Roland Martin . He says he felt that a prudent silence was better than a provocative public recital of the truth .
 Unlike Schumacher, Adenauer said very little on the subject of the suffering of Jews at German hands .
 He only ever spoke of Jewish victims, never of German perpetrators, never German perpetrators . Indeed, he only ever mentioned victims of Nazi crimes .
 He acknowledged the irresistible pressure to make restitution . On the other hand, he acknowledged that he acknowledged the pressure to do so .
 In September 1952 Adenauer reached agreement with Israeli Prime Minister Moshe Sharett to pay to Jewish survivors what would amount, through the years, to over DM100 billion . Adenauer and Sharett reached agreement in September 1952 .
 A further 29 percent acknowledged that Germany owed some restitution to the Jewish people . The majority of respondents said Germany owed restitution to Jews .
 The rest were divided between those who thought that only people ‘who really committed something’ were responsible and should pay, and those who did not . To which Resnais responded, ‘Naturally I hadn’t realized that the National Socialist regime would be represented at Cannes
 Adenauer depended on the votes of his Social Democratic opponents in order to get the agreement approved . Adenauer's Social Democratic Party was in power in the 1970s .
 Adenauer exploited widespread international nervousness over a possible Nazi revival in Germany to nudge West Germany’s allies in the direction he wanted them to move . Adenauer used to exploit fears of a possible revival of the Nazi movement in Germany .
 Western Allies must abstain from criticizing German behaviour or evoking troubled pasts, he says . If they want German cooperation in European defense, he suggests, they should abstain .
 If they wanted to head off domestic backlash, they should stand firm with Adenauer . Adenauer rejected Soviet plans for East Germany .
 They allowed him considerable leeway, accepting his insistence that only he stood between them and a far less amenable alternative, and his claim that he needed foreign concessions if he was to head off trouble at home .
 Eisenhower’s successor as Supreme Allied Commander in Europe, asked Allied High Commissioners in 1953 to pardon all German officers previously convicted of war crimes on the Eastern Front . In a similar vein General Ridgeway asked Allied .
 Adenauer’s behaviour did not endear him to his interlocutors . Dean Acheson in particular resented Bonn's insistence on setting conditions before agreeing to join the community of civilized nations .
 Adenauer was quick to turn the situation to political advantage when it became public embarrassment . Adenauer told German voters of the fickleness of Germany’s allies and how he alone could be counted upon to look after national interest .
 Domestic support for German rearmament was not especially strong in the 1950s . The creation of a new West German army, the Bundeswehr, in 1956, did not arouse widespread enthusiasm .
 Even Adenauer himself had been ambivalent, insisting that he was responding to international pressure . Adenauer was ambivalent about the situation .
 Given that the most likely trigger for a Third World War in Europe was the German situation itself, these aspirations may seem curious . But it may be curious that the aspirations seem curious, they may seem odd .
 West Germany's privileged position as a de facto U.S. protectorate was for some of its citizens as much a source of resentment as of security . But it was one of the oddities of post-war West Germany .
 It became clear from the later fifties that a war in Germany might see the use of battlefield nuclear weapons—under the exclusive control of others . And such sentiments were only strengthened when it became clear .
 Adenauer warned that the Federal Republic could not remain a nuclear protectorate’ forever . Adenauer had warned in 1956 that the German Republic had to be a 'nuclear protectorate' forever .
 West would never allow Germany access to nuclear weapons, he was furious when it became clear in the early 1960s that the Allies had come to terms with Moscow on this sensitive subject .
 Bonn Republic's allegiance to Washington might be transferred to De Gaulle’s Paris, with whom it was bound by a common resentment at high-handed Anglo-American treatment and a shared suspicion that the U.S. was wriggling free of obligations to its European clients
 The French desire for an independent nuclear deterrent offered a tempting precedent to West Germany . De Gaulle skillfully exploited in his efforts to wean Bonn away from its American friends .
 The following week he translated that ‘sympathy’ into a Treaty of Franco-German friendship . And the following week, he translated the treaty into a treaty of French friendship .
 As for De Gaulle, he of all people harbored no illusions about the Germans, he harboured no illusions . As for the French leader, he had no illusions over the Germans .
 No West German leader dared break with Washington for the sake of an illusory French alternative . However cool relations, however cool their relations, no West German leaders dared break .
 After initial relief at having been ‘liberated’ by the West had worn off, other feelings surfaced . But after the initial relief . at having . been 'liberated' by the . West, they said, ‘but after the . initial relief had worn . off
 The hard post-war years of the Allied occupation contrasted unfavorably with life under the Nazis . The hard times of the Nazi occupation contrasted with the hard times under Allied occupation .
 During the Cold War some blamed America for putting Germany at the center of 'its' conflict with the Soviet Union and exposing the country to risk .
 West Germany's growing prominence on the eastern edge of the Western alliance subliminally recalled Nazi Germany’s selfassigned role . Nazi Germany was Europe's cultural bulwark facing down Asiatic Soviet hordes .
 The Americanising of West Germany—and the omnipresence of foreign occupiers—contrasted revealingly with the sanitized Germany of popular desires . The sanitized West Germany was nourished in the early fifties on a diet of nostalgic domestic films .
 'Heimat' films were typically set in the mountain landscapes of southern Germany . They featured tales of love, loyalty and community in period or regional costume .
 These hugely popular entertainments were often close copies of Nazi-era films, sometimes with identical titles . Shamelessly kitschy and kitschy, the films were often very similar to Nazi-style films .
 The timelessness carried comforting intimations of a country and people free not just of occupiers from East and West but clean, too, of guilt and undefiled by Germany’s recent past .
 The Heimat films reflected the provinciality and conservatism of the early Federal Republic . The films reflected a heartfelt desire to be left alone .
 This demobilization of Germans was perhaps facilitated by the disproportionate presence of women among the adult population . Women were perhaps more likely to be demobilized than men in Germany .
 In the first post-war census of 1950, one-third of all West German households were headed by a divorced woman or a widow . In the 1950s, one third of all households in West Germany were led by divorced women or widow .
 As in Britain or France, only more so, family and domestic concerns were uppermost in the public mind . The French election was the first to be held in France and France since 1968 .
 The adoption of substitute public goals to replace the discredited ambitions of the past was quite deliberate . It was deliberate to replace discredited ambitions with new public goals, it was said .
 West Germany was distinctive in that it alone stood to recover its sovereignty by joining international organizations . The idea of Europe could itself substitute for the void opened up in German public life by the evisceration of German nationalism, Schuman said .
 For the intellectual and political elites, this diversion of energies proved effective . For the political elite, the diversion of energy proved effective. For the rest of the world's political leaders, it was a good thing for them .
 For the woman in the street, the real substitute for the old politics was not the new’Europe’ but the business of surviving—and prospering - she said . The real substitute was not a new Europe, but a thriving economy, she said.
 Churchill hoped Churchill would be able to use the power of the Great War . But he had to wait and wait to see what would happen before it did . It was a disaster, but Churchill was able to pull it through .
 Making, saving, getting, getting and spending became not just the primary activity of most West Germans, but also the publicly affirmed and approved purpose of national life . Making and saving, saving and getting and getting were the primary activities of most Germans .
 Hans Magnus Enzensberger observed that ‘one cannot understand the puzzling energy of the Germans if one resists the idea that they have turned their defects into virtues.’
 Germans were condemned after Hitler’s fall for blindly obeying immoral orders . Germans thus turned the defect of their industrious obedience into a national virtue .
 The shattering impact of their country’s total defeat and subsequent occupation made West Germans amenable to the imposition of democracy in a way that few could have imagined a decade earlier . West Germans are now more likely to accept democracy in the West .
 In place of the ‘devotion for its rulers’ that Heine had first observed in the German people a century before, Germans attracted international respect for their devotion to efficiency, detail and quality in the manufacture of finished products .
 Well into the nineteen-sixties, many Germans over sixty years old thought that life had been better under the Kaiser . Many Germans over 60 years old still thought that they had a better life .
 In view of what had followed, the security and tranquility afforded them by the passive routines of daily life in the Federal Republic were more than acceptable as a substitute .
 The ‘skeptical generation’ were particularly mistrustful of the newfound German order . They were old enough to have experienced Nazism but young enough to bear no responsibility for it .
 For men like the writer Gunther Grass, or the social theorist Jurgen Habermas, West Germany was a democracy without democrats, they say . West Germany's West Germany is now a democracy, but not a democracy with democracy .
 Its citizens had vaulted with shocking ease from Hitler to consumerism . They had salved their guilty memories by growing prosperous . The country's citizens vaulted from Hitler's depravity to prosperity .
 Grass and others saw a denial of civic responsibilities past and present . Grass: In the German turn away from politics towards private accumulation, private accumulation is a denial . Grass says that in Germany, politicians are failing to engage in civic responsibilities .
 Habermas would later be closely identified with the search for Verfassungspatriotism . The only sort of national sentiment that he felt it appropriate—and prudent—to encourage in his countrymen .
 As early as 1953 he came to public attention for an article in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung attacking Martin Heidegger for allowing his Heidelberg lectures to be republished with the original allusions to the 'inner greatness' of Nazism .
 At the time the incident was isolated—it aroused little international attention . At the . time of the incident, the incident aroused little . attention . at the time .
 It put down a marker all the same, foreshadowing the bitter interrogations of a later decade . But it was a marker that foreshadowed the bitter interrogation of later decades .
 Rainer Werner Fassbinder (born in 1945) acidly dissects the serial defects of the Federal Republic as they appeared to its youthful critics . In 1978 film The Marriage of Maria Braun, he plays Maria Braun . The film is based on the life of a young woman in
 Maria then devotes herself with unflinching single-mindedness to the national preoccupation with making money, at which she proves strikingly adept . Maria says: 'I'm not scared'
 Along the way the heroine, her initial vulnerability now encrusted with cynicism, exploits the resources, affections and credulity of men . While remaining ‘loyal’ to Hermann, her German soldier-husband incarcerated in the Soviet Union and whose wartime exploits are left
 All Maria’s relations, achievements and comforts are measured in cash, culminating in a new, gadget-filled house . She plans to welcome her restored husband into a new house into which she plans to welcomed him .
 The radio acclaims hysterically West Germany’s victory in the 1954 football World Cup . West Germany won the 1954 World Cup in Germany .
 For Fassbinder and a coming generation of angrily dissenting West Germans, the newfound qualities of the new Germany in its new Europe did not deflect attention from the old defects . The new Germany has a tacit agreement not to arouse the sleeping dogs of national memory, he says .
 Imre Nagy, chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Hungarian People's Republic, speaking . Dean Acheson, speech at West Point, December 5th 1962 .
 In the early hours of this morning, the Soviet troops launched an attack against our capital city with the obvious intention of overthrowing the lawful, democratic, Hungarian Government . The attack was carried out with the intent to overthrow the lawful and democratic Hungarian government .
 At the close of the Second World War, the peoples of Western Europe—who were hard put to govern or even feed themselves—continued to rule much of the nonEuropean world . Josip Broz Tito, 1956 .
 This unseemly paradox, whose implications were not lost on indigenous elites in the European colonies, had perverse consequences . The European colonies were colonized by indigenous elites .
 To many in Britain, France or the Netherlands, their colonies and imperial holdings in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Americas were balm for the suffering and humiliations of the war in Europe . They had demonstrated their material value in that war as vital national resources .
 Without access to far-flung territory, supplies and men that came with colonies, the British and French would have been at a greater disadvantage in their struggle with Germany and Japan than they already were .
 Names of colonial and dominion cities, rivers and political figures are as familiar as those of Great Britain itself . The names of colonial British cities and rivers are still familiar .
 The British had lost their ‘first’ empire in North America . Its successor, if not exactly acquired in a fit of absent-mindedness, was anything but the product of design .
 It cost a lot to police, service and administer; and—like the French imperium in North Africa—was most fervently appreciated and defended by a small settler class of farmers and ranchers in places like Kenya .
 ‘white’ dominions Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa were independent . But their formal allegiance to the Crown, their affective ties to Britain, their food and raw materials they could supply and their armed forces were regarded as national assets in all but name .
 British holdings in East Africa were esteemed above all as adjuncts to Britain’s main imperial asset: India . At the time, these included what would later become Pakistan and Bangladesh, as well as Sri Lanka and Burma .
 All the European empires had been acquired sporadically, episodically and (with the exception of the land and sea routes servicing British India) with little sustained attention to logistic consistency or economic gain .
 The Spanish had already lost most of their empire to the British, later to demands for independence from their own settlers . The rising power of the United States is a source of lingering anti-American sentiment in Spain .
 Franco abandoned Morocco and Equatorial Guinea between 1956 and 1968 . What remained were mere enclaves in Morocco and Guinea . Franco abandoned by Franco between 1956- 1968 .
 Neither the British, nor any of the other remaining European colonial powers, anticipated the collapse of their holdings or influence overseas . Thus neither the British nor any other European colonial power anticipated the imminent collapse .
 The end of European colonial empires seemed very far off in 1939 even to students at a seminar for young Communists from Britain and her colonies . As the British historian Eric Hobsbawm has attested, the end of the colonial empires seem very far away .
 70 percent of the world’s gross output and 80 percent of economic value added in manufacturing industry came from Western Europe and North America . i960 .
 Tiny Portugal extracted raw materials at highly favorable prices from its colonies in Angola and Mozambique . These also offered a captive market for Portuguese exports, otherwise internationally uncompetitive . Tiny Portugal was the poorest of the European colonial powers .
 Mozambique grew cotton for the Portuguese commodity market rather than food for its people, a distortion that issued in sizeable profits and regular local famines . The distortion resulted in regular famines and regular food shortages .
 In these circumstances and despite unsuccessful revolts in the colonies and military coups at home, Portugese decolonization was postponed as long as possible .
 Few at the time could conceive of the colonies themselves surviving alone, unsupported by foreign rule . Even if European states could manage without their empires, few thought of colonies surviving alone .
 Even liberals and socialists who favored autonomy and eventual independence for Europe’s overseas subjects expected it to be many years before such goals would be realized . Even liberals .
 The world war, however, had wrought greater changes in the colonies than most Europeans yet understood . The colonies were still at the center of the world's first colony .
 Britain had lost its East Asian territories to Japanese occupation during the war . Although these territories were recovered after the defeat of Japan the standing of the old colonial power had been radically undermined .
 The British surrender in Singapore in February 1942 was a humiliation from which the British Empire in Asia never recovered . The British Empire never recovered from the humiliating defeat in Singapore .
 British forces were able to prevent Burma and India falling to the Japanese . The myth of European invincibility was shattered for good by the Japanese invasion .
 After 1945 colonial powers in Asia would face pressure to relinquish their traditional claims . After 1945 the colonial powers would face growing pressure on relinquishing traditional claims to the continent .
 The Netherlands is the oldest colonial power in the region . The consequences of the Dutch colonial rule were particularly traumatic .
 The Dutch East Indies, and the trading company that had developed them, were part of the national myth . They were a link to the Golden Age and a symbol of Dutch commercial and seafaring glory .
 The ensuing guerilla war lasted for four years and cost the Netherlands more than 3,000 military and civilian casualties . The Netherlands was defeated by the Dutch government in 1968 .
 Indonesian independence was unilaterally asserted by the nationalist leader Sukarno on November 17th 1945 . It was finally conceded by the Dutch authorities at a conference in The Hague in December 1949 .
 By the end of 1957, when President Sukarno closed Indonesia to Dutch businessmen, Dutch ‘repatriates’ numbered tens of thousands .
 The experience of decolonization had an embittering effect on Dutch public life, already hard hit by the war and its sufferings . The experience had a devastating effect on the Dutch public .
 Many ex-colonials and their friends pressed what became known as ‘the Myth of Good Rule’, blaming the Left for the Dutch failure to reassert colonial authority following the interregnum of Japanese occupation .
 The colonial war of which no-one was proud, in which many felt that military success had been impeded by UN insistence on a negotiated transfer of power . On the other hand conscripted soldiers were just glad to be home in one piece, after a colonial war .
 World War Two had demonstrated that the Netherlands could not stand aside from international affairs, particularly those of its large neighbors . The loss of Indonesia was a timely reminder of the country’s real standing as a small and vulnerable European state .
 Making a virtue of necessity, the Dutch retooled as ultra-enthusiastic proponents of European economic and political integration .
 The process did not just happen painlessly, nor was it an overnight switch in the collective sensibilities of the nation . But it was not just painlessly or overnight, it was an overnight change .
 Until the spring of 1951, the Dutch military calculations and expenditures of post-war Dutch governments were targeted not for European defense . Dutch participation in the Brussels Pact and NATO was not included in NATO but for the colonies .
 Only slowly, and with some suppressed regret, did Dutch politicians pay undivided attention to European affairs and abandon their ancient priorities . Dutch politicians are now paying more attention to the continent .
 The same was true, in varying degrees, of all the colonial and ex-colonial powers of Western Europe . The British colonial powers of the 1930s and 1940s were colonial powers .
 American scholars sometimes miss this distinctive feature of post-World War Two Europe . American scholars projecting the experience and preoccupations of Washington onto the rest of the West, sometimes miss it .
 In the United States, the Cold War was what mattered and foreign and domestic priorities and rhetoric reflected this. In the U.S. it was what matters and foreign policy reflected this .
 National independence movements were the strategic headache for much of the 1950s, not Moscow and its ambitions . The two overlapped in some cases, though some cases of independence movements overlapped .
 The French Empire, like the British, had benefited from the re-distribution of Asian and African holdings seized from the defeated Central Powers .
 In 1945 liberated France ruled once again over Syria and Lebanon, as well as substantial swaths of sub-Saharan Africa and some island holdings in the Caribbean and Pacific .
 In French history texts, the place of colonies was perhaps more ambiguous than across the English Channel . France was a Republic in which imperial dominion had no natural place, in part because so many of France’s early conquests had long since been taken over by English-speaking rulers .
 France backed down from a confrontation with Britain over control of Egypt, Sudan and the Upper Nile . In 1950 millions of French men and women still remembered the 'Fashoda Incident'
 To speak of Empire in France was to be reminded of defeat as well as victory, says historian . The Empire was to remember defeat and victory, he says .
 French schoolchildren were insistently presented with the image of France as a trans-oceanic continuum, a place in which the civic and cultural attributes of Frenchness were open to all . Schools from Saigon to Dakar taught about ‘nos ancetres les Gallois
 Only in France could treat their most valued colonial possessions not as foreign soil but as administrative extensions of France itself . Only only in France can treat these lands as extensions of the country itself .
 During the war, the French, like the British and Dutch, had lost their prized South-East Asian colonies to the Japanese .
 French Indo-China remained under the tutelage of the Vichy authorities until 1945 . The Japanese occupation came late—and was anyway less traumatic than France’s own defeat in 1940 .
 In Africa, De Gaulle had re-established France’s presence at the Brazzaville Conference of early February 1944 .
 What exactly De Gaulle meant is—as so often—unclear, perhaps deliberately so . Perhaps deliberately so. What exactly he meant is still unclear .
 He was referring to colonial emancipation and eventual autonomy . But he was certainly understood to be referring to independence .
 French public opinion was not inhospitable to colonial reforms . Andre Gide’s excoriation of forced labor practices in his Voyage au Congo raised pre-war public awareness of European crimes in central Africa .
 United States Secretary of State Cordell Hull had recently spoken approvingly of the prospect of international control for the less advanced European colonies and early self-government .
 Reformist talk in impoverished, isolated francophone Africa was cheap, especially before metropolitan France itself itself was even liberated . Reformist reformist talk was cheap before the liberation of France .
 Within two weeks British forces began to arrive in the southern city of Saigon, followed by the French . Within a month later the French arrived in Saigon and British forces arrived in .
 The northern districts of Vietnam, hitherto under Chinese control, were restored to the French in February 1946 .
 At this point there was a serious prospect of negotiated autonomy or independence, as the authorities in Paris opened talks with nationalist representatives .
 French admiral and local plenipotentiary Thierry d’Argenlieu unilaterally proclaimed the separation of Cochin China (the southern part of the country) from the nationalist-dominated north .
 The French bombed Haiphong harbor in the autumn of that same year, the first Vietnam War had begun . The first Vietnam war began in the fall of that year .
 De Gaulle discouraged open talk of colonial self-government . France’s post-war struggle to re-establish its authority in Indo-China was a po3 .
 Ho Chi Minh received double credit among the French domestic Left, as a fighter for national independence and as a Communist revolutionary . The identity of the Vietnamese Communist Party was intertwined in his own thinking .
 Sending young men to fight and die in a ‘dirty war in Indo-China made little sense to most French voters . Let Hanoi take over was not obviously more ill-advised than supporting the palpably inadequate Bao Dai, whom the French established as the country�
 French officer corps was keen to pursue the struggle in Vietnam . France’s martial heritage (or what remained of it) seemed at stake and the French High Command had a point to prove .
 French economy could never have sustained a long drawn out war in a farflung colony without significant external aid . But the French economy would not have sustained the war in such a long-drawn out war without external help .
 In effect, the USA underwrote post-war French economic modernization while France dedicated its own scarce resources to the war .
 Starting in July of that year the United States sharply increased its military assistance to French forces in South-East Asia . The U.S. increased its support for French troops in South East Asia .
 Of all the European states France, by 1953, was by far the most dependent on U.S. support, in cash and kind alike . France was dependent on the United States by 1953 .
 Only in 1954 did Washington call a halt, rejecting increasingly desperate French pleas for airborne help to save the doomed French garrison at Dien Bien Phu . Washington refused to accept the French request for airborne assistance .
 After nearly eight years of fruitless and bloody struggle, it was clear to Washington that the French could not re-establish their former authority in Indo-China . The French were no match for Ho Chi Minh’s regular and guerilla forces .
 In America’s view the French had frittered their money away and were an increasingly risky investment . The French were considered a risky investment by the U.S.
 Dien Bien Phu surrendered on May 7th 1954 and the French requested a cease-fire . No-one was surprised at the French request of a ceasefire .
 The fall of French Indo-China precipitated the collapse of the last of the French coalition governments that had tried to hold it, and the succession of Pierre Mend£s-France .
 Ho Chi Minh’s incarnation as an international Communist icon was confirmed on January 14th 1950, when Mao and Stalin were the first to recognize his newly declared Democratic Republic of Vietnam .
 The burden of sustaining the southern half of France’s former colony now fell to the Americans alone . Those elections were never held .
 Unlike the Dutch, the French had not been in the region very long; and even though America paid for the first Vietnam War , it was French soldiers who fought and died there .
 French politicians of the Right castigated Mendes-France and his predecessors for their failure to prosecute the war more effectively . But no-one had anything better to propose and almost all were secretly pleased to put Vietnam behind them .
 Only the French Army, or more precisely the professional officer corps, has a long list of continuing grievances . The French Army is not the only source of continuing complaints .
 Some younger officers, notably those who had first served in the Resistance or with the Free French and acquired there the habit of independent political judgment, began to nourish inchoate but dangerous resentments . Some young officers began to resent resentments, including those who first served with the Resistance
 French troops in the field had been ill served by their political masters in Paris, they said . Once again, they murmured, French troops were ill-served by the political masters .
 Algerian insurrection began on November ist 1954, just 14 weeks after the signing of the Geneva accords . In one respect this was almost literally true, the Algerian uprising began on Nov ist .
 North Africa had been at the center of Parisian concerns long since . But North Africa has long been a source of concern for Parisians since the 1950s .
 The French first arrived in present-day Algeria in 1830, part of a larger French ambition to dominate Saharan Africa from the Atlantic to Suez .
 French had settled instead for primacy in the western Mediterranean and across the Sahara into westcentral Africa . Thwarted in the east by the British, the French settled instead of primacy .
 Northern Africa was the only French colony in which Europeans had established themselves permanently in large numbers . Outside of the far older settlement in Quebec, and some islands of the Caribbean, it was only the only colony of Europeans to have settled permanently in Northern Africa .
 Many Europeans were not French in origin but rather Spanish, Italian, Greek or something else . But many of the Europeans were born in France .
 Even an emblematically French Algerian like Albert Camus was part-Spanish, part-French . Camus's French forebears were very recent arrivals .
 France had not been a land of emigrants for many generations . Russia, Poland, Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Scandinavia, Germany, Ireland, Scotland (and even England)
 If there was a France-outside-France it was in Algeria, it was confirmed, as we have seen, by Algeria’s technical presence inside France as part of the metropolitan administrative structure . Algeria's technical presence in France was confirmed by Algeria's presence in the country .
 The closest analogy elsewhere was Ulster, another overseas enclave in a former colony, institutionally incorporated into the ‘mainland’ with a long-established settler community for whom the attachment to the imperial heartland mattered far more than it did to the metropolitan majority .
 No French government except Leon Blum’s short-lived Popular Front of 1936 paid serious attention to the grievous mis-rule of colonial administrators in French North Africa .
 Moderate Algerian nationalists like Ferhat Abbas were well known to French politicians and intellectuals before and after World War Two . No-one really expected Paris to concede their modest goals of self-government or ‘home rule’ any time soon .
 The government of liberated France showed little concern for Arab sentiment, and when this resulted in an uprising in the Kabylia region east of Algiers in May 1945, insurgents were uncompromisingly crushed .
 By the time these years of pent-up anger and thwarted expectations culminated in the outbreak of organized insurrection, on November 1st 1954, compromise was no longer on the agenda . By the end of the war, the situation had reached such a low point .
 The Algerian FLN —Front de Liberation Nationale — was led by a younger generation of Arab nationalists . The FLN scorned the moderate, Francophile strategies of their elders .
 French independence was not ‘home rule’ or reform but independence . French governments could not contemplate independence . Their objective was not 'home rule' or reform .
 The new Socialist government of Guy Mollet granted independence in March 1956 to the neighboring French colonies of Tunisia and Morocco . It was the first surrender of colonial power on the African continent . Tunisian and Morocco were the first French colonies to have independence .
 When Mollet visited Algiers, a crowd of European settlers pelted him with rotten fruit . Mollet was attacked by European settlers during his visit to the city of Algier .
 Paris was caught between the implacable demands of the clandestine FLN and the refusal of Algeria’s European residents, now led by a Committee for the Defense of French Algeria , to accept any compromise with their Arab neighbors .
 The French strategy is to defeat the FLN by force before putting pressure on the settlers to accept political reforms and some power-sharing measures . French strategy, if it merits the name, was now to defeat FLN .
 Both sides regularly resorted to intimidation, torture, murder and outright terrorism . Both sides often resorted to violence, torture and murder, says CNN's John Defterios .
 French paratroop colonel Jacques Massu was given a free hand to destroy the nationalist insurgents in Algiers by whatever means necessary . After a particularly gruesome series of Arab assassinations and European reprisals in December 1956, Mollet’s political representative Robert Lacoste gave
 Arab population paid a terrible price, but the reputation of France was irrevocably sullied . France's reputation was irrevitable, and the Arab population suffered a terrible cost . The French reputation was ruined by the Arab invasion of France .
 European settlers remained as suspicious as ever of Paris’s long-term intentions .
 French air force bombed Sakhiet, a town across the border in Tunisia suspected of serving as a base for Algerian nationalists . In February 1958 the newly installed government of Felix Gaillard was embarrassed by the air force’s bombing .
 The resulting international outcry, and offers of Anglo-American ‘good offices’ to help solve the Algerian imbroglio, led to growing fears among Europeans of Algeria that Paris was planning to abandon them .
 Policemen and soldiers in Paris and Algiers began openly to demonstrate their sympathy for the settlers' cause .
 The Gaillard government, France’s third in eleven months, resigned on April 15th . Gaillard is France's third government in 11 months .
 Ten days later there was a huge demonstration in Algiers demanding the preservation in perpetuity of French Algeria and the return to power of De Gaulle . Organizers of the gathering formed themselves into a Committee of Public Safety .
 On May 15th, forty-eight hours after yet another French government, led by Pierre Pfimlin, had been inaugurated in Paris, General Raoul Salan—the French military commander in Algeria—shouted out De Gaulle’s name to a cheering crowd in
 De Gaulle reappeared in public to address a press conference on May 19th . He had been silent since retreating from public life to his home village of Colombey in eastern France .
 Armed rebels seized control of the island of Corsica and Paris was gripped by rumours of imminent paratroop landings . Armed rebels took over Corsica from Corsica in the early 1950s .
 On May 28th Pfimlin resigned and President Rene Coty called upon De Gaulle to form a government . President Coty has called upon President De Gallaise to form an immediate government .
 De Gaulle took office on June 1st and was voted full powers by the National Assembly the following day . Without even pretending to demur, he took office without pretending to be demur .
 The new French Prime Minister had indeed understood his Algerian supporters, better than they knew . French PM said he understood Algerians better than their Algerians .
 Among De Gaulle’s many distinctive traits was an unwavering appreciation for order and legitimacy . But among his traits was his unwavering respect for order, legitimacy and order .
 The hero of the Free French, the implacable critic of Vichy, had restored the credibility of the French state after August 1944 . He was no friend of the Algerian rebels, much less the free-thinking young officers who had taken their part .
 His second and related objective was to resolve the Algerian conflict that had so dramatically undermined it . His second was to solve the Algerians' conflict with Algeria .
 Within a year it was clear that Paris and Algiers were on a collision course . Paris and Algeria have been at odds with each other for years .
 International opinion was increasingly favorable to the FLN and its demand for independence . The FLN was defeated by the French-backed government of France in 1953 .
 He had already established a ‘Communaute Fran^aise’ as the first step towards a 'commonwealth’ of France’s former colonies .
 South of the Sahara, formal independence would be granted rapidly to French-educated elites of countries that were far too weak to stand alone . France would thus be utterly dependent on France for decades to come .
 In September 1959, just one year after coming to power, the French President proposed ‘self-determination’ for Algeria .
 Infuriated by what they regarded as evidence of a coming sell-out, officers and settlers in Algeria began planning a full-scale revolt .
 In January i960 barricades went up in Algiers and ‘ultra-patriots’ shot at French gendarmes . In January 'ultra patriots' shot at gendarriers in Algerian capital .
 The revolt collapsed in the face of De Gaulle’s intransigence . Senior officers (including Massu and his superior, General Maurice Challe) were carefully re-assigned away .
 The chief victim of the coup was the morale and the international image of the French Army . The French Army's morale and international image was the biggest hit . The coup was a coup to destroy the morale of the army, says French President Francois Hollande .
 An overwhelming majority of Frenchmen and women, many of them with sons serving in Algeria, drew the conclusion that Algerian independence was not just inevitable but desirable . For the sake of France, the sooner the better, they say .
 De Gaulle, ever the realist, began negotiations with the FLN at the spa town of Evian on Lake Geneva . The French leader began negotiations at Evian, a spa town on the lake .
 Initial talks, conducted in June i960 and again during June and July 1961, had failed to find common ground . Initial talks had been held during the summer of that month .
 After eight years of unbroken fighting, FLN declared a cease-fire on March 19, 1962 . A renewed attempt in March 1962 was more successful, after ten days of discussion the two sides reached agreement .
 On the basis of the terms agreed at Evian De Gaulle called a referendum on Sunday July 1st and the French people voted overwhelmingly to free themselves of the Algerian shackle .
 The OAS grew into a fully fledged underground organization, committed first to preserving French Algeria and then, after that failed, to punish those who had 'betrayed' their cause .
 At least one plan to ambush the President’s car as he drove through the Parisian suburb of Petit Clamart came perilously close to succeeding .
 For a few years in the early sixties France was in the grip of a determined and increasingly desperate terrorist threat . For a short time in the sixties, France faced an increasingly desperate threat .
 The French intelligence services ultimately broke the OAS, but the memory lingered . The OAS was broken by the French government, but it was never broken .
 Millions of Algerians were forced into French exile against their will . Meanwhile, millions of Algerian refugees were forced to live in France . The Algerian population was forced into exile against its will, many of whom were not Algerians .
 The European pieds-noirs settled for the most part in southern France . The first generation harbored longstanding grievances against the French authorities for betraying their cause .
 Algeria’s Jews also abandoned the country, some for Israel, many for France . Many went to France, where they would come in time to constitute the largest Jewish community in Europe .
 Others, notably those who had worked with the French or served as auxiliaries with French police and military authorities—the socalled harkis —fled the wrath of the victorious nationalists .
 Even those who made it safely to France got no thanks from the French and scant acknowledgement or recompense for their sacrifices . Many were caught and suffered horrible retribution; but even those who got . made no thanks .
 Evian Agreements of 1962 put an end to nearly five decades of war or fear of war in French life . The Evian Agreement was signed by French President Francois Laporte in 1962 .
 The population was weary of crises and fighting, weary of threats and rumours and plots . It was weary—weary of crises, tired of fighting and threats and threats .
 Unloved and unlamented, it was cruelly weakened from the outset by the absence of an effective executive—a legacy of the Vichy experience, which had made post-war legislators reluctant to establish a strong presidency .
 It was handicapped by its parliamentary and electoral systems, which favored multiple parties and produced unstable coalition governments . The country's parliamentary system has been plagued by instability .
 It oversaw unprecedented social changes but these generated a divisive political backlash . The U.S. experienced unprecedented social change but also a divisive backlash .
 Anti-system, ‘poujadist’ deputies won parliamentary seats in the national elections of 1956 . Fifty-two anti-system deputies won seats in parliamentary seats .
 The first post-war French republic was brought low by its colonial struggles . But above all, it was brought down by the struggles of the French colonialists .
 Like the Ancien Regime, the Fourth Republic was crippled by the costs of war . The Fourth Republic, the Republic of France, was plagued by war costs .
 Between December 1955 and December 1957 France lost two-thirds of its currency reserves . Despite the steady growth of the economy, France's currency reserves were lost . France's economy grew steadily in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Governments of every hue divided and fell when faced with these hurdles . Governments of all hue divided when faced by these hurdles, governments divided . Governments were divided by the hurdles they faced, and fell .
 Even without a disaffected army, the Fourth Republic would have been hard pressed to face down such challenges just a decade after the worst military defeat in the nation's history and a humiliating four-year occupation .
 The institutions of Charles de Gaulle’s Fifth French Republic were designed to avoid precisely the defects of its predecessor . The institutions were designed for the French Republic in the 1950s and 1960s to avoid the mistakes of the previous French Republic .
 In the aftermath of his success in ending the Algerian conflict, De Gaulle proposed that the President of the Republic be henceforth elected by direct universal suffrage . This amendment was duly approved in a referendum of October 28th 1962 .
 French President now has more power than any other freely elected head of state or government in the world . Sustained by his institutions, his record and his personality, French memories of the alternative—and French memories .
 In domestic affairs, De Gaulle was for the most part content to leave daily business to his prime ministers . The French prime minister was in charge of the French military .
 The radical economic reform program began with the issuing of a new franc on December 27th 1958 . The new franc was in line with earlier recommendations from the International Monetary Fund .
 Many of the most significant transformations in French transportation infrastructure, town planning and town planning were conceived and begun under his authority . It is not surprising that many of France's most significant reforms in transportation infrastructure were conceived under him .
 De Gaulle understood economic stabilization and modernization largely as weapons in the struggle to restore national glory . Like Spain’s General Franco, he had nothing in common with the Francoist .
 France had been in steady decline at least since 1871, a grim trajectory marked by military defeat, diplomatic humiliation, colonial retreat, economic deterioration and domestic instability . France was in a state of decline since the French Revolution in 1871 .
 De Gaulle had long been sensitive to France’s serial humiliation —less by its German foe in 1940 than at the hands of its Anglo-American allies ever since .
 De Gaulle never forgot his own embarrassing isolation as France’s impoverished and largely ignored spokesman in wartime London . He was largely ignored by the French during the Second World War .
 France's proud Mediterranean fleet was sunk by the British at Mers-el-Kebir in July 1940 . The symbolism of the act rankled nonetheless, but Frenchmen shared the pain .
 De Gaulle had particular cause to feel ambivalent towards Washington, where Franklin Roosevelt never took him seriously . Roosevelt was never taken seriously by the French leader .
 The United States maintained good relations with the wartime Vichy regime far longer than was decent or prudent . The U.S. maintained good ties with the French regime long longer than it was prudent .
 France was absent from the wartime Allied negotiations; this allowed De Gaulle in later years cynically to disclaim responsibility for the Yalta agreement of which he privately approved, the memory rankled . France was left out of the wartime negotiations .
 The nuclear 'club' did not include France, reduced thereby to unprecedented irrelevance in international military calculations . The nuclear ‘club’ did not . include France . France .
 France had been utterly dependent on the USA in its colonial war in Asia . Worse still, France had to rely heavily on the U.S. for its colonial success .
 President Eisenhower pressured the British into withdrawing, to France’s impotent fury . In October 1956, when Britain, France and Israel and Israel conspired to attack Nasser's Egypt, it was President Eisenhower who pressured Britain into withdrawing .
 French diplomats fumed helplessly when British and American arms were delivered to Tunisia, despite French fears that these would end up in Algerian rebel hands . A year later, in November 1957, the French diplomats were fuming helplessly at the arms being delivered .
 De Gaulle was told he was not entitled to learn details of the American deployment of nuclear weapons on French soil . General Norstad, the American commander of NATO, told him not to learn about nuclear weapons .
 This is the background to De Gaulle’s foreign policy once he assumed full presidential powers . The background to his foreign policy is that he took over at the age of 50 .
 From nuclear weapons to the dollar’s privileged international status as a reserve currency, the U.S. was in a position to impose its interests on the rest of the Western alliance and could be expected to do so .
 French policy had been in Indo-China and again at Suez, but not dependent on Washington . The U.S. could not be trusted, but it was at least predictable; the important thing was not to be dependent on it .
 France must stand its ground as best it could, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy . France must also acquire its own nuclear weapon, he says .
 French President assumed that Great Britain would strive to maintain its position halfway between Europe and America . If forced to chose, London would opt for its Atlantic ally over its European neighbors, he says .
 Macmillan had held talks with De Gaulle at Rambouillet, but he had given the French President no indication of what was to come . MacMillan had given no indication what was going to happen .
 Nassau, then, was yet another ‘Anglo-American’ arrangement cooked up behind France’s back . Nassau is yet another 'Anglo American' arrangement, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 Paris was itself offered the same Polaris missiles, on similar conditions, without even having been party to the discussions . To this injury was added further insult, Paris was offered the missiles on similar terms .
 President De Gaulle announced in January 1963 that France was vetoing Britain’s application to join the European Economic Community . It was against this background that France decided to veto the application .
 De Gaulle turned towards Bonn and signed the highly symbolic if utterly insubstantial Treaty with the Federal Republic . Meanwhile, as we have seen, the French President signed the Treaty with his predecessor .
 The idea that France could compensate for its vulnerability to Anglo-American pressure by aligning with its old enemy across the Rhine was hardly new . The idea of France's alliance with the U.S. is hardly new, but it's hardly new.
 Treaty with Germany made little practical difference in 1963 . Treaty was signed in 1963, but it was signed by President Eisenhower in 1964 .
 The French had no plans to leave the Western alliance, and De Gaulle had not the least intention of being dragged into any German schemes to revise the post-war settlement in the East .
 Treaty of 1963 and new Franco-German condominium confirmed France’s decisive turn towards Europe, says historian . Treaty confirmed France's decisive turning towards Europe .
 For Charles de Gaulle, the lesson of the twentieth century was that France could only hope to recover its lost glories by investing in the European project and shaping it into a French goals .
 British retreat from empire was very different from that of the French . With one important exception, the British retreat is very different to that of French .
 The British Empire, like the Soviet one, survived the war intact, if battered . The Empire survived the conflict intact, but was battered, if not battered .
 Great Britain depended heavily on imperial growers for basic foodstuffs . In certain theatres of the war, British troops had outnumbered British soldiers in North Africa .
 The residents of Britain itself were, as we have seen, far more conscious of Empire than their French counterparts . One reason why London was so much bigger than Paris was that it had thrived on its imperial role as port, commercial entrepot and manufacturing center .
 British imperialists had no realistic hope of holding on to their imperial heritage after 1945 . But the British after 1945 had . no realistic . hope of keeping on to . imperial heritage .
 In any case it was obvious to almost everyone that the pressure for independence was now irresistible . "In any case, almost everyone in the country is now irresistible," says David Cameron . "It was obvious that almost everyone wanted independence," he says .
 The Commonwealth was created by the 1931 Statute of Westminster . It was intended by its framers to obviate the need for rapid colonial independence . It offered instead a framework for autonomous and semiautonomous territories .
 The British Commonwealth was to become a holding club for former colonies, independent states . But it was now to become instead a club of former colonies . It was now instead to be a club for ex-British colonies .
 India, Pakistan and Burma were granted independence in 1947, Ceylon the following year . Ceylon was granted independence from Sri Lanka in 1974, India and Burma from 1947 .
 Millions of Hindus and Muslims were massacred in ethnic cleansing and population exchanges that followed . The colonial power itself withdrew relatively unscathed from the process .
 A Communist insurgency in neighboring Malaya led the British government in June 1948 to declare a Stafe of Emergency . The British government would only be lifted twelve years later with the rebels’ defeat .
 Britain’s departure from South Asia was both more orderly and less traumatic than might have been expected . But on the whole, and in spite of the accompanying retreat from India and its neighbors of thousands of colonial residents and administrators, Britain's departure was more orderly than perhaps expected .
 In the British Mandate territory of Palestine, Great Britain abandoned its responsibilities in 1948 under humiliating but relatively bloodless circumstances . Arabs and Jews set upon one another in force only after the British had quit the scene .
 Britain experienced the ironies and drama of de-colonization and suffered a defeat of historic proportions . But it was in Egypt, paradoxically, a country that had never been a British colony in the conventional sense, that Britain experienced a defeat .
 In the Suez Crisis of 1956 Britain underwent for the first time the sort of international humiliation— illustrating and accelerating the country’s decline— that had become so familiar to the French . In the 1950s Britain was humiliated by the crisis .
 British interest in Egypt stemmed directly from the importance of India, to which was added in later years the need for oil . The British interest began in Egypt in the early 1900s .
 British troops first seized Cairo in 1882, 13 years after the opening of the Suez Canal, administered from Paris . British troops took control of the city from Cairo, Egypt, from 1882 .
 From 1914 to 1922 Egypt was a British Protectorate, after which it became independent . Egypt was an independent state of Egypt from 1922 to 1922 .
 Relations between the two countries remained stable for a while, formalized in a 1936 Treaty .
 In October 1952 the new government in Cairo, led by army officers who had overthrown the Egyptian King Farouk, abrogated the Treaty . The treaty was signed by the Egyptian government in 1952 .
 In response the British re-occupied the Canal Zone . The British, fearful for the loss of their privileged access to the waterway, re-occupation was feared .
 Gamal Abdul Nasser was pressing for the departure of British soldiers from Egyptian soil . Within two years he had become head of the government and pressed for the removal of British troops .
 The British were disposed to compromise—they needed Egyptian cooperation . The British needed Egypt's cooperation, and the Egyptian government agreed to compromise .
 The UK was increasingly reliant on cheap oil, imported via the Suez Canal and paid for in sterling . The UK is now dependent on oil imports via the canal and paid in sterling.
 If this supply was disrupted, or the Arabs rejected payment in sterling, Britain would have to use her precious currency reserves to buy dollars and get the oil .
 London signed an agreement in October 1954 to evacuate the Suez base by 1956 . It was agreed that the British military presence in Egypt could be ‘re-activated’ if British interests were threatened .
 The agreement held and the last British soldiers were duly evacuated from Suez on June 13th 1956 .
 Colonel Nasser declared himself President of Egypt in November 1954 . Nasser was becoming a problem in his own right in Egypt . He declared himself president in 1954, but was soon a problem .
 Eden and his advisers regularly compared him to Hitler; . He was a threat to be addressed, not appeased. Eden's government compared him with Hitler; he was compared to Hitler .
 French dislike of Nasser had to do less with his threat to Suez or even his friendship with the Soviet bloc, than with his disruptive influence on France’s North African subjects . Paris shared this view, though .
 At a meeting with Tito in Yugoslavia on July 18th 1956, Nasser—together with India’s Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru—issued a joint statement of non-Alignment . Nasser disassociated Egypt from any dependence on the West .
 Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal Company . A week later, on July 26th, he announced the nationalization of the company .
 Britain, the U.S. and France convened a conference in London to decide on their response . Britain, France and the United States are among the countries involved in the crisis .
 The conference duly met and drew up a ‘plan’ that the Australian Prime Minister Robert Menzies was to present to Nasser . Nasser was to be presented with a 'plan' to the Australian PM .
 The London conferees then met again, from September 19th to the 21st, this time agreeing to form a Suez Canal Users Association . The London meeting took place in September .
 British and French announce they will refer dispute over Suez to the United Nations . The dispute will be referred to the U.N.
 Up to this point the British especially had taken care to align their own response to Nasser’s acts with that of Washington . The British had been wary of the U.S. response .
 Britain was still heavily indebted to the US, paying interest on outstanding loans . Pressure on sterling in 1955 had even led London to consider seeking a temporary waiver of these payments .
 Washington, it was believed, harbored plans to supplant Britain in the Middle East, which was why American spokesmen indulged in occasional anti-colonialist rhetoric .
 The British felt they could rely on American sympathy for Britain’s international interests and commitments . Korea—and the dynamic of the Cold War—had papered over mutual resentments of the 1940s .
 British leaders took it for granted that the United States would always support them if matters came to a head . They had been told by Eisenhower himself that they were worrying altogether too much about Nasser .
 British Prime Minister Anthony Eden set out to deal once and for all with the troublesome Egyptian . Eden had succeeded the ageing Churchill the previous year .
 Whatever their public posture, the British and French were impatient with the UN and its cumbersome procedures . The British, French and British were impatient at the UN .
 The Canal itself had always been within Egyptian territory and indisputably a part of Egypt . Even as the various conferences and international plans provoked by Nasser’s actions were being convened and discussed .
 Plans extended to include the Israelis, who joined the French and British in top-secret negotiations at Sevres . On October 21st these plans were extended to Israel . The Israeli government and the French government have been involved in secret negotiations .
 The Egyptians had blockaded the Gulf of Aqaba as early as July 1951 . It was a restriction on Israeli trade and freedom of movement that Jerusalem was determined to remove .
 Israel was out to reduce Nasser and secure its territorial and security interests in and around Sinai . Israel was seeking to reduce the Nasser regime .
 Israel would attack the Egyptian army in Sinai, pressing forward to occupy the whole peninsula, including the Suez Canal on its western edge . Israel would then press forward to occupying the whole of Sinai, including Suez .
 They would seize control of the Canal, assert that Egypt was incompetent to run so important a resource fairly and efficiently . They would restore the status quo ante and fatally undermine Nasser . The Canal is a vital resource for Egypt and the world .
 In Britain only Eden and four senior cabinet ministers were aware of the protocol signed at Sevres after three days of discussion . The plan was kept very secret .
 On October 29th, two weeks after UN Security Council failed to agree on a solution for Suez (thanks to a Soviet veto) Israeli forces crossed into Sinai one week after Sevres meeting .
 Britain and France vetoed a UN motion calling for Israel to withdraw, and issued an ultimatum to Israel and Egypt . The following day, October 30th, Britain and . France vetoed the UN motion . The . following day the UK and France issued . a . disingenuously called on
 Within forty-eight hours the Israelis completed their occupation of Sinai and Gaza, ignoring a UN General Assembly call for a cease-fire . The Egyptians for their part sank boats in the Suez Canal, effectively closing it to shipping .
 The first Anglo-French ground troops landed in Egypt on November 5th . Two days later, the first British ground troops arrived in Egypt . The first British troops landed on November 4th .
 Dwight Eisenhower was re-elected President of the United States on November 6th . Dwight Eisenhower is the current president of the U.S. Eisenhower was elected to office in 1953 . Eisenhower's re-election was the first time he had been in office .
 The 1950 Tripartite Declaration committed Britain, France and the U.S. to acting against the aggressor in the event of any Israel-Arab conflict . London and Paris had ignored both the letter and the spirit of the 1950 Declaration .
 The United States began to place considerable public and private pressure on Britain in particular to put a stop to its invasion of Egypt, even threatening to ‘pull the plug’ on the British pound .
 Shocked at such direct American opposition, but unable to withstand the accelerating run on sterling, Eden capitulated . Eden hesitated briefly but then capitulated, saying he was too scared .
 The UN authorized the dispatch to Egypt of a Peacekeeping Force, which Nasser accepted on November 12th, provided that Egyptian sovereignty was not infringed . That same day the UN authorized . the dispatch . of the . peacekeeping force, which Egypt accepted, was not allowed to infring
 UN Peacekeeping Force arrived in Egypt on December 4th and moved into Sinai . Three days later, the UN peacekeeping force arrived in Sinai and moved to Sinai .
 British and French withdrawal from Suez completed on December 22nd . British withdrawal was completed December 22th .
 Britain's sterling and dollar reserves had fallen by $279 million in the course of the crisis . The IMF announced that it had approved a $561.47 million loan for Britain, and a stand-by commitment for a further $738 million .
 Israel withdrew its own troops from Gaza in the first week of March 1957 . Israel secured a public U.S. commitment to its right of passage through the Gulf of Aqaba and Straits of Tiran .
 Clearance of the Suez Canal began a week after the completion of the Anglo-French withdrawal and the Canal was reopened on April 10th 1957 .
 The Israelis saw very clearly that their future lay in aligning their interests as closely as possible with those of Washington . The 'Eisenhower Doctrine' in January 1957, stated that the United States would use armed force in the event of an ‘International Communist’ aggression in the
 Nasser’s standing in the non-aligned world was greatly enhanced by his apparent success in facing down colonial powers . As the French had feared, his moral influence and example upon Arab nationalists and their supporters now reached new heights .
 For the United States, the Suez adventure was a reminder of its own responsibilities, as well as an opportunity to flex its muscles . For the U.S. it was also a reminder that it had to take responsibility for its actions .
 Eisenhower and Dulles resented the way Mollet and Eden had taken U.S. support for granted . Mollet, Eden and Eden took American backing for granted, Eisenhower and . Dulles .
 The Suez crisis coincided almost to the hour with the Soviet occupation of Hungary . The crisis coincided with the invasion of Hungary in 1956 .
 By indulging in so patently imperialist a plot against a single Arab state, London and Paris had drawn the world's attention away from the Soviet Union’s invasion of an independent state and destruction of its government . The plot was ostensibly in retribution for the exercise of its territorial sovereignty
 They had placed their own interests above those of the Western alliance as a whole . The U.S. felt that they were anachronistic and that they had placed themselves above those interests .
 France and Britain had initiated the Soviet Union into a role that it would improvise with gusto in the coming decades . But by allowing Moscow to perform, even if only symbolically, the role of protector to the injured party was not only symbolic .
 The divisions and rhetoric of the Cold War were to be imported deep into the Middle East and Africa . Thanks to the Suez crisis, the division and rhetoric was imported into the region .
 It was on Britain that the impact of the Suez miscalculation was felt most acutely . The impact was felt acutely by the British government in the 1950s .
 It would be many years before the full extent of the conspiracy against Nasser was made public . Many suspected it, though many suspected it .
 Anthony Eden was humiliated by the incompetence of the military strategy he had approved and by the very public American refusal to back it . But within weeks, he was forced to resign . He was humiliated .
 The first lesson of Suez was that Britain could no longer maintain a global colonial presence . The Suez Canal was built in the 1950s and 1960s . Suez proved that Britain was unable to maintain global colonial power .
 The country lacked the military and economic resources, as Suez had only too plainly shown . The country was likely now to be facing increased demands for independence .
 After a pause of nearly a decade, only the Sudan and Malaya had severed ties with Britain . The country thus entered upon an accelerated phase of de-colonization, in Africa .
 The Gold Coast was granted its freedom in 1957 as the independent state of Ghana . It was the first of many independent states to become the Gold Coast .
 Between i960 and 1964, seventeen more British colonies held ceremonies of independence as British dignitaries traveled the world hauling down the Union Jack and setting up new governments .
 The Commonwealth, which had just eight members in 1950, would have twenty-one by 1965, with more to come . The Commonwealth would have more than 20 members by 1965 .
 When compared to the trauma of Algeria or the catastrophic consequences of Belgium’s abandonment of the Congo in i960, the dismantling of the British Empire was relatively peaceful .
 In eastern and, especially, southern Africa, the unraveling of empire proved more controversial than it had in West Africa . In eastern Africa, it was more controversial to unraveling empire than West Africa.
 Harold Macmillan told South Africans that 'wind of change is blowing through this continent, and, whether we like it or not, this growth of consciousness is a political fact' He did not expect a friendly reception from the South Africans .
 The white settlers of South Africa declared themselves a republic in 1961 and left the Commonwealth in 1961 . To preserve the system of apartheid rule in force since 1948, the white settlers left the country . South Africa has been a republic since 1961 .
 In neighboring Southern Rhodesia, white colonists unilaterally pronounced themselves independent and self-governing . Four years later, in neighboring Rhodesia the white colonists declared themselves independent . The white colonists became self-governors .
 In both countries the ruling minority succeeded for a few years longer in ruthlessly suppressing opposition to their rule . In both cases, the minority succeeded in suppressing opposition .
 Once it became clear that London had neither the resources nor the appetite for enforcing colonial rule against majority opposition, the European colonists accepted the inevitable .
 In 1968 the Labour government of Harold Wilson announced that British forces would henceforth be withdrawn permanently from the various bases, harbors, entrepots, fuelling ports and other imperial-era establishments that the country had maintained ‘East of Suez’
 "The country could no longer afford to pretend to power and influence across the oceans," says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "We cannot pretend to be powerful across the world"
 The second lesson of Suez, as it seemed to the overwhelming majority of the British establishment, was that the UK must never again find itself on the wrong side of an argument with Washington . Suez was the first time the UK had been in the wrong way with the U.S
 Anglo-American relations between 1957 and 1961 produced some coolness between the two countries . London was far more disposed to make concessions to Moscow than Moscow . This didn’t mean that London and Germany would always agree .
 Macmillan's view was that the U.S. could not be counted on to back its friends in all circumstances . De Gaulle's stance was the opposite of that drawn by his French counterpart . But the demonstration that Washington could not count on backing its friends led Harold Macmill
 Whatever their hesitations, however ambivalent they might feel about particular U.S. actions, British governments would henceforth cleave loyally to United States positions . Whatever their views, however, however . however . they might be ambivalent about particular United States actions .
 Only that way could they hope to influence American choices and guarantee American support for British concerns when it mattered . Only way they hoped to influence U.S. was to influence their own decisions .
 This strategic re-alignment was to have momentous implications, for Britain and for Europe . This strategic change was to be momentous for the UK and Europe .
 The lasting consequences of the Suez crisis were felt in British society . The crisis was felt in many ways by British society in the 1970s .
 Great Britain, and England especially, was distinctly optimistic in the early 1950s . Great Britain and England, especially, were distinctly optimistic .
 The election of a Conservative government in 1951, and the first intimations of an economic boom, had dispersed the egalitarian gloom of the early post-war years . The election was the first hint of a boom in Britain's economic boom .
 In the first years of the reign of the new Queen, the English basked in a cozy Indian summer of self-satisfied well-being .
 Britons had split the atom, invented radar, discovered penicillin, designed the turbo-jet engine and more besides .
 The most popular British films of the first half of the Fifties—comedies like Genevieve or Doctor in the House —depict a rather perky, youthful, affluent, affluent and self-confident southern England .
 This was an England in which debutantes were still received at Court (an anachronistic and increasingly absurd ritual that the Queen finally abandoned in 1958) One in five Conservative parliamentarians had gone to Eton; and the percentage of students of working-class origin attending university in 1955
 These films were a comforting reminder of the reasons the British had for feeling proud of themselves . The films were based on episodes of British heroism from World War Two .
 Without glorifying combat, they cultivated the myth of Britain’s war . They paid special attention to the importance of comradeship across class and occupation . The myth was cultivated without glorifying the war .
 When social tensions or class distinctions hinted at, the tone was usually one of street-wise wit and skepticism rather than conflict or anger . The tone was more of streetwise wit than conflict and anger .
 War films like The Bridge on the River Kwai or Dunkirk carried undertones of questioning and doubt . The confident heritage of 1940 was starting to crack . Dunkirk is the latest in a series of films to be released in the UK .
 By i960, Sink the Bismarck appeared curiously anachronistic and quite at odds with the prevailing temper . i960 was set in the older mould .
 John Osborne’s path-breaking play Look Back in Anger was first produced in London in 1956 and made into an impressively faithful film two years later . The new mood was set by the play, first produced by John Osborne in 1956 .
 In this drama of frustration and disillusion the protagonist, Jimmy Porter, stifles in a society and marriage that he can neither abandon nor change . Jimmy Porter is frustrated and disillusioned by the society he cannot abandon and change .
 The film is about a woman trapped between her working-class husband and her aging ex-colonial father . She, in turn, is trapped between the two men and her father, who is confused and wounded .
 This diagnosis of Britain’s unstable mood at the moment of Suez was not perhaps terribly nuanced, but it rang true . This diagnosis was perhaps perhaps not terribly nuanced .
 The later films, dubbed ‘kitchen-sink dramas’ for their gritty depiction of everyday life, starred a new cohort of younger actors—Tom Courtenay, Albert Finney, Richard Harris and Alan Bates . The films were dubbed 'kitchen sink dramas'
 They were typically set in northern working-class communities, with accents and language to match .
 They represented England as a divided, embittered, cynical, jaundiced and hard-faced world, its illusions shattered . And they represented England, a divided and cynical, cynical world, their illusions shattered.
 Films of the early fifties and early sixties had in common was that women almost always played a secondary role, and everyone was white . Everyone in the cinema of the sixties and sixties was white.
 If the illusions of Empire died at Suez, the insular confidence of middle England had been under siege . Middle England was under siege for some time, says historian .
 The symbolism of the English national cricket team’s first defeat by a team from the West Indies (in 1950 and on the ‘hallowed soil’ of the home of the game at the Lord's cricket ground in London) was driven home three years later when England�
 England itself was no longer supreme after the two international games that had spread across the world . England's two international matches had spread around the world, but England itself had been supreme .
 These non-political measures of national decline had all the more impact because Britain in these years was a largely apolitical society . These measures of decline were particularly important because Britain was largely apathetic .
 Like the rest of Western Europe, the British were increasingly interested in consuming and being entertained . The British were also interested in entertainment and entertainment .
 Their interest in religion was waning, and with it their taste for collective mobilization of any kind . Their interest was waning and with which they were losing their taste .
 Harold Macmillan, a conservative politician with liberal instincts, was the appropriate leader for this transitional moment . Harold MacMillan was a middle-class political trimmer masquerading as an Edwardian country gentleman . He was very much like a British Prime Minister of the 1920s,
 Older voters were pleased with this outcome; only the young were increasingly disenchanted . Older voters are well enough pleased with the outcome; younger voters are increasingly disenchantant .
 The retreat from Empire contributed directly to a growing British anxiety about the loss of national direction . The retreat of Empire contributed to growing anxiety about national direction, the historian says .
 The Commonwealth served Britain largely as a source of food . The Commonwealth was founded in 1881 .
 Food from the Commonwealth was cheap, and constituted nearly one-third by value of all imports to the UK at the start of the 1960s . Food from Commonwealth member states were cheap and often cheap .
 America might be the indispensable ally, but it could hardly furnish the British with a renewed sense of purpose, much less an updated national identity . Britain's national identity is at risk of being left without a new national identity, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Britain's dependence on America illustrated the nation’s weakness and isolation . On the contrary, Britain's dependency on the U.S. illustrated its fundamental weakness . The UK is not dependent on America, it is dependent on its own strength and isolation.
 Macmillan: One way or another, the country’s future lay across the Channel . Little in their instincts, culture or their education pointed them toward continental Europe .
 The ‘European project’, in so far as it ever existed outside the heads of a few idealists, had stalled by the mid-nineteen-fifties . The 'European project' had stalled in the early 1950s .
 The French National Assembly had vetoed the proposed European army . The proposal would have led to enhanced European coordination . France's National Assembly rejected the proposal .
 Various regional accords on the Benelux model had been reached, notably the Scandinavian ‘Common Nordic Labor Market’ in 1954 . Nothing more ambitious was on the agenda .
 Advocates of European cooperation could point only to the new European Atomic Energy Community, announced in the spring of 1955 . But this, like the Coal and Steel Community, was a French initiative . Success lay, symptomatically, in its narrow and largely technical mandate .
 If the British were skeptical about the prospects for European unity, their view was not an altogether unreasonable view . The British were still skeptical as ever .
 The push for a fresh start came, appropriately enough, from the Benelux countries, who had the most experience of cross-border union and the least to lose from diluted national identities . The push comes from the countries who have the least experience of union .
 It is now clear to leading European statesmen, notably Paul-Henri Spaak, that political or military integration was not feasible, at least for the present .
 By the mid-fifties European concerns had shifted markedly away from military preoccupations of the previous decade .
 The emphasis, it seemed clear, should be placed on European economic integration . National self-interest and cooperation could be pursued in concert without offending traditional sensibilities, it seems .
 Spaak, together with his Dutch counterpart, convened a meeting at Messina, Italy, in June 1955, to consider this strategy . Spaak and Dutch counterpart met in Messina to discuss the strategy .
 The French were cautiously enthusiastic; the British were decidedly doubtful . The British were cautiously optimistic .
 By November 1955 the British had dropped out, alarmed at the prospect of just the sort of pre-federal Europe they had always suspected . But by November 1955 they had already dropped out .
 The Spaak Committee reported back in March 1956 with a formal recommendation in favor of a Common Market . Paris concurred with the recommendation .
 The Treaty establishing a European Economic Community was signed at Rome on March 25th 1957, and became effective on January 1st 1958 . The new EEC was the same six countries that had joined the Coal and Steel Community seven years before .
 It represented for the most part a declaration of future good intentions . It represented a declaration for the future, but it wasn't all about the future .
 Its signatories laid out a schedule for tariff reductions and harmonization . They also agreed to work towards the free movement of goods, currencies and labor .
 The text constituted a framework for instituting procedures designed to establish and enforce future regulations . Most of the text was written in the form of a proposal to set up and enforce regulations .
 Not everyone even in the member states was entirely pleased with the new proposals .
 In France many conservative deputies voted against ratification of the Rome Treaty on ‘national’ grounds’ Some socialists and left radicals opposed the formation of a ‘little Europe’ without the presence of Great Britain .
 In Germany, Adenauer’s own Economics Minister, Ludwig Erhard, remained critical of a neo-mercantilist ‘customs union’ that might damage Germany's links with Britain, restrict trade flows and distort prices .
 In the course of the 1950s the countries of continental Western Europe traded increasingly with one another .
 West Germany is key to Europe's economic recovery . West Germany has been key to the European economic recovery in recent years .
 This trend towards mutually advantageous coordination was driven by national self-interest, not the objectives of Schuman’s Coal and Steel Authority, which was irrelevant to economic policy making in these years . This trend was thus driven towards mutually beneficial coordination .
 The same concern to protect and nourish local interests that had turned Europe’s states inwards before 1939 now brought them closer together . Europe's states were united to protect their local interests .
 The removal of impediments and the lessons of the recent past were perhaps the most important factors in facilitating this change . The removal and lessons from the past are perhaps the key factors in this change, the author says .
 The Dutch, for example, were not altogether happy at the prospect of high EEC external tariffs that would inflate local prices . Like their Belgian neighbors they worried about the absence of the British .
 But they could not risk being cut off from their major trading partners . The U.S. government says it will not be allowed to withdraw from the region .
 As Europe’s main exporting nation Germany had a growing interest in free trade within Western Europe . The more so because German manufacturers had lost their important markets in eastern Europe and had lost important markets . Germany's main export country had lost its important eastern European markets .
 EU customs union confined to six countries was not necessarily a rational German policy objective, as Erhard understood . But a tariff-protected European customs union is not necessarily an objective of German policy .
 Like the British, he and many other Germans might have preferred a broader, looser European free trade area . Germany's economy has been hit hard by the Eurozone crisis .
 As a principle of foreign policy, Adenauer would never break with France, however divergent their interests, he says . Adenauer: "Adenauer would not break with French, even if divergent interests"
 Too many inefficient European peasants produced only just sufficient food for a market that could not pay them enough to live on . In the first half of the twentieth century, too many inefficient Europeans produced just enough food to feed a market .
 In the hungry years immediately after World War Two all sorts of programs were put in place to encourage and assist arable farmers in particular to produce more . The hungry years were the years of the hungry .
 To reduce dependence on dollar-denominated food imports from Canada and the US, the emphasis was placed on encouraging output rather than efficiency .
 In a manner of speaking, the Forties were thus a golden age for Europe’s farmers .
 They continued to benefit from what amounted to permanent public welfare . But they continued to be part of the public in the United States .
 In the years that followed the country’s agricultural output soared . But in the years following the war, agricultural output rose sharply .
 The French government is conscious of the symbolic significance of the land in French public life . Meanwhile the French government has sought to maintain price supports and find export markets for the food .
 France’s chief economic interest in a European common market was the preferential access it would afford to foreign—especially German —markets for meat, dairy and grain products . France's chief economic advantage in a common market is preferential access to foreign markets, especially Germany .
 France's National Assembly voted for the Rome Treaty on farm production . The Rome Treaty is part of a plan to buy up superfluous French farm output . This is in line with the promise of continued price supports .
 EEC's notorious Common Agricultural Policy was inaugurated in 1962 and formalized in 1970 after a decade of negotiations . This is the background to the EEC’s notorious Common Agriculture Policy .
 All of Europe’s food production became too expensive to compete on the world market . As fixed European prices rose, all of Europe's food production failed to compete with the world .
 Efficient Dutch dairy combines were no better off than small and unproductive German farms, since all were now subject to a common pricing structure . Efficient dairy combines are no better than small, unproductive farms in Germany .
 The EEC devoted its energies to forging a set of practices and regulations designed to address this problem .
 EEC external tariffs would then bring the cost of imported agricultural products up to these levels . The tariffs were typically keyed to the highest priced and least efficient producers in the Community .
 Each year, the EEC would henceforth buy up all its members’ surplus agricultural output, at figures 5-7 percent below the ‘target’ prices . The EEC has since bought up surplus crops at prices below 'target' prices .
 It would then clear the surplus by subsidizing its re-sale outside the Common Market at below-EU prices . The surplus would then be cleared by subsidization .
 This manifestly inefficient proceeding was the result of some very old-fashioned horse-trading . This is a case of some old fashioned horse trading, says David Cameron .
 French and Italian farmers were not especially high-priced, but no-one dared instruct them to restrict production, much less require that they take a market price for their goods .
 Each country gave its farmers what they wanted, passing the cost along in part to urban consumers but above all to taxpayers . Instead of passing on the cost, each country gave their farmers what it wanted, and taxpayers .
 The grain tariffs of late-nineteenthcentury Europe, directed against cheap imports from North America, were partly analogous to those of North America's .
 There were attempts at the depths of the Slump of the early 1930s to shore up farm prices by buying surpluses or paying farmers to produce less . There were various attempts to shore-up farm prices in the 1930s .
 Modern agriculture has never been free of politically motivated protections of one kind or another . Modern agriculture is not always free of political motivated protections, says author .
 The US, whose external tariffs fell by 90 percent between 1947 and 1967, took care to exclude agriculture from this liberalization of trade .
 The perverse consequences of the Common Agricultural Policy were perhaps distinctive all the same . But the perverse consequences were perhaps distinct from all the others .
 As world food prices fell in the late 1960s, EEC prices were stranded at absurdly high levels . The EEC was left stranded in the EEC as food prices were falling .
 By 1970 the CAP employed four out of five of the Common Market's administrators . Agriculture was costing 70 percent of the budget, a bizarre situation for some of the world’s most industrialized states .
 No single country could have sustained so absurd a set of policies, but by transferring the burden to the Community at large, each national government stood to gain, at least in the short run .
 Only the urban poor lost out from the CAP, and the former at least were typically compensated in other ways . The urban poor was typically compensated for by other ways, such as compensation .
 A year after the Common Market was inaugurated, the British suggested that the EEC be expanded into an industrial free-trade zone . The British were trying to head off the emergence of a super-national European bloc . The EEC memberstates, other European countries and the British Commonwealth
 The member states were mostly prosperous, peripheral, and enthusiastic proponents of free trade . Austria, Switzerland, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Portugal and the UK were later joined by Ireland and Iceland .
 Their agriculture, with the exception of Portugal, was small-scale but highly efficient and oriented to the world market . Their agriculture was small, efficient and highly efficient . Portugal was the only country to have a successful agriculture system .
 EFTA was a minimalist organization, a reaction to the defects of Brussels rather than a genuine alternative . But EFTA is a response to Brussels' defects, rather than an alternative to Brussels, it says .
 It was only ever ever a free-trade zone for manufactured goods . Farm products were left to find their own price level .
 Some of the smaller member-states, like Austria, Switzerland or Sweden, could thrive in a niche market for their high-value-added industrial goods and their attraction for tourists .
 Others, like Denmark, depended heavily on Britain as a market for their meat and dairy products . Others, such as Denmark, rely heavily on the UK for their products .
 Britain needed a vastly larger industrial export market than its tiny Scandinavian and Alpine allies could provide . But Britain itself needed a much larger industrial market than they could provide. Britain needed to rely heavily on its industrial exports .
 Macmillan's government formally applied to join the European Economic Community in July 1961 . London’s disdainful disengagement from Messina talks was six years after the Messina Talks .
 Ireland and Denmark, their economies umbilically linked to that of the UK, applied alongside it . Denmark and Ireland also applied alongside .
 De Gaulle publicly vetoed Britain’s entry in January 1963 . But the issue was moot—De Gaulle, as we have seen, publicly vetoed the issue in 1963 .
 The British had little recourse but to try again, which they did in May 1967, only to be vetoed once more, six months later, by the French President . The French President vetoed the British bid again, but it was vetoed six months after .
 Britain, Denmark and Ireland finally joined the European Economic Community in 1973 . But they were in no position to influence it as British leaders had once fondly hoped .
 The EEC was a Franco-German condominium, in which Bonn underwrote the Community’s finances and Paris dictated its policies . Bonn also dictated the Community's policies .
 The West German desire to be part of the European Community was bought at a high price . Adenauer and his successors would pay that price without complaining, cleaving closely to the French alliance .
 The French, meanwhile, ‘Europeanized’ their farm subsidies and transfers, without paying the price of a loss of sovereignty . The French 'Europeanized' their farm subsidy and transfers without paying for the price .
 It was with this goal in mind that De Gaulle browbeat the other member-states of the European Economic Community in the course of its first decade .
 Under the original Rome Treaty all major decisions (except for the admission of new members) were to be taken by majority vote in the inter-governmental Council of Ministers . Under the Rome Treaty, major decisions were taken by a majority vote .
 French President withdrew from inter-governmental talks in June 1965 until his fellow leaders agreed to adapt its agricultural funding to French demands . French President hobbled the workings of the Community in 1965 .
 In 1966 the Council of Ministers would no longer be able to pass measures by a majority vote . After holding out for six months the other countries gave in . In January 1966 they reluctantly conceded that in future the council of ministers could no longer pass measures .
 It was the first breach of the original Treaty and a remarkable demonstration of raw French power . It was a remarkable show of raw power .
 By the end of its first decade, the European Economic Community had acquired an aura of inevitability, which was why other European states began lining up to join it . Despite the shadow of De Gaulle, the EU had acquired a aura of . inevitability .
 A high-priced, self-serving customs union, directed from Brussels by a centralized administration and an unelected executive, was not an unalloyed gain for Europe or the rest of the world . The union is directed from a central administration and a centralized executive, it was not
 The network of protective agreements and indirect subsidies put into place at France’s bidding was altogether out of keeping with the spirit and institutions of the international trading system that had emerged in the decades following Bretton Woods .
 To the extent that the EEC’s system of governance was modeled on that of France, its Napoleonic heritage was not a good omen . The EEC was not an omen for the French state of its governance .
 In certain respects it was actually a lot smaller than the world that the French, or Dutch, had known when their nation-states opened on to people and places flung far across the seas .
 In the circumstances of the time this hardly mattered to most West Europeans, who in any case had little option . In any case, the West Europeans had little choice in the circumstances .
 It would lead in time to a distinctly parochial vision of Europe, with troubling implications for the future . But it would lead to a parochial vision of the future, leading to a troubling implications .
 Josef Stalin’s death in March 1953 had precipitated a power struggle among his nervous heirs . Josef's death in 1953 was precipitated by his nervous heir's death . Stalin died in 1953 .
 Lavrenti Beria, head of the secret police, appeared likely to emerge as the dictator’s sole heir . At first, he was seen as likely to be the head of state police chief .
 The new leadership had little choice but to follow the path that Beria had advocated . Khrushchev was increasingly primus inter pares, leading the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union had little hope of winning back control of the country .
 Stalin’s death, following many years of repression and impoverishment, had precipitated widespread protests and demand for change . The death of Stalin's death in 1953 precipitated protests and demands for change in Russia .
 Khrushchev reverted to Beria’s strategy . Once order’ had been restored, Khrushche reverted to the strategy . But once order' was restored, he continued to use Beria's strategy .
 In the course of the years 1953-56 some five million prisoners were released from the Gulag . Some five million people were released during the years of the Gulags .
 The post-Stalin era was marked not just by the 1953 Berlin revolt but by opposition even in such obscure and typically cowed imperial outposts as provincial Bulgaria . Bulgaria workers in tobacco factories rioted in May and June of that same year . In the people’s democracies the
 Nowhere was Soviet rule seriously threatened, but the authorities in Moscow took very seriously the scale of public discontent . Nowhere in Soviet Russia was seriously threatened by the growing discontent .
 Khrushchev’s strategy, as it emerged in the following years, was fourfold . He said: “Khrrushchev's strategy was to win back the Soviet Union”
 West Germany needed to stabilize relations with the West, following the rearmament of West Germany, its incorporation into NATO and the establishment of the Warsaw Pact . West Germany was joined by NATO and NATO in the 1980s .
 Khrushchev and Marshal Bulganin visited Yugoslavia in May 1955 (one month after the signing of the Austrian State Treaty) in order to rekindle Soviet-Yugoslav relations after seven years of very cold storage . At the same time Moscow began building bridges to the ‘
 In retrospect this speech has taken on a mythical aura, but its epochal significance should not be overstated . In retrospect, the speech has become an important part of the history of American history .
 He had set himself a tricky objective of acknowledging and detailing Stalin’s deeds, while confining responsibility for them to the man himself . He set himself to acknowledge and detailing the deeds, but confiding responsibility to Stalin .
 His task was to confirm the legitimacy of the Communist project by heaping obloquy and responsibility upon the corpse of Uncle Joe . His task, as he saw it, was to . confirm . the legitimacy . of the . Communist project .
 The speech, delivered on February 25th, was entirely conventional in length and language .
 Khrushchev took the calculated risk of detailing the scale of Stalin’s personal failings (and thus shocking and offending the . sensibilities of the obedient cadres in his audience) in order to preserve and even enhance the unsullied standing of Lenin, the Leninist system of government
 It drew a firm line under the Stalinist era, acknowledging its monstrosities and disasters while preserving the fiction that the present Communist leadership bore no responsibility . The Communist Party was not responsible for any of the worst atrocities .
 Khrushchev was thus secure in power and had won a relatively free hand to reform the Soviet economy and liberalize the apparatus of terror . The Soviet economy was reformed and terrorized by the Soviet government .
 Old Stalinists were now marginalized—Molotov was removed from the post of foreign minister on the eve of Tito’s return visit to Moscow in June .
 As for Khrushchev’s contemporaries, and younger apparatchiks like Leonid Brezhnev, these men were just as guilty of collaborating in Stalin's crimes . They were thus in no position either to deny his assertions or attack his credibility .
 Khrushchev’s attack on Stalin could not be kept a secret, and therein lay the seeds of its failure . The attack was meant to be kept secret, but the attack was not kept secret . The Soviet Union failed to find a solution to the crisis, and Khrush
 The speech would not be officially published in the Soviet Union until 1988 . Western intelligence agencies had wind of it within days . The speech was published in 1988, but it was not officially published .
 Khrushchev’s intentions were not made privy to his intentions . Western Communist parties, including the Communist Party, were privy of his intentions, he says . The West had not been privy .
 Rumours of Khrushchev’s denunciations of Stalin were everywhere . As a consequence, within a few weeks rumours of the denunciation were everywhere. As a result of this, rumours of his denunciation of Stalin are everywhere .
 For Communists, the denunciation of Stalin and his works was confusing and troubling; but it was also a relief . For Communists it was confusing, troubling and troubling, but also relief . The denunciation was a relief for Communists .
 Communists would no longer have to excuse or deny the more outrageous charges of their critics . Henceforth, as it seemed to many, Communists would not have to deny or deny these charges . The Communist Party would not be able to justify or deny their critics' outrageous charges .
 Khrushchev’s reported abjuration of Stalin was even more dramatic . In Eastern Europe, the impact of the reported abduration of St. Stalin was more dramatic than ever imagined .
 Khrushchev’s repudiation of Stalin seemed to suggest that Moscow would now look favorably upon different ‘roads to socialism’ and had rejected terror and repression as a tool of Communist control .
 Now, or so it was believed, it would be possible to speak openly for the first time . Now, it is possible to do so again - and again .
 Czech author Jaroslav Seifert explained to a Writers’ Congress in Prague in 1956 that it is necessary for writers to tell the truth .
 The impact of the shock wave of de-Stalinization in neighboring Poland was very different . The impact on the Polish economy was also very different than in the Soviet Union .
 In June the Polish army was called out to put down demonstrations in the western city of Poznan . Demonstrations were sparked by disputes over wages and work-rates .
 Gomulka had been in prison just a few years before and narrowly escaped trial . He was sentenced to life in prison in 2010 .
 Khrushchev, Mikoyan, Molotov and three other senior figures flew to Warsaw on October 19th, intending to block Gomulka’s appointment, forbid the ouster of Rokossowski and restore order .
 Khrushchev simultaneously instructed a brigade of Soviet tanks to move towards Warsaw . The Polish city was the site of the second World War II .
 Gomulka, in return, assured the Russians that he could restore control and had no intention of abandoning power, taking Poland out of the Warsaw Pact, or demanding that Soviet troops leave .
 Gomulka averted a catastrophe for his country by averting a catastrophe . Considering the disproportion in power between Khrushchev and the new Polish leader’s success in averting it was remarkable .
 The Stalinist leadership remained firmly in place, trials continued in camera for two more years . On May 1st 1955, a grotesque, over-sized statue of Stalin was erected on a hill overlooking Prague .
 Dealinization would not reach Czechoslovakia until a decade later, with dramatic consequences . DeStalinization was not reached until the end of the war .
 De-Stalinization did not mean that Khrushchev planned to relinquish any of the Soviet Unions territorial influence or political monopoly . Gomulka appreciated that Gomilka appreciated the de-stalinization of Stalin .
 Few at the time knew just how close Warsaw had come to a second Soviet occupation . The 'Polish October' had a fortuitously benign outcome . The ‘Polish . October’, then, had been a fortuitous .
 As early as July 1953 the Hungarian Stalinist leadership had been replaced (at Moscow’s initiative) with a reform-minded Communist, Imre Nagy . The Hungarian Communist Party was replaced by a reformist Communist in 1953 .
 Internment and labor camps were to be closed, peasants to be permitted to leave kolkhozes if they wished . peasants were to have their freedom to move out of kolkkozes .
 Nagy was certainly not a conventional option, from Moscow’s point of view . Nagy has been a long-term ally of Russian President Vladimir Putin . The Russian president is expected to make a speech in Moscow on Sunday .
 In September 1949 he had been critical of the ultra-Stalinist line of Matyas Rakosi . He was one of only two Hungarian Politburo members who had opposed the execution of Laszlb Rajk .
 He was nonetheless a logical choice, once the time came to make changes in a country whose political elite, like its economy, had been ravaged by Stalinist excesses . But he was nevertheless a . logical choice .
 Rakosi’s turn to attract the unfavorable attention of Moscow . Rakosi's visit to Rakosi was the first time Rakosi has been seen in Russia since 2003 .
 Khrushchev was keen to rebuild Soviet links to Yugoslavia . He wanted to rebuild links to the country .
 In the course of the anti-Tito hysteria of earlier days Rakosi had played a particularly prominent role .
 Rakosi, then, was becoming an embarrassment, an anachronistic impediment to Soviet projects . Rakosi became an embarrassment to the Soviet Union, but it was never an embarrassment .
 Stalinist Stalinist was closely associated with the bad old days . His past record and present intransigence was beginning to provoke public protests in Hungary in 1956 .
 Despite Rakosi’s best efforts—in March 1956 he contributed to the Hungarian newspaper Szabad Nep an enthusiastic denunciation of Beria and his Hungarian police lieutenant Gabor Peter, his time was past . In March 1956, Rakosi contributed to an article closely echoing Khrushchev
 On July 17th 1956 Anastas Mikoyan flew into Budapest and unceremoniously removed Rakosi from office . Rakosi was removed from office for the last time .
 In Rakosi’s place the Soviets promoted Ernd Gero, another Hungarian of impeccably Stalinist pedigree, to the Soviets . Rakosi was replaced by Gero .
 Laszlb Rajk and his fellow show-trial victims were reburied in Budapest on October 6th . Authorities in Budapest permitted the public reburial of the show trial victims in Belgrade .
 Laszlo Rajk’s remains rested for seven years in an unmarked grave . Executed as a result of trumped up charges, Laszlos Rajk's remains were buried in unmarked graves .
 Hungarian PM's death has become a warning signal for the Hungarian people and for the whole world, says Ferezi Szasz . Yet his death has been a warning sign for the Hungarians and the world, he says .
 For the hundreds of thouands who pass by this coffin desire to honor not only the dead man; it is their passionate hope and their firm resolve to bury an entire epoch . For the thousands, the coffin is a symbol of hope and hope .
 The lawlessness, arbitrariness and moral decay of those shameless years must be buried forever . The danger posed by Hungarian practitioners of rule by force and of the personality cult must be banned forever, he writes .
 There was a certain irony in the sympathy now aroused by the fate of Rajk, a man who had himself sent so many innocent victims to the gallows . Rajk was himself sent to prison for his crimes .
 The reburial of Rajk provided the spark that was to ignite the Hungarian revolution . But ironic or not, it was the catalyst for the revolution .
 On October 16th 1956, university students in the provincial city of Szeged organized themselves into a ‘League of Hungarian Students’, independent of the of3i4 LOST ILLUSIONS ficial Communist student organizations .
 The student demands encompassed industrial and agrarian reforms, greater democracy and the right to free speech, and an end to petty restrictions and regulations .
 They also included a desire to see Imre Nagy installed as prime minister, Rakosi and his colleagues tried for their crimes, and Soviet troops withdrawn from their country . But they also included, more ominously, the desire for the removal of Soviet troops from the country .
 The following day, October 23rd, students began to assemble in Budapest’s Parliament Square to demonstrate in support of their demands . Students gathered in the square to demonstrate against the government .
 Gero denounced the meeting and its organizers in a speech broadcast by Hungarian radio that evening . After it went ahead that same afternoon, Gero proceeded to denounce the meeting .
 Soviet troops entered Budapest to attack crowds, and the Hungarian Central Committee met through the night . An hour later enraged demonstrators tore down the statue of Stalin in the center of the city .
 Imre Nagy was installed as Prime Minister of Hungary at 8.13am on Monday morning . Nagy is the first Hungarian Prime Minister to be installed in the country's history .
 In talks with Suslov and Mikoyan, he and the other members of the new Hungarian leadership insisted on the need to negotiate .
 Kadar's distinction may have convinced some of the Soviet leaders, but it did not reflect Hungarian reality . Kadar’s distinction was not accepted by Soviet leaders .
 Student organizations, workers’ councils and revolutionary ‘national committees’ were spontaneously forming all over the country . Student organizations and revolutionary 'national committees' spontaneously forming . Students and workers' councils spontaneously forming spontaneously forming in the spring .
 Clashes between police and demonstrators provoked counter-attacks and lynchings . Police and demonstrators have been involved in violent clashes in recent weeks . Clashes are often followed by counter-attacks against police officers .
 He replaced Gero, whose security forces had fired on unarmed demonstrators in Parliament Square that same morning . Gero was replaced by Gero's security forces after he fired on protesters .
 The Soviet leadership, whatever their doubts, had decided to endorse the new approach of the Hungarian leader . The Hungarian leader's new approach was endorsed by the Soviets .
 Nagy was now basing his authority increasingly on the popular movement itself . Far from confronting the opposition, Nagy is now relying on the support of the movement . Nagy: "I'm not going to confront the opposition"
 He appealed to Moscow ‘to begin the withdrawal of Soviet troops’, from Budapest and the rest of Hungary as well .
 Nagy's gamble was supported by the other Communists in his Cabinet . Nagy’s belief that he could restore order in Hungary, and thus stave off the unspoken threat of Soviet intervention .
 Popular insurrectionary committees, political parties and newspapers had sprung up all over the country . Popular insurrectional committees and political parties were sprung up in the wake of the revolution .
 Anti-Russian sentiment was everywhere, with frequent references to the Imperial Russian suppression of the Hungarian revolt of 1848-49 . The film was set in Budapest, Hungary, in 1849 .
 Soviet leaders were losing confidence in him, he says . And, most important, they were losing it all, he adds .
 Nagy announced, on the afternoon of October 31st, that he was beginning negotiations to secure Hungary’s withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact . Nagy's fate was probably sealed when he announced his intention to pull out .
 Khrushchev and his colleagues had always taken the view that in Hungary—as earlier in Poland -- they would have to intervene if the ‘counterrevolution’ got out of control . In Hungary, the 'counterrevolution' would have had to be stopped by the Soviet Union .
 They appear to be initially reluctant to pursue this option . But they appear to have been reluctant to take the opportunity .
 As late as October 31st the Presidium of the Central Committee put out a statement declaring its willingness ‘to enter into the appropriate negotiations’ with the Hungarian leadership regarding withdrawal of Soviet troops from Hungarian territory .
 Reports of student demonstrations in Timisoara and of ‘hostile sentiments’ among Bulgarian intellectuals sympathetic to the Hungarian revolutionaries .
 This was beginning to sound like the start of the contamination effect that the Soviet leaders had long feared, and it prompted them to adopt a new approach . The Soviet leaders feared the contamination of the Soviet Union would lead to a change in tactics .
 The Soviet Presidium was advised by Khrushchev that this was now out of the question . The day after it had promised to negotiate troop withdrawals, the Soviet Pres. Pres. was advised to withdraw troops from the country .
 Soviet army divisions in Romania and Ukraine were duly ordered to move towards the Hungarian border . Soviet forces in Romania, Ukraine and Ukraine moved to the border with Hungary .
 Hungarian Prime Minister summoned the Soviet Ambassador and informed him that in protest against renewed Soviet troop movements, Hungary was unilaterally renouncing its membership in the Warsaw Pact . Hungary renounced membership in Warsaw Pact in response to Soviet troop movement .
 Nagy announced on the radio that Hungary was henceforth a neutral country and asked that the UN recognize its new status . Nagy asked the UN to recognize Hungary as a neutral nation .
 Workers’ Councils of Budapest, who had been on strike since the revolt began, responded by calling for a return to work . This declaration was widely approved in the country, but it was widely accepted .
 Nagy has finally won over most of those in Hungary who had been suspicious of his intentions . Nagy had won over many of Hungary's most suspicious of Nagy .
 Janos Kadar was secretly spirited away to Moscow, where Khrushchev convinced him of the need to form a new government in Budapest, with Soviet backing . The same evening that Nagy made his historic announcement, the same night that Kadar made it .
 The Red Army would come in and restore order in any case; the only question was which Hungarians would have the honour of collaborating with them . The only question would be which Hungarian would have to collaborate with them, he says .
 Khrushchev insisted that the Soviets now knew they had made a mistake when they installed Gero in July . Any reluctance Kadar may have felt about betraying Nagy and his fellow Hungarians was overcome .
 Nagy asked UN Secretary-General Dag Hammerskjold to mediate between Hungary and the USSR, and seek Western recognition of Hungary’s neutrality . Nagy continued to protest against the increased Soviet military activity .
 The following day, November 3rd, Nagy government opened (or thought it was opening) negotiations with the Soviet military authorities about the withdrawal of troops . Nagy's government thought it would be opening negotiations with military authorities .
 Hungarian negotiating team returned to Soviet army headquarters at Tokol, in Hungary, immediately arrested . But when they returned that evening they were immediately arrested by Soviet troops .
 Soviet tanks attacked Budapest, followed by a broadcast from Soviet-occupied eastern Hungary announcing the replacement of Imre Nagy by a new government . Shortly afterwards, at 4m. on the morning of November 4th, Soviet tanks attack Budapest .
 Nagy himself made a final radio address to the Hungarian people, calling for resistance against the invader . Nagy's final broadcast was a final broadcast of his life in Hungary . In response to the invasion, Nagy made a radio address .
 He and his colleagues took refuge in the Yugoslav embassy in Budapest, where they were granted asylum . Then he and his closest colleagues fled to the Yugoslav Embassy in Budapest . He was granted asylum in Hungary .
 Within a month the new authorities felt confident enough to take the initiative . But within a month they had to take it seriously . The new authorities are confident of taking the initiative.
 On January 5th, the death penalty was established for ‘provocation to strike’ and repression began in earnest . The death penalty has been established for 'provocation' to strike .
 A further 13,000 were sent to internment camps and many more were dismissed from their jobs or placed under close surveillance . A general amnesty was declared in March 1963 .
 An estimated 200,000 people—over 2 percent of the population—fled Hungary in the aftermath of the Soviet occupation, most of them young and many from Budapest and the urbanized west of Hungary .
 They settled in the United States, Austria, Britain, West Germany, Switzerland, Switzerland and many other places . They moved to the U.S. and Austria, Austria and Switzerland .
 After spending nearly three weeks in the Yugoslav Embassy in Budapest, they were tricked into leaving on November 22nd, immediately arrested by the Soviet authorities, and abducted to prison in Romania . They were abducted to Romania, where they were held in prison .
 It took Kadar many months to decide what to do with his erstwhile friends and comrades . Kadar: "It took many months for him to think about what he would do with them"
 Most of the reprisals against young workers and soldiers who had taken part in street fighting were kept as quiet to avoid arousing international protest . Even so there were international demands for clemency in the case of a number of prominent figures, such as the writers J6zse
 In April 1957 Kadar and his colleagues decided to return Nagy and his 'accomplices' to Hungary to face trial . The proceedings themselves were delayed until June 1958, and even then they were held in secrecy .
 On June 15th 1958, the accused were all found guilty of fomenting counter-revolution . The accused were variously sentenced to death or long prison terms .
 The writers Istvan Bibo and Arpad Goncz (future president of postCommunist Hungary) received life sentences . The writers were also jailed for life sentences.
 Two others, Jozsef Szilagyi and Geza Lozonczy, were killed in prison before their trial began . Two others were also killed before they were tried .
 Imre Nagy, Pal Maleter and Miklos Gimes were executed at dawn on June 16th 1958 . The execution took place in Budapest .
 The Hungarian uprising, a brief and hopeless revolt in a small outpost of the Soviet empire, had a shattering impact on the shape of world affairs . The uprising was a brief but hopeless revolt .
 Until then the United States acknowledged the impossibility of detaching Eastern European satellites from Soviet control . The U.S. continued to encourage the ‘spirit of resistance’ there .
 Many Hungarians sincerely hoped for Western assistance, encouraged by the uncompromising tone of American public rhetoric . Radio Free Europe's emigre broadcasters encouraged Hungarians to take up arms and promised imminent foreign support .
 The defeated rebels were understandably embittered and disillusioned . When no such backing was forthcoming, the defeated rebels became embitters . The rebels were left disillusioned and disappointed .
 Even if Western governments had wished to do more, the circumstances of the moment were highly unpropitious . Even though Western governments wished to . do more they would, it would be a disaster .
 Representatives of France and Britain were at Sevres, in secret talks with the Israelis, on the very day that the Hungarian revolt broke out . The very day of the revolt, representatives of the two countries were in Sevres .
 Hungary appeared on the NSC agenda at a meeting on November 8th . The general consensus was that it was all the fault of the French and British forces .
 In Communist eyes the real threat posed by Nagy was neither his liberalization of the economy nor the relaxation of censorship . In Communist hands, Nagy had liberalized the economy and relaxed censorship . The real threat was not to Nagy's liberalization, but his relaxation of censors
 Even the Hungarian declaration of neutrality, though it was regarded in Moscow as ‘provocative’, was not the occasion for Nagy’s downfall . Nagy was the Hungarian leader of the Soviet Union in 1945 .
 Such a departure from Soviet practice was the thin edge of a democratic wedge that would spell doom for Communist parties everywhere . Such a change in practice could spell doom to Communist parties worldwide, says Julian Zelizer .
 Khrushchev’s decision to depose Nagy was made by the Communist leaders in every other satellite state . That is why they went along so readily with the decision . The Communist leaders of all other satellite states went along .
 The Yugoslav leader had initially welcomed the changes in Hungary as further evidence of de-Stalinization . The former Yugoslav leader initially welcomed Hungary's changes in the country .
 Hungary’s proximity to Yugoslavia and presence of a large Hungarian minority in the Vojvodina region of his country were very much on his mind . But by the end of October the course of events in Budapest was changing his mind, and he changed his mind.
 Khrushchev and Malenkov took the trouble, on November 2nd, to fly to Tito’s Adriatic island retreat . Tito proved anxious but understanding .
 His main concern was that the puppet government to be installed in Hungary not include Rakosi and other unreconstructed Stalinists . The puppet government should not include Rakosi and other reconstructed Stalinists .
 Tito granted asylum to Nagy, 15 members of his government, and their families . Khrushchev was distinctly less pleased when, just two days later, granted asylum in Tito . Tito also granted asylum for Nagy and his government .
 The Yugoslav decision appears to have been made in the heat of the Hungarian crisis . The decision was made on the assumption that the Russians had no interest in making martyrs . The Yugoslav government made the decision in the aftermath of the crisis .
 Tito was placed in an uncomfortable position following the abduction of Nagy and the others . Tito had promised a promise of safe conduct from Kadar himself from the Soviet leader .
 In public the Yugoslav leader continued to express approval of Kadar s new government . But unofficially he made no effort to hide his displeasure at the course of events . Even Gomulka, in Poland, acceded readily enough .
 In Poland, Nagy’s departure from the Warsaw Pact was a source of anxiety . The Poles’ fear of German territorial revisionism gave them a special interest in the security arrangements guaranteed by Soviet arms .
 Gomulka tried hard to dissuade Khrushchev from putting Nagy on trial . In a meeting in May 1957, he tried hard, albeit without success, to persuade the Soviet leader to put Nagy behind bars .
 Relations between Moscow and Belgrade deteriorated once more . Yugoslav regime initiated overtures to the West and the non-aligned countries of Asia . Relations deteriorated once again .
 Like the Soviet leaders he was relieved at the restoration of Communist order . But the way in which it had been accomplished set a dangerous precedent and left a bad taste, he said .
 Khrushchev’s secret speech, once it leaked out in the West, had marked the end of a certain Communist faith . Once the speech was leaked out, it was seen as a sign of the end to the Communist faith in Russia .
 The desperate street fighting in Budapest dispelled any illusions about this new, ‘reformed’ Soviet model . But the streets fighting in Hungary dispelled all illusions about the 'reformed' model .
 Communist authority was revealed to rest on nothing more than the barrel of a tank . Once again, Communist authority had been unambiguously revealed to . rest on a barrel .
 Hannah Arendt thought it was the rise of the councils that signified a genuine upsurge of democracy against dictatorship, of freedom against tyranny .
 As it seemed, it seemed it might be possible to speak of Communism and freedom in the same breath . Finally, as it seemed to be possible, it might have been possible to talk of Communism with freedom .
 It was not the Hungarians’ revolt but rather the Soviet repression which made the greater impression on foreign observers . Whatever the motives of the insurgents in Budapest and elsewhere—and these were far more varied than was clear at the time—the Soviet repression made the greatest impression .
 Communism is now forever to be associated with oppression, not revolution . Communism is no longer associated with revolution, but with oppression .
 For forty years the Western Left had looked to Russia, forgiving and even admiring Bolshevik violence as the price of revolutionary self-confidence and the march of History . For 40 years, the Western left had looked at Russia as a model for the future .
 Soviet Communism lost its charm for most Western sympathizers and admirers . The Soviet Union was revealed in Budapest in all its armored mediocrity .
 After 1956, the secrets of History were no longer to be found in grim factories and dysfunctional kolkhozes of the People’s Democracies but in other, more exotic realms . The secrets of history are no longer found in the grim factories or dysfunctional kolhoz
 The Hungarians took to heart the message of the Soviet tanks . But it was not only the Hungarians who would take the message home .
 The events of 1956 tore the veil from the eyes of hitherto committed Communists like Leonid Pliushch . East German intellectuals were arrested and put on trial for criticizing Soviet actions . Students demonstrated in support of their Hungarian neighbors .
 A new generation of intellectual dissidents, men like Paul Goma in Romania or Wolfgang Harich in the GDR, was born in the rubble of Budapest . They were born in Budapest, Hungary .
 The difference in Eastern Europe, of course, was that the disillusioned subjects of a discredited regime could hardly turn their faces to distant lands, or rekindle their revolutionary faith in the glow of far-off peasant revolts .
 They were forced to live in and with the Communist regimes whose promises they no longer believed . They were perforce obliged to live with the regimes that they had promised them to do .
 East Europeans experienced the events of 1956 as a distillation of cumulative disappointments . East Europeans were disappointed by the events in 1956 . The events were the culmination of a series of disappointments in Europe .
 Their expectations of Communism, briefly renewed with the promise of de-Stalinization, were extinguished . But so were their hopes of Western succor . Their hopes were extinguished, but so were those of Western success .
 Khrushchev-era Soviet leadership came in time to allow a limited degree of local liberalization . In Hungary, this was in Hungary above all . The populations of Communist Eastern Europe were quiescent .
 Kadar established the model ‘post-political’ Communist state in 1956 . His punitive retaliation against the insurgents of 1956 and their sympathizers .
 The resulting ‘goulash Communism’ secured the stability of Hungary . The memory of Hungary ensured the stability . of the rest of the Bloc, at least for the next decade .
 For most people living under Communism, the ‘Socialist’ system had lost whatever radical, forward-looking, utopian promise once attached to it, and which had been part of its appeal—especially to the young—as recently as the early fifties . As recently as
 Few after 1956 anticipated an early end to the Soviet system of rule . That did not mean it could not last a very long time . The Soviet system, however, was never expected to last very long .
 There had been more optimism on that score before the events of that year . Indeed, there had been rather more optimism than the events that year.
 After November 1956 the Communist states of Eastern Europe, like the Soviet Union itself, began their descent into a decadeslong twilight of stagnation, corruption and cynicism .
 1956 represented the defeat and collapse of the revolutionary myth so successfully cultivated by Lenin and his heirs . The Soviets too would pay a price for this—in many ways, 1956 represents the defeat .
 'The tragedy of 1956 ... will forever remain an indelible spot on the Soviet regime,' Yeltsin said in a speech to the Hungarian Parliament on November 11th 1992 .
 One of the speakers over Nagy’s grave was the young Viktor Orban, future Prime Minister of his country . Orban was the future prime minister of Hungary .
 ‘Admass is my name for the whole system of an increasing productivity, plus inflation, plus a rising standard of living, plus high-pressure advertising and salesmanship, plus mass communications, plus cultural democracy and cultural democracy’
 Luchino Visconti: ‘We’re going where the sun shines brightly, We’ve going to where the sea is blue. We're going to the sea,’ he said .
 In 1979, French writer Jean Fourastie published a study of the social and economic transformation of France in the thirty years following World War Two . Jimmy Porter, in Look Back in Anger, looks back at the social transformation of the country .
 The remarkable acceleration of economic growth was accompanied by the onset of an era of unprecedented prosperity . The economy is now in an unprecedented period of economic prosperity .
 Less than a decade after staggering uncertainly out of the rubble, Europeans entered the age of affluence . Europeans entered, to their amazement and with some consternation, upon the age .
 The 1930s Malthusian emphasis on protection and retrenchment was abandoned in favor of liberalized trade . The 1930’s focus on protection was abandoned by the 1930s for liberalization of trade .
 Instead of cutting their expenditure and budgets, governments increased them . Governments increased them. Instead of spending, they increased them, they cut their budgets .
 Almost everywhere there was a sustained commitment to long-term public and private investment in infrastructure and machinery . Older factories and equipment were updated or replaced, with attendant gains in efficiency and productivity . An employed and youthful population demanded and could afford an expanding range of goods .
 The post-war economic 'boom' came first to Germany and Britain and only a little later to France and Italy . It was experienced differently according to national variations in taxation, public expenditure or investment emphasis .
 The initial outlays of most post-war governments went above all on infrastructure modernization . Infrastructure modernization is the building or upgrading of roads, railways, houses and factories .
 Consumer spending in some countries was deliberately held back, with the result—as we have seen—that many people experienced the first post-war years as a time of continuing, if modified, penury .
 Every European country saw steadily growing rates of per capita GDP and GNP . Nevertheless, every European nation saw steady growth rates of GNP and GDP .
 In the 1950s, the average annual rate at which per capita national output grew in West Germany was 6. percent . In Italy, Italy 5. percent; in France 3. percent. In West Germany, the growth rate of per capita output grew 6.1 percent .
 Even in the prosperous decades of the Wilhelminian Empire after 1870, the German economy had only managed an annual average of 1.0 percent .
 By the 1960s the rate of increase began to slow down, but the western European economies still grew at historically unusual levels .
 Between 1950 and 1973, German GDP per head of the population more than tripled in real terms . Overall, between 1950 to 1973, the country's GDP per person more than doubled in terms of population .
 Dutch economy grew by 3. percent each year from 1950-1970 — seven times the average annual growth rate for the preceding forty years . Dutch economy grows by three percent per year between 1950 and 1970 - seven times faster than the average growth rate of previous years .
 Overseas trade grew much faster than overall national output in most European countries . A major contributory factor in this story was the sustained increase in overseas trade .
 West Germany's share of the worlds export of manufactured goods rose from 7. percent in 1950 to 19. percent just ten years later . The German economy had occupied the place it had occupied in international exchange before the Crash of 1929 .
 In the forty-five years after 1950 worldwide exports by volume increased 16fold . In the same period of the 1950s, the world's largest exports were exported by volume .
 Even a country like France, whose share of world trade remained steady at around 10 percent throughout these years, benefited greatly from this huge increase in international commerce . France's share of trade in the world remained steady throughout the years .
 The terms of trade moved markedly in their favor after World War Two, as the cost of raw materials and food imported from the non-Western world fell steadily . The cost of imported goods fell steadily, while the price of manufactured goods kept rising .
 In three decades of privileged, unequal exchange with the ‘Third World’, the West had something of a license to print money . The West has something of an unequal, but it is not the same thing as the 'Third World'
 What distinguished the western European economic boom, however, was the degree of de facto European integration in which it resulted . The West's economic boom was the result of the de facto integration of Europe .
 44 percent of Belgian exports were already going to its future EEC partners . The Rome Treaty was signed on the eve of the signing of the Rome Treaty . The treaty is expected to be signed by the end of 2015 .
 The European Community did not lay the basis for an economically integrated Europe . It represented an institutional expression of a process already under way under way, says David Cameron .
 Another crucial element in the post-war economic revolution was the increased productivity of the European worker .
 GDP per hour worked grew even faster than GDP per head of the population . GDP per hours worked grew as a result of the increase in GDP per person's work hours .
 This points to a marked increase in efficiency and, almost everywhere, much improved labour relations . Considering how many more people were in work, this points to an increased efficiency . This points out how many people are in work and efficiency .
 In 1956,74 percent of the UK’s exports went outside of Europe, mostly to its colonies and to the Commonwealth . The UK exports went to colonies and the Commonwealth, mostly in the colonies .
 Only one-third of the UK's export trade was directed at the twelve countries that would form the European Union in 1992 . Even in 1973, when the UK finally entered the EEC, only a third of its exports were directed towards the 12 countries .
 Even without interest in modernization and improved techniques, economic performance would have seen some improvement . Even without the contemporary interest, modernization would probably have seen improvement .
 Behind the steady increase in productivity, however, lay a deeper, permanent shift in the nature of work . Behind the rise in productivity is a change in the way of work, experts say .
 The Mediterranean countries, Scandinavia, Ireland and Eastern Europe were still primarily rural and, by any measure, backward . The Mediterranean and Scandinavia were still predominantly rural and backward .
 In 1950, three out of four working adults in Yugoslavia and Romania were peasants . Three out of 4 working adults were peasants in 1950, according to census .
 One working person in two was employed in agriculture in Spain, Portugal, Greece, Hungary and Poland . In Italy, two people in every five worked in agriculture; in Italy, there are two working people per person .
 One out of every three employed Austrians worked on farms . In France, nearly three out of ten employed persons was a farmer of one kind or another .
 Even in West Germany, 23 percent of the working population was in agriculture . Even in the 1970s, the majority of Germany's working population worked in agriculture.
 The industrial revolution of the nineteenth century ushered in a post-agrarian society . Only in the UK, where the figure was just 5 percent, had the industrial revolution ushered in .
 In the course of the next thirty years vast numbers of Europeans abandoned the land and took up work in towns and cities . The greatest changes took place during the 1960s, with the greatest changes taking place during that period .
 By 1977, just 16 percent of employed Italians worked on the land . In the Emilia-Romagna region of the northeast, the share of the active population engaged in agriculture dropped from 52 percent in 1951 to 20 percent in 1971 .
 In Austria the national figure had fallen to 12 percent, in France to 9. percent . In West Germany, the figure has fallen to 6. percent and in Austria the figure is 12 percent .
 In Belgium and the UK, farmers were becoming statistically insignificant. In the UK (at 2.5 percent) farmers were being statistically insignificant . Farmers are now statistically insignificant in Belgium and UK .
 Farming and dairy production became more efficient and less labor-intensive . Butter, cheese and pork products were now profitable exports and mainstays of the domestic economy .
 The chief beneficiary was the tertiary sector, where many of the former peasants—or their children—ended up . The former peasants, or their children, ended up in poorer areas .
 Italy, Ireland, parts of Scandinavia and France moved directly from an agricultural to a service-based economy in a single generation . Britain or Belgium had been caught for nearly a century, bypassing the industrial stage in which Britain and Belgium were caught .
 By the end of the 1970s, a clear majority of the employed population of Britain, Germany, 4 percent employed in agriculture . By way of comparison it might be noted that the figure for the USA in 1950 was 12 percent employed .
 The Swedes had access to a pool of cheap and readily available immigrant workers, as well as a hydroelectric power industry that cushioned the country from oil-price shocks . But the Swedes still have access to cheap immigrant workers and cheap hydro power .
 In Communist Eastern Europe, the majority of former peasants were directed into labour-intensive and technologically retarded mining and industrial manufacture . In Czechoslovakia, employment in the tertiary, service sector actually declined during the course of the 1950s .
 The decline of agriculture alone would have accounted for much of Europe’s growth, just as the shift from country to town, and farming to industry, had accompanied the rise of agriculture to industry a century before .
 The Netherlands outperformed its industrialized neighbor in these decades, benefiting from the ‘one-time’ transfer of a surplus rural workforce into hitherto undeveloped industrial and service sectors . For the same reason, the Dutch outperformed Belgium in the decades .
 The role of government and planning in the European economic miracle is harder to gauge . Government and planning is key to success in Europe's economic success, says David Cameron .
 The ‘new’ economy of northern Italy, for example, drew much of its energy from thousands of small firms . Small firms pay little or no tax and have low overheads and investment costs .
 The part played by the Italian central authorities in sustaining the economic efforts of these firms is unclear . Beyond turning a blind eye to fiscal, zoning, construction and other infractions, the part played in sustaining these efforts is unclear.
 Like large-scale state projects elsewhere, the Cassa was inefficient, and more than a little corrupt . The Cassa project was inefficient and corrupt, but it was a state-run state project .
 Most of its benefits went to the favored coastal regions . Much of the new industry that it brought in was capital-intensive and thus created few jobs . Most of the benefits go to coastal regions, but few jobs created .
 Many of the smaller ‘independent’ farms formed in the wake of agrarian reform remained dependent on the state . Italy’s Mezzogiorno is a sort of semi-permanent welfare region .
 By the mid-1970s per capita consumption in the South had doubled, local incomes had risen by an average of 4 percent per annum . Infant mortality had halved and electrification was well on the way to completion .
 What is striking is not the failure of the Cassa to work an economic miracle south of Rome, but the fact that the region was able to keep up with the industrial North was taking off, he says . The Cassa's success is striking because of the speed at which the industrial
 In France, the state confined itself to what became known as ‘indicative planning’—using the levers of power to direct resources into selected regions, industries and even products . The state consciously compensated for the crippling Malthusian under-investment of the pre-
 Currency laws and limited mobility of international capital held back foreign competition . Government officials were able to exercise fairly effective control over domestic investment .
 Bankers and private lenders in France and elsewhere invested at home . Restricted in their freedom to seek out more profitable short-term returns abroad .
 Bonn paid far closer attention to arrangements aimed at preventing or mitigating social conflict, notably between employers and workers . In West Germany, the abiding inter-war memory was of conflict and instability . Bonn was less active than French or Italian counterparts in designing or directing economic behavior .
 They encouraged and underwrote negotiations and ‘social contracts’ designed to reduce the risk of strikes or wage inflation . In particular, they underwrote and negotiated 'social contracts'
 The contrast with past practice is revealing. Private industries (and banks with whom they worked or who owned them) were more disposed to 6. As a consequence, private industries (as well as the banks with which they worked and who owned) they were more inclined to 6 . The contrast
 In earlier stages of French industrialization even the great Parisian investment banks lacked the resources to support the modernization of the country’s industrial infrastructure, and had received no help from the government .
 Shop-floor workers in West Germany were compensated for this comparative docility by the assurance of employment, low inflation and, above all, comprehensive public welfare services and benefits .
 Most of the nationalizations undertaken by the Labour government of 1945-51 were left in place by the Conservative governments that succeeded it .
 Both parties foreswore long-term economic planning or aggressive intervention in labour-management relations . But both parties foreweore long term economic planning .
 Interest rates and marginal tax bands were manipulated to encourage saving or spending . Demand management took the form of demand management in the 1980s .
 The main strategic objective of British governments of all colors in these years was to prevent a return to the traumatic levels of unemployment of the 1930s . The main objective of these governments was to keep unemployment down .
 Government policies were the product of government policies and collective intention, they say . They were the result of government policy and intention, the government says .
 The facilitating condition for their unprecedented success lay beyond the direct reach of government action . But the facilitating condition of their success is beyond government action, experts say .
 The trigger for the European economic miracle was the rapid and sustained increase in Europe’s population . The social and cultural upheaval that followed in its wake of its wake was the rise in population . Europe's population is now the world's largest and fastest growing economy .
 Europe had seen demographic growth spurts in the past, most recently in the mid-nineteenth century . Europe has had a long history of demographic growth spurs .
 War and emigration had kept population growth in Europe well below what might have been expected from the increased birth rate of earlier decades .
 By the eve of World War Two, the birth rate in parts of Western Europe had fallen to historic lows . The knock-on effects of the loss of a generation of young men in World War One, together with the economic Depression and the civil wars and political uncertainty of the 1930s
 In the UK there were just 15.3 live births per thousand people; in Belgium 15.4; in Austria 12.8.8 . In Belgium, there were 15.2 live births a day; in the UK, there are just 15 live births in a year .
 In France, the birth rate in 1939 stood at 14. per thousand . Deaths exceeded births during World War One and in 1919 and again in 1929 . Deaths also exceeded births for every year from 1935 to 1944 . In 1939, France had a birth rate of 14.2 per thousand per
 As in civil war-era Spain, the national population was steadily falling . The national population in Spain is steadily falling. Spain's national population is declining .
 In the rest of Mediterranean Europe and east of Vienna the birth rate was higher, some times double the rate of the West . The birth rate is also higher in rest of the Mediterranean Europe, east of Austria .
 Infant mortality and death rates in all age groups were high, but population growth was unremarkable . Even there were high levels of infant mortality and higher death rates for all ages of children .
 It is against this background, and that of the additional demographic calamity of the Second World War itself, that the post-war baby boom has to be understood .
 Between 1950 and 1970 the population of the UK rose by 13 percent; that of Italy by 17 percent . The population of Italy rose 17 percent in the same period .
 In West Germany the population grew in these years by 28 percent . In Sweden by 29 percent; in the Netherlands by 35 percent . West Germany grew in West Germany by 28 per cent . Sweden grew by 29 per cent in the same period .
 The striking feature of Europe in the nineteen fifties and sixties—it can immediately be gleaned from any contemporary street scene—was thus the number of children and youths .
 The peak years for post-war births in most countries were 1947-1949 . In 1949 869,000 babies were born in France, compared to just 612,000 in 1939 .
 By i960, in the Netherlands, Ireland and Finland, 30 percent of the population was under 15 years old . i960 is based on data from iReport.com.com .
 The infant mortality rate in Western Europe has fallen sharply in recent decades . The rate of infant mortality fell sharply in the 1990s thanks to improved nutrition, housing and medical care .
 In Belgium it dropped from 53. in 1950 to 21. in 1970, with most of the change coming in the first decade . In Belgium, the change came in the 1950s and 1970s .
 Old people lived longer in Western Europe, where the death rate fell steadily over the same period . Western Europe's death rate has also fallen steadily in recent decades .
 Rates fell from 81 per thousand in 1950 to 25 in 1970, though with wide variations among the different republics . In the Soviet Union itself, rates fell to 25 per thousand . Rates fell in the USSR between 1950 and 1970, but rates varied widely .
 There are many explanations for the recovery of European fertility after World War Two . But most of them reduce to a combination of optimism and free milk .
 By 1950, Yugoslavia, Poland, Romania and Albania were the only European countries where more than one child in ten died before the age of one . During the long demographic trough of 1913-1945, governments had sought in 7 .
 Peace, security and a measure of state encouragement sufficed to achieve what no amount of pro-natal propaganda before 1940 had been able to bring about . Now—even before post-war growth had translated into secure employment and a consumer economy—the coincidence of peace, security .
 Demobilized soldiers, returning prisoners of war and political deportees took the first opportunity to marry and start a family . Rationing and allocation schemes favored married couples with children, as well as cash allowances .
 For the first time since records kept, western Europe was experiencing full employment . Western Europe is experiencing full full employment, the BBC says .
 Trade unions (with the distinctive exception of Britain) were either weak or else reluctant to exercise their power . In spite of the leverage this afforded to organized labor, organized labor was not strong enough to exercise its power .
 Union representatives through the fifties and early sixties often preferred to collaborate with employers rather than exploit labour shortages to their immediate advantage . In return for their newfound respectability as national negotiating partners, union representatives often opted to cooperate with employers .
 The first ever productivity agreement in France was struck between the car workers’ representatives and the nationalized car manufacturer Renault . It was symptomatic of the shift in perspective that the major gain came not in wages but in the innovatory concession of a third week of paid holiday .
 The old blue-collar unions were no longer so significant in Western Europe . Their constituency, skilled male manual workers, was in decline in Europe .
 Employment in coal, steel, textiles and other nineteenth-century industries was shrinking, though this did not become obvious until the sixties . The decline in employment in these industries began in the early 1900s .
 More and more jobs are opening up in the tertiary sector, many of those taking them were women . More than a third of the graduates are women .
 Some occupations, such as textile manufacture, had been heavily feminized for many decades . Some occupations have been feminized in recent decades .
 After the war employment opportunities in both of these diminished sharply . Employment opportunities in these areas diminished sharply.
 The female labor force no longer consisted of single women working as servants or mill girls . Women no longer worked as mill girls or maids, women were forced to work in factories .
 The following year, in March 1956, this right was extended to all French workers . Instead it was increasingly composed of older women working in shops and offices .
 Renault workers obtained a fourth week of paid vacation in 1962, but it took seven years before the rest of the country followed suit . Renault workers got a four week paid vacation for the first time in 1962 .
 By 1961, one-third of the employed labour force in the UK was female . Two out of every three employed women worked in clerical or secretarial jobs .
 Even in Italy, 27 percent of the labour force was female by the end of the 1960s . Older women had traditionally not joined the ranks of the employed .
 The insatiable demand for labour in Europe’s prosperous northwest quadrant accounts for the remarkable mass migration in the 1950s and early 1960s .
 In the first place, men (and to a lesser extent women and children) abandoned the countryside for the city and moved to more developed regions of their own country . Women and children are among those who moved to the cities .
 In Portugal a substantial percentage of the residents of the impoverished Alentejo region departed for Lisbon . In Portugal, many of those who left the impoverished region to move to the capital .
 In Italy, between 1955 and 1971, an estimated nine million people moved from one region of their country to another . An estimated 9 million people in Italy moved from their region to another in the same period .
 This pattern of population movement was not confined to the Mediterranean, it has been reported in the past .
 Millions of young people abandoned the German Democratic Republic for West Germany between 1950 and 1961 . In heading west they were also seeking well-paid jobs and a better life .
 In this respect they differed little from their Spanish or Italian contemporaries . A quarter of a million Swedes from the rural centre and north of their country moved to the cities .
 Much of this movement was driven by income disparities; but the desire to escape hardship, isolation, and the hold of traditional rural hierarchies also played a part, especially for young people .
 One incidental benefit was that the wages of those who remained behind, and the amount of land available to them, increased as a consequence . The wages of the men who stayed behind rose as a result .
 A second route taken by migrants involved moving from one European country to another country . The other route involved moving between one country and another .
 The same was true of the millions of Greeks, Poles, Jews and others who emigrated in the same years . Scandinavians, Germans and Irish of an earlier generation .
 After World War One, there had been a steady trickle of miners and farm workers from Italy and Poland into France, for example . The 1930s saw political refugees fleeing west from Nazism and Fascism .
 In Europe, intra-European migration, especially in search of work, remained the exception . But intra-Europe migration remained an exception, the EU says .
 Cross-border labor movement had begun shortly after the end of the war . Tens of thousands of young Italian workers traveled in organized convoys to work in the mines of Wallonia in return for a Belgian undertaking to supply coal to Italy .
 Bonn government forced to seek out cheap labour from abroad as economy grew . Bonn's government was forced to look for cheap labour in order to boost economy .
 By 1956 Chancellor Adenauer was in Rome offering free transport to any Italian laborer who would make the journey to Germany and seeking official Italian cooperation to funnel unemployed southerners .
 Most of the men came from poor, rural or mountainous regions . Like Finnish migrant workers in Sweden, or Irish laborers in Britain, these men came under 25 .
 Their earnings in Germany and other northern countries played an important part in sustaining the economies of the regions they had left behind . Their departure alleviated local competition for jobs and housing, even as their departure eased competition .
 In 1973, remittances of workers abroad represented 90 percent of Turkish export earnings . Remittances also represented 50 percent of export earnings in Greece, Portugal and Yugoslavia . Turkey is now the world's largest economy in the Middle East .
 Although migrants were officially ‘temporary’ they had in practice left their homes for good . Although the migrants were . officially 'temporary' they had left their . homes for . good .
 Between 1961 and 1974, one and a half million Portugese workers found jobs abroad . The greatest population movement in Portugal’s history left behind in Portugal itself a workforce of just 3. million .
 These were dramatic figures for a country whose total population in 1950 had been only eight and one third million . The population in the 1950s had been just 8 and 1.3 million .
 The emigration of young women in search of domestic employment in Paris and elsewhere had a marked effect on the countryside . The shortfall of young adults was only partly made good by the arrival of immigrants from Portugal’s colonies in the Cape Verde Islands and Africa .
 In one Portuguese municipality, Sabugal in the rural north, emigration reduced the local population from 43,513 in 1950 to just 19,174 thirty years later . The local population in Sabugal, in Portugal's rural north of Portugal, dropped to just 18,174 in 30 years
 By 1964, foreign workers were one quarter of the work force of Switzerland, 9 . With the result that as tourism began to develop towards the end of the Sixties there was actually a shortage of workers in Greece itself .
 In West Germany, in the peak year of 1973, there were 2. million foreign workers, mostly in the building trades and in metalworking and car manufacture . West Germany's foreign workers were mostly in building trades .
 In France the 2 million foreign workers recorded that year were 11 percent of the total working population . In France, the 2.million foreign workers were 11% of the population .
 Many of them were women in domestic work, employed as cooks, cleaners, concierges and babysitters . Many of the women were of Portuguese origin .
 Most of these men and women had no permanent rights of residence . They were not included in the agreements signed by unions and employers providing for the security, welfare and retirement of local employees . Most of them were not part of the agreements .
 They represented very little commitment or long-term cost to the employer and country to which they had come . They thus represented little commitment to the employers and country they'd come from . They represented little cost to their employer or country .
 Guest-workers' in Germany were held back at entrylevel positions and wages . Well into the 1980s, guest-workers’ in Germany held back .
 By 1973 in West Germany alone there were nearly half a million Italians, 535,000 Yugoslavs and 605,000 Turks . By 1973, West Germany had nearly 500,000 Italian, Yugoslavs, Turks, Italians and Yugoslavs .
 The Germans did not especially welcome the sudden eruption of so many foreigners on their soil . The Germans, like the Swiss, French, Belgians or British, did not welcome the influx .
 The experience of living among so many people from unknown foreign lands was unfamiliar to most Europeans . It was the first time Europeans had lived in a European country .
 If it was tolerated reasonably well, with only occasional outbreaks of prejudice and violence against communities of foreign workers . This was in some measure because the latter lived apart from the local population, in the drearier outer suburbs of the larger cities . It was widely understood that they would one
 Many of the people who had returned to the Netherlands, Belgium and France from former imperial holdings in Asia, Africa, South America and the Pacific were white professionals, or retired farmers .
 Algerian nationals living in France by 1969 numbered just 600,000, less than the local population of Italians or Spaniards . Even the Algerian national population of France in 1969 were less than locals .
 Government of the 1950s actively encouraged immigration from the Caribbean to staff trains, buses and municipal services .
 By 1959 West Indian immigration to the UK was running at around 16,000 people per year . By 1959 the UK had seen a steady increase in immigration to West Indian immigrants .
 In 1959 there were just 3,000 immigrant arrivals from India and Pakistan . Immigration from other parts of the Commonwealth was even smaller than in 1959 .
 As late as 1976 there were still only 1.85 million ‘non-whites’ in the UK population, 3 percent of the total . The numbers would increase in later years, but only 3% of the population was non-white .
 Commonwealth citizens had presumptive right of permanent residence and citizenship in the imperial metropole . What made the difference, of course, was that they were brown or black .
 In 1958, race riots in west London alerted the government to the perceived risk of permitting ‘too many’ immigrants to enter a historically white society . Already in 1958, the government was concerned about the risk of 'too many' immigrants .
 The UK brought in the first of many controls on non-European immigration . The economic case for unskilled immigrants remained strong and the overall totals were insignificant .
 A successor Act of 1968 tightened these still further, restricting UK citizenship to persons with at least one British parent; and in 1971 a further Act, overtly directed at non-whites, severely restricted the admission of the dependents of immigrants already in Britain . A further Act of 1971 was
 The net effect of these laws was to end non-European immigration into Britain less than twenty years after it had begun . The net . effect of the new laws is to end . less than 20 years after the immigration began began .
 Restrictions on the right of blacks and Asians to enter the UK were accompanied, in due course, by a considerable improvement in their life chances once there . On the other hand, these drastic restrictions on the . right of . blacks and . Asians to entry to the UK was accompanied,
 A Race Relations Act of 1965 banned discrimination in public places, introduced remedies for job discrimination, and set out penalties for incitement to race hatred . The Act was passed in 1965 .
 A successor Act eleven years later outlawed all discrimination based on race . It established a Commission for Racial Equality Commission . The Commission was established in the 1920s .
 In certain respects, the new, non-European populations of the UK were more fortunate than the second-class Europeans who found work north of the Alps .
 English landladies could no longer display signs announcing ‘No Blacks, Irish or Dogs’ But notices forbidding entry to ‘dogs and Italians’ were not unknown in Swiss parks for some years to come .
 Dutch government encouraged workers from Spain, Yugoslavia, Italy, Italy to come and take up jobs in textiles, mines and shipbuilding . The Dutch government urged workers to come to take up textiles and mines .
 When the old industries shut down, it was these workers who lost their jobs, often without any insurance or social safety net to cushion the impact on them and their families .
 In West Germany a Foreigners’ Law of 1965 incorporated within its text ‘Police Regulations for Foreigners'’ first promulgated by the Nazis in 1938 . The law was enacted in West Germany in 1965 .
 Foreign workers described and treated as temporary presence, at the mercy of the authorities . Foreign workers were described as temporary workers at the time .
 By 1974, when the European economy had slowed to a crawl and many of the immigrant workers were no longer required, they had become permanent residents . By that time, many of them were permanent residents of the European continent .
 Forty million people were in transit, moving within countries, between countries and into Europe from overseas . Taken all in all, they amounted to some forty million people in transit . They were moving between countries, within countries and overseas .
 The European boom would not have been possible without cheap and abundant labour in this vulnerable and mostly unorganized form . Without cheap labour in Europe, the EU boom would have not been possible, says Simon Tisdall .
 The post-war European states—and private employers—benefited greatly from a steady flow of docile, low-paid workers for whom they frequently avoided paying the full social cost . Private employers often avoid paying the social cost of living with a low-wage workforce .
 When the boom ended and it came time to lay off excess labour, the immigrant and migrant workforce was the first to suffer . Immigrants and migrant workers were the first workers to suffer from excess labour .
 Like everyone else, the new workers not only made things; they bought them . The new workers also made things for themselves, and bought them. They also bought things from the company .
 Industrialization in the course of the nineteenth century had transformed the world of townand city-dwellers . In many parts of rural Europe the traditional economy operated largely unchanged up to and beyond the Second World War .
 By far the largest expense in a traditional household budget was food and clothing, which together with housing took up much of a family’s earnings .
 Most people did not shop or ‘consume’ in the modern sense; they subsisted . Most people didn't shop or 'consume' in modern sense, but subsisted. They subsisted, and did not 'consuminate'
 For the overwhelming majority of the European population up to the middle of the twentieth century, ‘disposable income’ was a contradiction in terms . ‘Disposable incomes’ were a contradiction for the majority of European population .
 In the two decades after 1953, real wages almost tripled in West Germany and the Benelux countries . Real wages also tripled in the two years after 1953 . In West Germany, wages have almost doubled in the past decade .
 Even in Britain the purchasing power of the average citizen nearly doubled in these years . Even in the UK, the average person's purchasing power nearly doubled .
 By 1965, food and clothing absorbed just 31 percent of consumer spending in Britain . By 1980 the average for northern and western Europe as a whole was less than one quarter of spending .
 In more traditional commodities the major impact of this revolution in spending came in the way goods were packaged and the scale on which they were sold .
 Supermarkets began to appear in the 1960s, notably in the decade when the impact of the increase in purchasing power was felt most dramatically . Supermarkets were introduced in the 1930s, and supermarkets began to open in the 1950s .
 The rationale for supermarkets was that shoppers would spend more in any one shopping trip if most of what they wanted — or could be tempted into wanting — was conveniently available in one place . The rationale was that .
 This assumed that women had somewhere to put their food when they got it home . But that implied, increasingly, the presence of a fridge .
 94 percent of Italian households now own a fridge, the highest ratio in Europe . The highest ratio of a fridge in Europe is now 94 percent .
 Like the domestic fridge, the washing machine made its appearance in these years . The washing machine also made its way into the kitchen .
 It too was aimed at easing the work of the newly affluent housewife and encouraging her to extend her range of purchases . It also aimed to ease the work .
 In the mid-1950s running water had still not arrived in more than half of all households in Belgium, Italy, Austria, Spain and many parts of France and Scandinavia . The electricity grid in many places could not support two large appliances in a single residence .
 Even in 1972, by which time most west Europeans lived in homes equipped with indoor toilets and full plumbing, only two households in three owned a washing machine .
 Washing machines remained for many years beyond the reach of the poor, especially large families that had greatest need of washing machines .
 The virtuous circle of millions of newly employed commodity-consumers had its most significant impact not in the home but outside of the home . But the virtuous circle had its greatest impact on the home and outside .
 The greatest single measure of European prosperity was the revolution wrought by the family car . The family car revolution was the birth of the modern European revolution .
 Until the 1950s, the motor car was a luxury for most Europeans . In many parts of Europe, it was scarcely to be seen .
 Market traders, costermongers and others still depended in their work upon a horse and cart . And even so, many Londoners didn't own a car and still depended on their horses and carts .
 In Britain, where an initial take-off in the 1930s had been stalled by war and post-war shortages, it doubled in each decade from 1950 to 1980 .
 Italians owned just 270,000 private cars at the outbreak of the war and 342,000 in 1950 (less than the number of cars in Greater London alone) Italians had two million vehicles by i960, five and a half million by 1965, over ten million in 1970 and an estimated
 In France, car ownership rose from less than two million to nearly six million vehicles in the course of the 1950s, then doubled again in the next ten years . Car ownership in France rose from just two million cars to nearly 6 million in the 1960s .
 Parking meters were introduced at the end of the 1950s in Britain, then spreading through France and elsewhere in the course of the Sixties .
 Europeans could buy cars for their personal use in such unprecedented numbers it was not merely because they had more money to spend . It was not just because they were buying cars for personal use, it was because they wanted to spend more money .
 There were many more cars available to meet the pent-up demand of decades of Depression and war . Many more cars were available in the 1930s and 1940s to meet demand .
 The war delayed the appearance of these models, but by the early 1950s they were rolling off newly installed production lines in ever-increasing number . By the 1950s, the models had been rolling off new production lines .
 In each Western European country there was a dominant local make and model of car . But in essence they were all remarkably alike .
 They had thin, tinny frames; small, under-powered engines (designed to consume as little fuel) and were equipped with the minimum of accessories and fixtures . They were designed to consume little fuel as possible .
 The Volkswagens, Renaults and Fiats were rear-engined and had rear-wheel drive . The compartment was left in front of the driver to accommodate a small amount of luggage, as well as the battery, spare wheel, crank handle and tools .
 The front-engined Morris, like its contemporary and competitor the Ford Popular, aspired to a slightly higher level of comfort . Morris was made at Ford’s UK plant in Dagenham, near London, for the domestic market .
 English motorists, regarding meter charges as a form of unauthorized taxation, withheld payment . English motorists also withheld payment for meter charges .
 The French registered their disapproval by decapitating Parisian meters . Parisians decapitated their meters in protest at being decapitated .
 Bikes, motorcycles and motorcycle-sidecar combinations flourished for a while . The latter as a makeshift family vehicle for those who could not afford a car or could not get hold of one .
 Motor scooters appeared on the scene in France and especially Italy, where the first national motor-scooter rally was held in Rome on November 13th 1949 . Vespa models in particular are celebrated in every contemporary film from or about Italy .
 By the beginning of the sixties the car was firmly in command in Western Europe, displacing traffic from rails to roads and from public to private means of transport .
 Railway networks peaked in length and user-volume in the years following World War One . Now, unprofitable services were cut back and thousands of miles of track pulled up .
 Elsewhere in Western Europe, train traffic held up rather better . In small, crowded countries with efficient networks, like Belgium, the Netherlands and Denmark, it actually grew . But far slower than road traffic .
 The number of people using buses also began to decline for the first time ever . More and more people went to work by car, as more and more went by car .
 Overall passenger traffic on London Transport’s buses, trams, trolleys and underground network fell from 3,955 million people a year to 2,485 between 1948 and 1962 .
 Recreational travel in Europe was not new, though it had hitherto been confined first to the aristocracy and latterly to the better-heeled and more culturally ambitious middle classes . The story is told in a new book, The World Travel Guide to Europe .
 ‘Tourism’ had suffered through war and economic recession . But like every other economic sector, ‘tourism had suffered from war and recession .
 The first European hypermarkets, defined as stores with at least 25,000 square feet of space on a single level, began to appear at the end of the 1960s . The Swiss tourist industry in 1913 boasted 21. million nights of lodging; it would not recover such numbers until the
 Coach companies blossomed, extending the tradition of factory and farm workers’ annual char-a-banc seaside trips into commercial services within and between countries . Coach companies have blossomed .
 Fledgling airline entrepreneurs like Freddie Laker developed charter services to newly opened summer vacation resorts in Italy, France and Spain .
 Camping was already popular before the war among less affluent vacationers and outdoor enthusiasts . Camping became a major industry in the later Fifties, spawning coastal and pastoral camp-sites, camping equipment emporia, printed guides and specialized clothing outlets . The camps were popular in the
 Older holiday resorts—along the coasts and in the countryside of northern and western Europe—thrived . Older holiday destinations, such as Spain and Italy, thrived .
 Freshly discovered locations emerged, gaining prominence in glossy brochures and popular mythology .
 Not everyone could afford St Tropez or Switzerland—though the French and Italian coasts and mountains were still inexpensive for travelers from Britain or Germany .
 Domestic seaside holidays, still sought-after by British, Dutch and Germans, are now truly cheap . But domestic seaside holiday prices are still very low in the UK .
 Newly opened resorts of Spain’s Mediterranean coast open for tourists . Bed-and-breakfast establishments, pensions and modest seaside hotels block-booked by new breed of package-tour operators . For the slightly more adventurous there were also newly opened resorts .
 Millions of families would squeeze into their Fiats, Renaults, Volkswagens and Morrises, often on the same day . Families would travel along narrow, inadequately serviced roads designed for an earlier age of travel .
 Traffic jams grew worse every year from the late 1950s to the late 1960s . The result was unprecedented and quite awful traffic jams that grew worse each year .
 Mass tourism, it has been well observed, may be environmentally insensitive but it has distinct re-distributive benefits . Mass tourism may have been environmentally insensitive, but it may also have re-social benefits. Mass tourism is a good way to distribute money to the poor .
 As prosperous northerners flocked to hitherto impoverished Mediterranean lands, jobs opened up for building workers, cooks, waiters and waiters . Others include prostitutes, porters, airport maintenance crews and others .
 For the first time, unskilled young men and women in Greece, Yugoslavia, Italy and Spain could find low-paying, seasonal work at home instead of seeking it abroad . Unskilled unskilled people in Greece and Yugoslavia could now find seasonal jobs at home .
 Rather than migrate to the expanding economies of the north, they now serviced those same economies in their own lands . Instead of migrating north, the north-easterners now serve their own economies .
 The success of large-scale tourism in the 1960s and after depended upon making Brits, Germans, Dutch, French and other neophyte travelers feel as comfortable as possible, surrounded by fellow-countrymen .
 The mere fact of going somewhere distant on a regular basis, and the novel means of transport used to get there, provided millions of hitherto insular men and women a window onto a far bigger world .
 Until the 1960s, the main source of information, opinion and entertainment available to the overwhelming majority of Europeans was the radio . The radio was the most popular form of entertainment in the world .
 It was from the radio that people got the news, and if there was a common national culture it was shaped far more by what people heard than from what they saw or read . It was more important for people to hear the news than to read or see the news .
 Between 1959 and 1973, the number of visitors to Spain rose from 3 million to 34 million . In every European country at this time radio was regulated by the state .
 In 1966, the number of annual tourists in Spain far surpassed the totals for France or Italy . Already in 1966, Spain had 17 million annual tourists, far more than any other country .
 In parts of the north-east and Spain’s Mediterranean littoral, the transition from pre-industrial economy to the age of the credit card was accomplished in half a generation .
 Most domestic radio sets had evolved little from the large, unwieldy, valve-driven wireless units of the inter-war decades . Most domestic sets still had to be wired wirelessly wired .
 It occupied a prime site in the parlor or kitchen and the family had perforce to listen to it while gathered in one place . It occupied the prime site .
 Even car radios altered little in this respect, the family that traveled together, listened together, and parents chose the programs . Parents and children traveled together and listened together in car radios .
 Wireless radio was thus a naturally conservative medium, both in its content and in its social patterns that it encouraged and sustained . Wireless radio is now a more conservative medium than radio .
 The transistor radio was still rare in 1958 . In all of France, there were just 260,000 . In 1958, the first time they were available in France, the radio was used in France .
 French owned two and a quarter million transistor radios in 1961 . Three years later, in 1961, the French owned 2.5 million radios . In 1961, they owned 2,500 radios .
 By 1968, nine out of every ten people in France owned a radio, two thirds of those radios were portable models . Two thirds of France's radio was made of portable radios .
 Teenagers no longer needed to sit around with their families, listening to news and drama directed at the taste of adults and scheduled for ‘family listening hours’ usually following the evening meal .
 They now had their own programmes —‘Salut les Copains' on French national radio, ‘Pick of the Pops’ on the BBC, etc. They now have their own own programmes .
 Individualized radios bred targetted programming; when state radio systems proved slow to adapt, ‘peripheral’ radio stations—Radio Luxemburg, Radio Monte Carlo, Radio Andorra, transmitting legally but from across state frontiers and financed by commercial advertising—seized the
 Battery-driven transistor radios were light and portable, and thus well adapted to an age of increasing mobility . Their natural habitat was the tourist beach or public park .
 Radio was still an aural medium, and thus restricted in its capacity to adapt to what was an increasingly visual age . But radio still had a long way to adapt in what was a visual age, and radio was still aural .
 Radio remained a primary source of information, enlightenment and entertainment for older people . For older people radio remained a main source of entertainment and information . Radio has been a radio medium for decades .
 In Communist states the radio set was also the only means of access to uncensored news and opinion . Radio Free Europe, the Voice of America and the BBC World Service were all available in Communist states .
 Young people everywhere listened to radio above all for popular music . But young people everywhere now listened to the music above all, says BBC presenter .
 In Britain, regular transmitting began in the 1940s and many people watched Queen Elizabeth’s June 1953 coronation live on television .
 France boasted just 60,000 television sets in June 1953 - one-fifth the UK figure for a comparable population . Even in i960 only one French family in eight owned a television, one- fifth UK figure .
 In the course of the Sixties, television caught on almost everywhere . Small black-and-white television sets had become an affordable and increasingly essential item of domestic furniture .
 By 1970 there was on average one television set for every four people in western Europe . More in the UK, rather less in Ireland, than in Ireland .
 Two East German households in three possessed a television . Czechs, Hungarians and Estonians (who could watch Finnish television broadcasting from as early as 1954)
 State-owned television channels ensured that the political and moral content of programs for children and adults alike was strictly regulated . Its subject matter was not, at first, especially innovative .
 Commercial television began in Britain in 1955, but it did not come elsewhere until much later . In most European countries there was no question of allowing private television channels until well into the 1970s . Commercial television in Britain began in 1955 .
 Most television programming in the early decades of the medium was conventional, stuffy and more than a little patronizing . Most TV programming in early decades was conventional and stuffy . This week's episode is a return to the old school of television .
 It contributed hugely to ending the isolation and ignorance of far-flung communities, by . providing everyone with the same experience and a common visual culture .
 Being ‘French’, or ‘German’ was now something shaped less by primary education or public festivities . ‘Being French’ or German’s or Dutch was now shaping less by public festivities “Paul Ginsborg, A History of Contemporary Italy.
 Until television, politics in Paris or Bonn, Rome or London were an elite affair, conducted by distant leaders known only from their disembodied voices on radio or newspaper photographs .
 Many older politicians failed miserably when faced with television cameras . Many of the older politicians fail miserably to overcome television cameras.
 It could also bring feature films into people’s homes, obviating the need to go out to see anything but the latest releases . Not only did it offer alternative screen entertainment, but it could also provide alternative entertainment .
 In the UK, cinemas lost 56 percent of their customers between 1946 and 1958 . The UK cinemas also lost 56 per cent of its customers in the same period .
 Numbers fell more slowly elsewhere in Europe, but sooner or later they fell everywhere . Numbers fell slowly elsewhere, but later fell everywhere, falling in Europe .
 Cinema attendance held up longest in Mediterranean Europe, especially in Italy . Cinema attendance remained steady in Italy until the mid-1970s. Cinema attendance was highest in the region .
 Eventually, even the Italian film industry, and Italian cinema attendance, languished . Eventually, the film industry and cinema attendance in Italy fell into disrepair .
 European film producers, lacking the resources of Hollywood, could not hope to compete with American films in scale or ‘production values’ and confined themselves increasingly to ‘ordinary life’ cinema .
 Audiences in the 1940s and 1950s had automatically gone to see whatever happened to be showing at the local cinema . They now went only if they were attracted by a particular film, such as The Dark Side .
 For random entertainment, the pair turned to television for a bit of entertainment .
 TV had a particular attraction for older audiences, especially in its early, state-regulated, culturally cautious years . Despite being a ‘young’ medium, television had an attraction for an older audience .
 By the end of the 1950s, the European economy was beginning to feel the full commercial impact of the baby boom .
 Around 1957, for the first time in European history, young people started buying things themselves . Young people started to buy things themselves around the age of 60 .
 Until this time, young people had not even existed as a distinct group of consumers . Young people were not even considered young people as a separate consumer group . Until now, they had not existed as an independent consumer group.
 In traditional families and communities, children remained children until they left school and went to work, a point they were young adults . In traditional homes, children remain children until after school and when they leave work, they are young adults, a child .
 The new, intermediate category of ‘teenager’, in which a generation was defined not by its status but by its age, had no precedent . Neither child nor adult had ever been defined as a 'teenager' The new category of 'teenagers’ had no
 Teenagers might represent a distinct group of consumers would have been unthinkable a few years ago . And the notion that such persons --teenagers --might represent a separate group of people would have had to be quite unthinkable .
 For most people, the family had always been a unit of production, not consumption . The family was always a source of production not consumption, says the author of the book .
 To the extent that any young person within the family had independent cash earnings, these were part of the family income and used to help defray collective expenses . These were used to defray individual expenses .
 Most families could subsist—and better—on income of the primary wage-earner . But with real wages rising rapidly, most families can subsist on the income of their primary wage earner .
 A son or daughter who had left school at 14 (the typical schoolleaving age for most young west Europeans in these years) was no longer automatically expected to hand over all his or her earnings every Friday .
 In France, by 1965, 62 percent of all 16-24-year-olds still living with their parents were retaining all their own earnings to spend as they wished . By 1965, by . 1965, France's economy was booming, and the French economy was on the rise .
 The most obvious obvious symptom of this new adolescent spending power was sartorial . The most immediately obvious symptom was the fact that the new generation is spending more .
 The baby-boom generation was born during the war rather than just after it . Its immediate predecessor, the generation born in the late Fifties, asserted its presence and its appearance in the gang cults .
 Despite occasional bursts of violence, gangs of leather-clad youths attacked Caribbean immigrants . The chief threat that these young people and their clothes posed was to their elders’ sense of propriety .
 Age-specific clothing was important, as a statement of independence and even revolt . The age-appropriate clothing is important, and was important to revolt .
 In the past, young adults had had little option but to wear the same clothes as their fathers and mothers . It was also new, as was new, for young adults to have had little choice .
 The association of ‘teenager’ and ‘pop music’ that became so automatic by the early Sixties had a commercial as well as a cultural basis . ‘Teenage’ was a commercial and cultural basis.
 In Europe as in America, when the family budget could dispense with a teenager’s contribution, the first thing the liberated adolescent did was to go out and buy a gramophone record .
 The first 45rpm ‘single’ was marketed by RCA the following year .
 Sales in Europe did not take off as fast as in America, where sales rose from $277 million in 1955 to $600 million four years later .
 In Britain, young people were initially more exposed to American music than their continental counterparts . Observers dated the pop music explosion from the showing of the 1956 film Rock Around the Clock starring Bill Haley and the Comets and the Platters .
 The film itself was mediocre even by the undemanding standards of rock music movie vehicles . But its eponymous title song (performed by Haley) galvanized a generation of British teenagers .
 Even the sex was kept firmly under wraps by record company producers, marketing managers and radio broadcasting executives . There was nothing very angry about it, much less violent, but there was nothing angry .
 Local council watch committees banned Rock Around the Clock . Elvis Presley's Jailhouse Rock also banned from the musical .
 The city fathers of Swansea in Wales thought the British skiffle player Lonnie 21 was the best in the world . It is perhaps worth emphasizing the marginality of jazz .
 There jazz was American . therefore both exotic and subversive, Western yet radical . It carried a charge quite lacking further West . Jazz was American therefore . therefore exotic . and subversive .
 Tommy Steele, a moderately energetic British rock singer of the late Fifties, was not allowed to perform on the Sabbath .
 Johnny Hallyday was an attempt to clone U.S. rockers of the Gene Vincent or Eddie Cochran mould . He inspired outrage among a generation of French conservative intellectuals when his first record appeared in i960 .
 In retrospect, the horrified response of parents, teachers, clerics, pundits and politicians across Western Europe appears quaintly disproportionate . Parents, teachers and clerics across Europe appear to have been horrified .
 Haley, Donegan, Steele, Hallyday and their like would seem hopelessly outdated, relics of an innocent prehistory . Within less than a decade Haley and Donegan would be obsolete . Within a decade, they would be relics of pre-history .
 European teenagers of the late fifties and early sixties did not aspire to change the world . European teens of the 1950s and 1960s were not interested in changing the world.
 Most of them just wanted to look different, travel more, play pop music and buy stuff . Most wanted to travel more and play more pop music, play more and buy more .
 In this they reflected the behavior and tastes of their favorite singers, and the disc-jockeys whose radio programs they listened to on their transistors . They listened to their favorite songs and disc jockeys, and their favorite radio programs .
 More even than their parents, they were the target of the advertising industry that followed, accompanied and prophesied the consumer boom . The advertising industry followed and predicted the boom in consumer boom.
 More and more goods were being made and purchased, and they came in unprecedented variety . More than ever was being made, and more was being sold and sold .
 Cars, clothes, baby carriages, packaged foods and washing powder all now came to market in a bewildering variety of shapes and sizes and colors . Cars and clothes now come in a variety of sizes and shapes .
 Newspapers, especially popular newspapers that flourished from the 1890s, had always carried advertisements . Newspapers that flourished in the late 1800s carried advertisements.
 Roadside hoardings and placards were a longstanding blight in Italy well before the nineteen fifties . Any traveler in mid-century France would have been familiar with the exhortations painted high up on the side of rural farmhouses and urban terraces .
 Commercial jingles as well as still photographs had long accompanied newsreels . Newsreels were the second feature in cinemas across Europe . The second feature was a newsreel with a commercial jingle .
 Traditional advertising took little account of targeted product placement, or markets segmented by age or taste . But such traditional advertising did not take account of product placement or market segments .
 From the mid-1950s, consumer choice became a major marketing consideration . Advertising, still a relatively small business expense in pre-war Europe, took on a prominent role . From the 1950s, advertising became a prominent business expense .
 Commercial breaks on Radio Monte Carlo and elsewhere were aimed above all at the ‘young adult’ market . Cleaning products and breakfast cereals advertised on early commercial television in Britain were directed towards housewives and children .
 Expenditure on retail advertising in Great Britain rose from £102 million a year in 1951 to £2.2 billion in 1978 . Retail advertising spending in Britain rose to £3 billion a year from 1951 to 1978 .
 Those polled already regarded these goods and services as rights of which they were deprived, rather than fantasies to which they could never aspire . But it is symptomatic that those polled already regard these goods as rights they are deprived, not fantasies .
 A group of middle-class activists published the first-ever consumer guide in Europe . The guide was published across the English Channel in 1968 .
 A radical departure though it seemed to many, this was not in fact a new experience . This was not the first time this was seen as a major departure in the history of American cinema .
 Europeans had been ‘Americanizing’—and dreading the thought—for at least thirty years . Europeans had hoped to be 'Americanized' for at least 30 years, but were dreadful of it .
 The vogue for US-style production lines and ‘Taylorized’ work rates was an old story even before World War Two . The fascination with American films and fashions was a long-standing story .
 For all its presence in the European imagination, the United States was still a great unknown for most Europeans . And yet, the very physical reality of American soldiers based all over western Europe is still a huge mystery .
 Americans spoke English, not a language with which most continental Europeans had no acquaintance in these years . Americans were speaking English, and Europeans were learning to speak English .
 The history and geography of the USA was not studied in European schools . Its writers were unknown even to an educated minority . Its political system was a mystery to all but a privileged few .
 East Europeans often had more links to the United States than westerners . Many Poles or Hungarians knew a friend or relative who had gone to America, and many more would have gone .
 It's important to emphasize that this sort of American influence and example depended curiously little on direct American economic involvement . But it's also important to stress that the U.S. has little direct economic involvement in the region .
 America in 1950 had three fifths of the capital stock of the West and about the same share of output . But very little of the proceeds flowed across the Atlantic .
 U.S. private investment in Europe amounted to just $4.15 billion in 1956 . In 1956, the United States had only $4 billion in private investment . The United States invested in Europe in the 1950s .
 The American economic presence in Europe was felt less in direct economic investment or leverage than in the consumer revolution that was affecting America and Europe alike . The U.S. economic presence was felt in Europe less than in direct investments or leverage .
 For young people the appeal of ‘America’ was its aggressive contemporaneity . The appeal of the American experience was its contemporary contemporaryity . For many young people it was the Americanness of America .
 As an abstraction, it stood for the opposite of the past; it was large, open, prosperous—and youthful . The city was young, prosperous and youthful, as an abstraction .
 French taste in particular was influenced by black performing artists who made their way to Paris to escape prejudice at home . The idea of 'America' in French culture was markedly infused with the image of racism .
 By the 1950s, the impact of American example on a European audience came overwhelmingly through the medium of film . The impact of U.S. example on European audiences was overwhelmingly through film .
 Audiences above a certain age continued to prefer the domestic product . And partly for this reason audiences above certain age preferred to watch TV shows .
 Contemporary critics worried that the smug conformism of American popular culture, combined with subliminal political messages conveyed in films aimed at mass audiences, would corrupt or tranquilize European youth .
 Young European audiences filtered out the propaganda content of mainstream American movies, much as their parents had done twenty years before, but laughing out loud at the bathos and naivete of American romance .
 Performers paid close attention to the often-subversive style of the performers .
 The music that was played in American films would re-surface on radio, in cafes, bars and dance halls . It would be played in cafes and bars across the country .
 The body language of rebellious American youth became a fashion statement for their European contemporaries . Body language became an important fashion statement in Europe .
 Young Europeans began to dress ‘American’ when ‘genuine Levi’ jeans first appeared on sale in Paris in 1963 .
 The American youth uniform of jeans and tee-shirts carried very little connotation of class . The distinction that emerged was not of social rank but material resources; indeed, worn by middle class .
 Stock American film themes, science-fiction, detective stories, Westerns, were domesticated in stylized European versions . Stock American themes, such as Westerns and science fiction, were developed in European films .
 By i960 German-language ‘Western’ novels were selling at the rate of ninety-one million a year in the Federal Republic alone . Millions of West Germans learned about cowboys from paperback novels .
 Lucky Luke is a hapless and appealing cowpoke featured weekly in Frenchand Dutch-language comics . Lucky Luke has been a popular character in the comics world for decades .
 America, real or imagined, was becoming the natural setting for light entertainment of all genres. America, Real or Imagination, is becoming a natural setting of light entertainment, all genres .
 Their elders observed and regretted the propensity of young Europeans everywhere to pepper their conversations with real or imagined Americanisms . Their elders said they regretted the tendency to pepper Americanisms in Europe .
 Anti-Americanism was typically confined to cultural elites whose influence made it appear more widespread than it was . Anti-Americaism was a principled distrust and dislike of American civilization and all its manifestations .
 America was given over to technology, standardization and conformism, bereft of originality of thought . America was a land of hysterical puritans, given over technology, conformism and conformity, he says .
 Such cultural insecurities had more to do with the pace of change in Europe itself than with the challenge or threat posed by America, says the president .
 European teenagers identified the future with an America they hardly knew, so their parents blamed America for the loss of Europe . Europe was secure in its identity, its authority and its values, and impervious to the sirens of modernity .
 These sentiments were not yet widely encountered in Germany or Austria, or even Italy . Many older people still regarded Americans as liberators .
 Anti-Americanism was more frequently espoused in England and France, the two former colonial powers displaced by the rise of the United States . Conversely, anti-U.S. sentiment was more common in England, France and England .
 A civilization of bathtubs and ffigidaires was what most Europeans now wanted . But notwithstanding the haughty disdain of Parisian intellectuals, Parisians now wanted a civilization .
 They wanted these commodities not because they were American but because they represented comfort and a degree of ease . And they wanted them not because of American, but because of comfort and ease .
 Butler celebrated in several speeches in 1953 and 1954 was but the last wash of prosperity breaking on British shores from the wake of the German economy as it surged ahead .
 West Germany's economic performance was a stark contrast with Britain's performance in post-war western Europe . West Germany and Great Britain were the two most successful economies in Europe .
 Germany's cities shattered, its currency destroyed, its male workforce dead or in prison camps, its transportation and service infrastructure pulverized . For the second time in one generation, Germany was the defeated power .
 Britain emerged unambiguously victorious from World War Two . Britain was the only European state to emerge unambigiously victorious from WWII .
 Bomb damage and human losses aside, the fabric of the country had survived the war intact . Roads, railways, shipyards, factories and mines were among the things that survived intact .
 By the early 1960s, the Federal Republic was the booming, prosperous powerhouse of Europe . Great Britain was an underperforming laggard, its growth rate far behind that of the rest of Western Europe . Yet by the early 60s, Great Britain had a growth rate well behind that
 By 1958 the West German economy was larger than that of Britain . Already by 1958 the German economy had grown larger than the UK .
 In the eyes of many observers the UK was well on its way to becoming the sick man of Europe . Many observers believe the UK is becoming the 'sick man of European Europe'
 The background to the German economic ‘miracle’ of the fifties was the recovery of the thirties . The German economic 'miracle' of the 1950s was the economic recovery from the '30s .
 The investments of the Nazis were undertaken for an economy geared to war, but their pay-off came twenty years later . The investments were made in communications, armaments and vehicle manufacture .
 The social market economy of Ludwig Erhard had its roots in the policies of Albert Speer . Many of the young managers and planners who went on to high position in post-war West German business and government got their start under Hitler .
 The essential infrastructure of German business survived the war undamaged . German business thrived in the war, but was not damaged .
 Manufacturing firms, banks, insurance companies, distributors were all back in business by the early ’50s . Manufacturing firms supplied a voracious foreign market with their products .
 Even the increasingly high-valued Deutschmark did not impede German progress . Even the high-value German mark didn't impede progress in the country .
 It made imported raw materials cheap, without restricting foreign demand for German products . German products were typically high-value and technically advanced, and sold on quality, not price .
 German business costs have been kept down by sustained investment in new and efficient production methods . German business keeps down by investing in new, efficient methods and a compliant workforce .
 Federal Republic benefited from a virtually inexhaustible supply of cheap labor . Young engineers fleeing East Germany, semi-skilled machine minders and assembly workers from the Balkans, unskilled laborers .
 All of these were grateful for stable hard-currency wages in return for steady employment, and—like an un-protesting older generation of German workers inherited from the Thirties—they were not disposed to make trouble .
 By the 1960s German car manufacturers had established a reputation for engineering quality and manufacturing reliability . Mercedes-Benz in Stuttgart and BMW in Munich could sell increasingly expensive cars .
 The Bonn government unashamedly supported such ‘national champions’ just as the Nazis had done before it, just as it did before it . The government encouraged the banking-business nexus that provided German companies with ready cash .
 Volkswagen had already laid the groundwork for the company's success by 1945 . Volkswagen's first car production was in Germany in 1945 .
 Like so much of post-war German industry, Volkswagen benefited from all the advantages of a free-market economy without suffering any of the drawbacks of competition or the costs of research, development and tooling . Volkswagen was able to grow demand for its products without suffering from competition or costs of
 Nazism, war and war and military occupation had all done well by it . The Allied Military Government looked kindly on Volkswagen precisely because its productive capacity had been built up before the war and could be put to work without further ado .
 There was no domestic competition for the VW Beetle when demand for mass-produced small family cars took off . Even at a fixed and low price the cars turned a profit—thanks to the Nazis, the company had no old debt to pay off .
 Like the German manufacturers, British carmakers laid increasing emphasis on overseas market .
 The company duly and deliberately neglected quality control in favor of rapid output . The company said it did not want to lose quality control .
 Once the reputation for low quality and poor service was established, it proved impossible to shake . But once the reputation was established it proved difficult to shake.
 European buyers abandoned British cars in droves as soon as better home-produced alternatives became available . British car firms had no affiliated banks to turn to for investment cash and loans, in the German manner .
 Under pressure from London, British companies built plants and distribution centers in uneconomic parts of the country . They built plants to conform to official regional policies and to appease local politicians and unions .
 After the war, authorities distributed scarce supplies of steel to manufacturers on the basis of their pre-war market share . The authorities distribute scarce supplies to manufacturers based on their market share, thus freezing a major sector .
 By 1970 European and Japanese producers were taking over their markets and beating them on quality and price . By 1970 Europe and Japan had taken over the world's largest markets .
 The oil crisis of the early 1970s, entry into the EEC and the end of the UK’s last protected markets in the dominions and colonies finally destroyed the independent British car industry . The UK's car industry has since been wiped out of existence .
 In 1975 British Leyland, the country’s only independent mass automobile maker, collapsed and had to be bailed out via nationalization . The company was bailed out by the government in 1975 after it collapsed .
 The decline and eventual disappearance of the autonomous British automobile sector can stand for British economic experience at large . The decline of an autonomous British car sector can be seen in Britain's economic experience .
 It provided full employment and it did grow, albeit more slowly than everywhere else . It provided employment and growth, but it was more slowly . It did grow .
 It suffered, however, from two crippling disadvantages, one a product of historical misfortune, the other self-imposed . It suffered from a crippling disadvantage, but it was not a result of history, it was self-inflicted .
 The pound, still a major unit of international transactions in the 1950s, was overvalued . It made it hard for Britain to sell enough abroad to compensate for sterling’s chronic deficit against the dollar .
 Island nation is dependent on imports of food and vital raw materials . Britain compensated for this structural vulnerability by its privileged access to protected markets in the Empire .
 Europe's dependence on far-flung markets and resources became a liability once Europe—and especially the EEC zone—took off . But this dependence on markets, resources, an advantage in the initial post-war years as the rest of Europe struggled .
 The British could not compete with the US, and later Germany, in any unprotected overseas market . British exports to Europe itself lagged ever further behind those of other European producers .
 British manufactured exports represented 25 percent by value of the world’s total in 1950 . Twenty years later they constituted just 10. percent of the value of British exports .
 The British had lost their share of the world market, and their traditional suppliers— in Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the African colonies — were now turning to other markets .
 In some measure the relative economic decline of Britain was thus inevitable . The relative decline of the British economy was also inevitable .
 Even before World War Two, Britain’s manufacturing industry had gained a well-deserved reputation for inefficiency .
 The maintenance of full employment was the cardinal social objective of every British government in these years . Indeed, the maintenance of . full employment . was the . cardinal social . objective of all British governments in these . years .
 The determination to avoid a return to the horrors of the thirties, when men and machines decayed in idleness, thus trumped any consideration of growth, productivity or efficiency .
 Trade unions, especially their local representatives, were more powerful than ever before or since . Trade unions and factory shop stewards' local representatives were more influential than ever .
 Strikes were endemic to post-war British industrial life . Strikes were a symptom of labour militancy and incompetent management alike .
 Even if Britain’s trade union leadership had followed the German example and offered amicable shop-floor relations and wage restraint in return for investment, security and growth, it is unlikely that most employers would have taken the bait .
 Clement Attlee had accurately identified the British economic malaise as a problem of underinvestment, lack of innovation, labour immobility and managerial mediocrity . The future Labour Prime Minister had correctly identified the problem in 1930s .
 Once in office, there seemed little that he or his successors could do to stop the rot . But, once in office he seemed to be powerless to stop it, he or successors could .
 German industry inherited all the advantages of the changes wrought by Nazism and war . Britain’s old-established, uncompetitive industries inherited stagnation and a deep fear of change .
 Textiles, mines, shipbuilding, steel and light engineering plants would all need restructuring and retooling in the post-war decades . But just as they chose to accommodate trade unions rather than attack inefficient labour practices, so British factory managers preferred to operate in a cycle of under-
 In France, a similar heritage of managerial incompetence and inertia was over2 Quoted in Peter Hennessy, Never Again .
 British governments confined themselves to collective bargaining, demand management and exhortation . British governments, however, confined themselves only to collective collective bargaining .
 For a state that had nationalized such sweeping tracts of the economy after 1945, this caution seems a curious paradox . By 1970, the state was responsible for spending 47 percent of the country’s GNP .
 The British state owned or operated most of the transport, medical, educational and communications sectors . But the British state never boasted any overall national strategic ambition .
 It fell to a later generation of ffee-market reformers to apply the full force of central government to the problem of Britain’s economic problems .
 Some of the strictures levelled at Britain’s maladapted ‘old’ economy were being levelled, for different reasons, at the faltering German economy too . But by then some strictures had been levelled .
 Since 1945 the relationship between the state and its subjects has become increasingly complex . But since 1945 that relationship has come increasingly to be characterised by social benefits and economic strategies in which it was the state that served its subjects .
 In the peak years of the modern European welfare state, when the administrative apparatus still exercised broad-ranging authority and its credibility remained unassailed, a remarkable consensus was achieved . The welfare state was still exercising broad-reaching authority when it was in its peak years .
 Between 1950 and 1973, government spending rose from 27. percent to 38. percent of the gross domestic product in France, West Germany, the UK and the Netherlands . The Dutch government spent more on government spending than ever before or since in the 1950s .
 The overwhelming bulk of the increase in spending went on insurance, pensions, health, education and housing .
 Only in Switzerland was the share of post-war GNP spent by the state kept comparatively low (it did not reach 30 percent until 1980)
 The success story of post-war European capitalism was everywhere accompanied by an enhanced role for the public sector . Post-war Europe was accompanied by a greater role for public sector, says David Cameron .
 Conglomerates such as IRI serviced not just their employees and consumers, but also a variety of political parties, trade unions, social service agencies and even churches whose patronage they dispensed and enhanced .
 The Italian National Institute for War Orphans employed 12 people for every 70 orphans . The institute spent 80 percent of its annual budget on salaries and administration .
 Control of public-sector companies in Belgium allowed the national government in Brussels to buffer local resentments and bribe contending regional and linguistic interests with services .
 In France the post-war nationalizations established long-lasting networks of influence and patronage . In France, nationalizations establish long-standing networks of power and influence .
 The state lubricated the wheels of commerce, politics and society in numerous ways . The state thus lubricated commerce and society, it's said .
 It was responsible, directly or indirectly, for the employment and remuneration of millions of men and women who thus had a vested interest in it, whether as professionals or bureaucrats . And it was responsible for millions of people's jobs, whether in the workplace or in the government .
 Graduates from Britain’s leading universities typically sought employment not in private-sector professions, much less industry and commerce, but in education, medicine, the social services, public law, state monopolies or government service .
 By the end of the 1970s, 60 percent of all university graduates in Belgium took up employment in the public services or publicly subsidized social sector . By the 1980s, more than half of Belgium's university graduates were employed in public services .
 The European state had forged a unique market for the goods and services it could provide . The EU state has forged a special market for services it can provide .
 It formed a virtuous circle of employment and influence that attracted near-universal appreciation . The circle of influence was formed by the president of the United States .
 Almost everyone had something to gain from the opportunities the state afforded them for income and influence . Doctrinal differences over the ostensible goals of the state might noisily oppose Left and Right, Christian Democrats and Communists .
 Faith in the state, as planner, coordinator, facilitator, arbiter, provider, caretaker and guardian, was widespread and crossed almost all political divides . Faith in state—as planner, . facilitator and facilitator -- was widespread .
 In that sense welfare capitalism, as it unfolded in Western Europe, was truly post-ideological . Welfare capitalism was post-Ideological in Europe, writes David Frum .
 At the time, they wielded little influence, but at the same time they had little influence . Now, they are still influential in the world .
 Social Democracy had always been a hybrid; indeed, this was just what was held against it by enemies to the Right and Left alike . Social Democracy was always a hybrid, and this is what it is held against its enemies .
 The nineteenth-century paradigm of violent urban upheaval was not only undesirable and unlikely to meet its goals; it was also redundant . As a solution to the injustice and inefficiency of industrial capitalism, industrial capitalism was not a solution .
 "Genuine improvements in the condition of all classes could be obtained in incremental and peaceful ways," says author of the book .
 It did not follow from this that the fundamental nineteenth-century socialist tenets were discarded, it said . The socialist movement was founded in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Social Democrats maintained as an article of faith that capitalism was inherently dysfunctional and that socialism was both morally and economically superior . The overwhelming majority of mid-twentieth-century European Social Democrats kept their distance from Marx and his heirs .
 Where they differed from Communists was in their unwillingness to commit to the inevitability of capitalism’s imminent demise or to the wisdom of hastening that demise by their own political actions, they said .
 The politics of social democracy were not always seductive to impatient young people, as later events were to show . Social democracy was not always as seductive as it was in the 1930s and 1940s .
 In certain parts of Western Europe social democracy by the mid-Sixties was no longer so much a politics as a way of life . But they were intuitively appealing to men and women who had lived through the terrible decades since 1914 .
 Between 1945 and 1968, eight out of ten Danish governments were led by Social Democrats . In the same years there were five Norwegian governments, three of them Social Democratic, and four Swedish governments, all Social Democratic .
 Norway’s Einar Gerhardsen led two Social Democratic governments for a total of 14 years . Tage Erlander ruled both his party and his country for twenty-three years, from 1946-1969 .
 Small and socially homogenous, with no overseas colonies or imperial ambitions, they had been constitutional states for many years . They had been small and homogenous . They were small and socially . homogenous. They were constitutional states .
 Danish constitution introduced limited parliamentary government but extensive press and religious freedom . Danish constitution of 1849 introduced limited government but freedom of press and religion .
 The Swedish constitution of 1809 established modern political institutions, including proportional representation and the exemplary system of the ombudsman . The ombudsman provided the stable framework within which the party political system could develop .
 Scandinavia was historically poor—a region of forests, farms, fisheries and a handful of primary industries, most of them in Sweden . But Scandinavia has a history of poor economic conditions, especially in Scandinavia .
 Labour relations in Sweden and Norway especially were chronically troubled by conflict . Strike rate in both countries was among the highest in the world during the first decades of the twentieth century .
 Unemployment in the region was chronic during the Depression of the 1930s . During the Depression, unemployment in the area was chronic .
 If Scandinavia did not follow path of other economically depressed societies on the European margin between the wars, much of the credit belongs to the Social Democrats . Social Democrats are responsible for Sweden's economic success .
 After World War One the Scandinavian socialist parties largely abandoned the radical dogma and revolutionary ambitions they had shared with the German and other Socialist movements of the Second International . In the course of the 1930s they moved towards a historic compromise between capital and labour .
 At Saltsjobaden in 1938, representatives of Swedish employers and labour signed a Pact that was to form the basis of the country’s future social relations . Contrast Italy, which had 13 different governments and 11 different prime ministers in the same period, or France, had 23 governments
 Scandinavian Social Democrats were open to such compromises because they had no illusions about the putative ‘proletarian’ constituency on which other socialist parties relied for their core support .
 Socialist parties of Scandinavia would forever have remained in the minority . Had they depended upon urban working-class votes alone, they would have remained minority . Socialist parties in Scandinavia have never been as strong as they did .
 Their political prospects rested upon extending their appeal to the overwhelmingly rural populations of the region . The region is overwhelmingly rural and has a large population of voters .
 The embittered and destitute peasants of inter-war central and southern Europe formed a ready constituency for Nazis, Fascists or single-issue Agrarian populists . And thus, unlike almost every other socialist or social-democratic party of Europe, Scandinavian social democrats were not
 Farmers, loggers, crofters and fisherman of Europe’s far north turned in growing numbers to Social Democrats . Social Democrats actively supported agrarian cooperatives in Denmark, where commercial farming was widespread .
 This alliance of labour and farming was to form the platform on which Europe’s most successful social democracies were built . This alliance was facilitated by the unusual independence of Scandinavian peasants, conjoined in fervently Protestant communities .
 The Saltsjobaden Pact resembled in certain respects the Arbeitsfrieden reached in Switzerland the previous year . Employers and workers agreed to establish a system of nonconffontational collective bargaining that was to prove an enduring cornerstone of the country’s future stability .
 The Scandinavian system of welfare was not conceived and implemented all at once . But except for education, which was already universal and comprehensive before 1914, the welfare system was not developed .
 What looked from the outside like a single Nordic system was in reality quite varied by country . Moreover, the Nordic system is quite different by country, especially in Scandinavia .
 The UK is dependent upon the overseas market for farm produce . It is more sensitive to policies and political developments elsewhere in Europe . Its skilled work force was much more divided by traditional craft-based loyalties and organisations .
 Denmark’s Social Democrats were constrained on more than one occasion in the Sixties to impose price and wage controls on an unstable labour market . In this respect it resembled Britain more than, say, Norway . Denmark's Social Democrats tried to emulate British governments and impose price controls .
 Danish social relations and Denmark’s economic performance were always somewhat troubled . By British standards, the policy was a success, but by more demanding Scandinavian measures, it was always a problem . Denmark's economic performance and social relations were always troubled .
 Even before oil was discovered off the coast, Norway’s situation was distinctive . Moreover, even before the discovery of oil, the situation was unique .
 Front-line state in the Cold War committed to much greater defense outlays than Denmark or neutral Sweden . Its population of less than four million people strung along a 1,752 kilometre coastline, the longest in Europe .
 Many of the farther-flung towns and villages were and are utterly dependent on fishing for their livelihood . Many of them were and were dependent on their livelihood for fishing .
 Sweden's peculiarities came over time to be thought of as the Scandinavian norm . Sweden, too, was distinctive, but its peculiarities were thought to be the norm .
 Sweden was by far the richest and most industrialized of the Scandinavian societies . With a population almost the size of Norway and Denmark combined (greater Stockholm alone was home to 45 percent of Norway’s inhabitants)
 Sweden was by the 1960s already one of the world’s wealthiest countries .
 Social democracy there was about allocating and equalizing wealth and services for the common good . Social democracy is about social justice, says David Cameron . Social justice is about equalizing and equating wealth, says Cameron .
 Private ownership and exploitation of the means of production were never put into question in Sweden . Private ownership was never questioned throughout Scandinavia, but in Sweden especially .
 Swedish Social Democrats were content to leave capital and initiative in private hands . Unlike the British Labour movement, their core doctrine and program rested on the virtues of state ownership .
 The example of the UK’s British Motor Corporation, a helpless guinea pig for government experiments in centralized resource allocation, was never followed in Sweden . Sweden has never followed the example of UK's British Motor Corp.
 Volvo, Saab and other private businesses were left free to flourish or fail . Volvo and Saab are among the most successful private businesses in the world .
 Industrial capital in 'socialist' Sweden concentrated into fewer private hands than anywhere else in western Europe . Sweden's industrial capital in ‘socialist’ Sweden was concentrated into few private hands .
 The government never interfered either with private wealth accumulation or with the marketplace for goods and capital . The government did not interfere with the market for goods or capital, the author says .
 Even in Norway, after 15 years of Social Democratic government, the directly state-owned or state-run sector of the economy was actually smaller than that of Christian Democratic West Germany . Even in Oslo, after . fifteen years of . Social Democratic . government, after fifteen years . of Social
 Denmark and Finland did not tax and redistribute private profits for public ends . But in both countries, what the state did do was ruthlessly and progressively tax and redistribution of profits .
 To many foreign observers and most Scandinavians, the results appeared to speak for themselves . To many observers, many Scandinavians were surprised by the results .
 The provision of educational, welfare, medical, . medical, insurance, retirement and leisure services and facilities was . unequalled, as were the economic and . physical security in which . citizens of Nordic Europe pursued their contented lives .
 In the 1960s and at times since, it pleased conservative critics of Scandinavian politics to blame these shortcomings on the moral paralysis induced by too much economic security and centralised direction . It pleased critics of Scandinavia to blame economic security on moral paralysis .
 If this was the worst that could be said against the Scandinavian ‘model’ then the Social Democrats of Sweden and elsewhere could be forgiven for laughing (or, as it were, complaining) all the way to the bank .
 Scandinavian Social Democracy was born of a widespread fascination with social engineering of all kinds . Social engineering is a form of social engineering in the U.S.
 The state is supposed to adjust incomes, expenditures, employment and employment information . It's also supposed to tinker with individuals themselves . The state could use the data to adjust income, expenditures and employment .
 It dovetailed especially well with the ambitions of well-meaning social reformers . Taken up by thinkers of all political shades, it was taken up by political parties .
 In the early decades of the twentieth century the appeal of scientifically manipulated social or genetic planning was widespread and thoroughly respectable . It was only thanks to the Nazis, whose ‘hygienic’ ambitions began with ersatz anthropometries and ended in the gas chamber, that
 Between 1934 and 1976 sterilization programmes were pursued in Norway, Sweden and Denmark . Each case took place under the auspices of Social Democratic governments .
 What this suggests about the depressant effect of prosperity, climate, latitude, diet, religion, family structures or the welfare state was obscure to contemporaries and remains unclear today . The impact of prosperity and latitude, latitude and diet, diet and religion, remains unclear .
 The legitimacy of the state in post-war Scandinavia left government free to act in what it took to be the common interest with remarkably little oversight . The authority and initiative accorded it by a mostly unquestioning citizenry was accorded to the state .
 It does not seem ever to have occurred to an ombudsman to investigate abuse of those who stood outside of the rights-bearing community of tax-paying citizens .
 The line separating progressive taxation and paternity-leave from forcible interference in the reproductive capacities of ‘defective’ citizens seems not to have been altogether clear to some post-war governments .
 If nothing else this suggests that the moral lessons of World War Two were not as clear as was once supposed . In countries like Sweden whose collective conscience was widely presumed clear, this was not the case .
 In Austria, an overwhelmingly rural, historically poor country had been transformed into a prosperous, stable, politically tranquil oasis of state-furnished well-being . In Austria as in Sweden or Norway, the country has been transformed .
 Austria was indeed ‘social’ (and had the largest nationalized sector of any Western European democracy), but it was not particularly Social Democratic . Austria was not quite Social Democratic, but it had nationalized sectors of its democracy .
 It was only in 1970 that the country got its first post-war Socialist head of government . Bruno Kreisky became Chancellor of the Socialist state in 1970 .
 Austria over time instituted many of the social services and public policies associated with Scandinavian Social Democratic society . Austria's social services include child care, generous unemployment insurance and public pensions, family support and family support . But what distinguished Austria from Sweden was the near-universal allocation of employment, influence,
 This appropriation of the Austrian state and its resources to stabilize the market in political preferences had less to do with social ideals than with the memory of past traumas . The Austrian state's use of the state to stabilize political preferences was less than social ideals, it is said .
 Austria's socialists were more interested in stabilizing their country’s fragile democracy than in revolutionizing its social policies . In the wake of their inter-war experience, Austria's socialist government was more concerned with stabilizing its fragile democracy .
 Austrian Social Democrats proved remarkably adept at putting their past behind them . Like the rest of Austrian society, the country’s Social Democrats have put their past right behind them.
 The Swedish Social Democrats showed more interest in Vienna’s early-twentieth-century ‘Austro-Marxist’ theorists Otto Bauer and Rudolf Hilferding .
 In West Germany the SPD waited until 1959 and its Congress at Bad Godesberg to recast its goals and purposes . The SPD had to wait until 1959 for its first congress to reconfigure its goals . The party's first congress was held in 1959 in Bad Badgerland .
 From its origins a labour movement rather than a socialist party, it was motivated above all by the concerns of its trade union affiliates . It was also, like its Belgian counterparts in this respect, from its origins was a labour party .
 The British compromise was characterized by demand-manipulating fiscal policy and costly universal social provisions, supported by sharply progressive taxation and a large nationalized sector . Instead of a compromise, it was characterized as a compromise with the British government .
 Cross-party agreement that a return to mass unemployment must be avoided at almost any cost . If there was any sense in which British politics, too, were shaped by past shocks it came in the wake of past shocks .
 Wilson’s narrow margin of victory in the election of 1964 hardly disposed him to take political risks . Even though Labour did better in elections called two years later there was to be no radical departure in economic or social policy .
 Wilson himself was heir to the Attlee-Beveridge tradition of Fabian theory and Keynesian practice . Wilson showed little interest in economic innovation . Wilson himself showed little enthusiasm for economic innovation in the 1930s .
 There was a certain distinctiveness about the British Social Democratic state, beyond the insular refusal of all parties concerned to describe it thus . Nevertheless, there was a distinctiveness there, with the exception of the Labour Party .
 What the British Left (and, at the time, much of the Centre and Centre-Right of the political spectrum) were taken up with above all was the goal of fairness . The British Left were concerned about fairness, not just fairness .
 Beveridge reforms led to the overwhelming vote for Labour in 1945 . It was the manifest injustice, the unfairness of life before the war that drove the Beveridge reform . Beveridge's reforms were the result of the war's defeat in 1945.
 Conservatives promised to liberalize the economy while maintaining a fair distribution of rewards and services . It was their promise that they could open the economy that brought them to power in 1951 .
 The British accepted progressive taxation and universal health provision not because these were presented as ‘socialist’ but because they were more intuitively just . The British accept progressive taxation not because they are presented as 'socialist'
 In the same way, the British flat-rate systems of benefits and services disproportionately favoured the better-heeled professional middle class . The British flat rate system was egalitarian because of its egalitarian nature .
 Wilson’s education reform was pursued by Conservative governments after his departure in 1970, despite warnings from all sides of the perverse consequences such changes might have. That is why the educational reform was even pursued .
 British industrial relations remained mired in adversarial shopfloor confrontations . Craft-based piece-rate and wage disputes were virtually unknown in Scandinavia, Germany, Austria or the Netherlands .
 Labour ministers made half-hearted attempts to break clear of this encumbering inheritance, but without much success . The achievements of continental social democracy were never quite emulated in Britain .
 The net effect of the re-distributive policies of the first three post-war decades was to shift income and assets from the top 10 percent to the next 40 percent . The bottom 50 percent gained very little, for all the general improvement in security and welfare .
 Any audit of the era of the welfare state in Western Europe will inevitably be side-shadowed by our knowledge of the problems it would face in later decades . The welfare state will inevitably have to be seen as a model for the future .
 The West German Social Security Reform Act of 1957 guaranteed workers a pension keyed to their wage at the point of retirement and linked to a cost-of-living index . It would prove an intolerable burden in changed demographic and economic circumstances . Thus today it is easy to see that initiatives like
 Income-levelling in Sweden reduced private savings and thus inhibited future investment . Social Democratic Sweden's income-levering policy has been criticised by critics .
 The achievements of Europe’s ‘nanny states’ were real all the same, whether introduced by Social Democrats, paternalist Catholics, or prudentially disposed conservatives and liberals .
 Welfare states managed this substantial transformation at almost no political cost . Welfare states moved on to systems of entitlement, benefits, social justice and income redistribution .
 This was good for Social Democrats and Christian Democrats alike, as such parties duly noted . This is good for Christian Democrats and Social Democrats alike . Social Democrats were pleased with the outcome of the election .
 It was also bad for Fascists and Communists, which mattered more than more . But it was good for Communists and Fascists, it was bad for Communists .
 These changes reflected the demographic transformations already noted, but also unprecedented levels of personal security and educational and social mobility . The changes reflect a new intensity of educational, social mobility, says CNN.com .
 West Europeans now less likely to remain in the place, the occupation, the income bracket and the social class into which they had been born . So they were less disposed to identify automatically with the political movements and social affiliations of their parents’ world .
 The rise in the influence of the state upon the employment and welfare of its citizens was accompanied by a steady reduction in its authority over their morals and opinions . The rise of the power of the . state has been accompanied by the steady reduction of its authority .
 Liberal and Social Democratic advocates for the European welfare state saw no reason in principle why government should not pay close attention to the economic or medical welfare of the population . The welfare state guarantees citizens’ well-being from cradle to grave, while keeping its nose firmly out of their views and
 The Christian Democrats of Germany or Italy, for whom the state still had a legitimate interest in the manners and mores of its subjects, could not so readily make this distinction . The state must still have an interest in manners, mores, its subjects .
 Until the early 1960s, public authorities throughout Western Europe (with the partial exception of Scandinavia) had exercised firm and mostly repressive control over the private affairs of the citizenry .
 Homosexual intercourse was illegal almost everywhere, and punishable by long prison terms . Homosexuality was illegal in almost all of the world, punishable with long prison sentences .
 Even contraception was technically against the law in some Catholic states, though often condoned in practice . Contraception was technically illegal in some states, even though it was condoned .
 Even in the UK, commercial television was strictly regulated and carried a publicly mandated obligation to provide ‘enlightenment and information’ as well as entertainment and advertisements . Commercial television was introduced in 1955, and was heavily regulated .
 In Britain and France some of the most stringent constraints on behaviour and the expression of opinion had been introduced during the First or Second World Wars and never repealed .
 In Italy, West Germany and some of the countries they had occupied, post-war regulations were a legacy of Fascist laws . In Italy and West Germany, they had preferred to maintain in place. Elsewhere, the laws were still in place .
 The Vatican made uncompromising demands upon its followers in other ways . Precisely because it was being squeezed out of the realm of political power by the modern state .
 Pope Pius XII not only maintained its spiritual claims, but actually brought the official Church back into politics . The long and—in retrospect— controversial papacy of Eugenio Pacelli was controversial .
 Pacelli’s papacy also took an uncompromising line in the domestic politics of the democracies . Pacelli's papacy was on the side of political reaction, from the Vatican's close ties to Mussolini to its enthusiasm for Catholic dictators .
 Catholics in Italy especially were left in no doubt as to the spiritual impropriety, and worse, of voting against the Christian Democrats . Even in relatively liberal Belgium or Holland the local Catholic hierarchy was under strict instructions to turn out the Catholic vote for the Catholic parties and only them .
 Not until 1967, nine years after the death of Pius XII, did a Dutch bishop dare suggest in public that Dutch Catholics might vote for a nonCatholic party without risking excommunication .
 In such circumstances, it is hardly surprising that the post-war Catholic hierarchy also took an uncompromising line in questions having to do with the family, moral behavior or inappropriate books and films .
 By the end of the 1950s the Vatican’s authoritarian rigidity in public and private matters alike was both anachronistic and imprudent . But younger Catholic laymen, and a new generation of priests, were uncomfortably aware of the Vatican's authoritarian rig
 Back in 1900, most marriages in Italy had lasted around twenty years, before being dissolved by the death of a spouse . Most marriages lasted around 20 years, and were dissolved by a spouse's death .
 By the end of the third quarter of the century marriages lasted in excess of thirty-five years, and demand for the right to divorce was steadily growing . Demand for divorce was growing .
 Post-war baby boom had undercut the demographic case against contraception, isolating the ecclesiastical authorities in their uncompromising opposition . Meanwhile, the post-war . baby boom undercut the . demographic . case against contraceptive .
 The problem was real and, as it seemed to the more perceptive Catholic leaders, could not be addressed by appeals to tradition and authority, or suppressed by invoking anti-Communism in the style of the late 1940s . Whatever the reasons, the declining importance of Catholic charities and par
 Upon Pacelli’s death, his successor Pope John XXIII called a new Vatican Council, to attend to these difficulties and bring up to date the attitudes and practices of the Church . The council was called to address the problems of the Vatican .
 The Church was not an opponent of liberal democracy, mixed economies, modern science, rational thought and even secular politics . The pronouncements of the Second Vatican Council made it clear that the Church was no longer frightened by change and challenge .
 The first—very tentative—steps were taken towards reconciliation with other Christian denominations . There was some acknowledgement of the Church’s responsibility to discourage antiSemitism by re-casting its account of Jewish responsibility for the death of Jesus .
 The changes were not universally welcomed even among the Catholic Church’s own reformers . One delegate to Vatican II, a young priest from Crakow, would later rise to the papacy and see it as his task .
 Since the decline of religion in Europe has by no means been confined to the Catholic faith, this was probably beyond their powers . But since the decline in religion is not confined to religion, it is probably beyond the powers of the Vatican .
 Vatican II did achieve the final divorce between politics and religion in continental Europe . What Vatican II achieved was the divorce between religion and politics in Europe, author says .
 After the death of Pius XII, no pope and almost no bishop again presumed to threaten Catholics with serious consequences if they fail to vote the correct way . The once-close link between Church hierarchy and Catholic or Christian Democratic parties in the Netherlands, Belgium, West Germany, Austria and Italy
 Vatican II wrought dramatic changes in Franco’s Spain, where the local Catholic hierarchy had enjoyed unusual privileges and powers . Even in Franco's Spain, there were dramatic changes to Vatican II .
 Until the mid-sixties the Spanish leader forbade all outward manifestations of nonCatholic religious belief or practice . Until the 1960s, he banned non-Catholic religious beliefs or practices .
 In 1966 he felt constrained to pass a law allowing other Christian churches to subsist, though still privileging Catholicism . Within four years full freedom of worship was authorized .
 When rights to abortion and the liberalization of divorce were put to the vote in predominantly Catholic countries like Italy, France or West Germany, the ecclesiastical authorities vigorously opposed them . The rights to divorce and abortion were also opposed by the church .
 The Church did not go to the wall, and its opposition no longer risked fragmenting the community . But even on these sensitive issues, the Church did . It did not risk fragmenting .
 In a society well on the way to being ‘postreligious’, the Church accepted its reduced place and made the best of it . The Church accepted it reduced to a reduced place in a society that is 'postreligious'
 In non-Catholic societies, the liberation of the citizen from traditional moral authority was necessarily more diffuse, but even more dramatic when it came . In Scandinavia, the UK, parts of the Netherlands and a minority of German-speaking western Europe, it was more dramatic .
 Until the end of the 1950s, British citizens were still forbidden to gamble, read or see anything that their betters judged ‘obscene’ or politically sensitive . They were also forbidden to advocate homosexual acts or practice abortions on themselves or others .
 If they committed murder or certain other major offences, they could be hanged . They could also be hanged if they commit murder or commit major offences .
 Publishers and authors could defend themselves in court by invoking the worth of the work as a whole, and could invoke ‘expert’ opinion in their defense .
 The Chatterley case was of particular interest to the British not just because of the hitherto illicit passages to which they were now exposed, but also thanks to the inter-class eroticism on which its notoriety rested . The case of the case was particularly interest in the British .
 Labour oversaw the introduction of state-financed family planning clinics, reform of the law on homosexuality and the legalization of abortion in 1967 . Four years later the death penalty was abolished by the incoming Labour Government .
 In 1969 9 In Ireland, the authority of the Church and its involvement in daily politics was sustained rather longer—well into the nineties . In 1969, the Church's authority was sustained in Ireland, but it was sustained well into the 1990s .
 The liberal and liberalizing reforms of 1960s Britain were emulated across northwest Europe, albeit with varying delays . The liberal reforms of the 1960s were emulating across northwest European countries .
 The Social Democratic-led coalition governments of West Germany, under Willy Brandt, introduced similar changes there in the course of the later Sixties and Seventies, constrained in their case less by law or precedent than by the reluctance of their coalition partners . The Free Democrats are economically liberal
 In France, abolition of the death penalty had to await the arrival of Francois Mitterrand’s Socialists in 1981, but there—as in Italy—the laws on abortion and divorce were rewritten in the course of the early Seventies .
 In general, with the exception of Britain and Scandinavia, the liberated ‘Sixties’ did not actually arrive in Europe until the Seventies .
 The diminishing standing of public authorities in matters of morality and personal relationships is no way supposed to a decline in the role of the state in the cultural affairs of the nation . The state's role in moral matters has been diminished in recent years .
 It was the responsibility of a well-run public authority to deliver cultural nourishment no less than food, lodging and employment . It was responsibility of the public authority .
 Social and Christian Democrats thought alike, and both were heir to the great Victorian-era improvers, though with far greater resources to hand . In such matters both Social Democrats and Christian Republicans thought alike .
 The financially strapped French Fourth Republic was less forthcoming, except to traditional, prestige venues for high culture . The state-monopolized radio and television stations were also less forthcoming .
 De Gaulle returned to power and installed Andre Malraux as his Minister for Culture . The situation in France was transformed when he was in charge of culture .
 Now the government would spend money to place performers and performances in the provinces . The government says it will spend the money to put performers and performers in provinces .
 Museums, galleries, festivals and theatres began to sprout across provincial France . Museums and galleries are now being opened across the country's provinces .
 The Avignon summer festival under the direction of Jean Vilar, began in 1947 . It took flight in the course of the fifties and sixties when Vilar's productions played a major part .
 Many of France’s best known actors—Jeanne Moreau, Maria Casar£s, Gerard Philipe—worked in Avignon .
 It was there, as well as in such unlikely venues as Saint-fitienne, Toulouse, Rennes or Colmar, that the French artistic renaissance began .
 Malraux’s encouragement of provincial cultural life depended of course on centralized initiative, he says . ‘Central initiative’ was the key to success in Quebec .
 Culture and the arts were a direct outgrowth of local policy and regional self-interest . In a genuinely decentralized country like the Federal Republic of Germany, culture and arts are an outgrowth .
 In Germany, as elsewhere in Western Europe, public spending on the arts expanded dramatically in the post-war decades . Public spending on arts has increased dramatically in Germany since the Second World War .
 Cultural and educational matters in West Germany fell under the authority of the Lander . There was considerable duplication of effort between the two .
 Every Land and most significant towns and cities had opera companies, orchestra and concert halls, dance companies, dance company, subsidized theatre and arts groups . Every Land had an opera company, orchestra, concert halls .
 As in France, this system had its roots in the past—in Germany’s case the pre-modern micro-principalities, duchies and ecclesiastical fiefs . Many had maintained full-time court musicians and artists, and regularly commissioned new works .
 West Germany's generously financed cultural institutions became a Mecca for artists of all kinds . Despite the cultural self-doubt of post-Nazi West Germany, the country’s generously funded cultural institutions were a Mecca of artists .
 The Stuttgart Ballet, the Berlin Symphony Orchestra, the Cologne Opera and dozens of smaller institutions—the Mannheim National Theatre, the Staatstheater of Wiesbaden and so on—offered steady work (as well as unemployment benefits, medical coverage and pensions
 Many dancers and musicians came from abroad, including the U.S. and the United States . Many of the dancers, musicians were from abroad .
 Local audiences paid subsidized rates to watch and hear them perform . They benefited hugely from the flourishing European cultural scene . They, no less than the local audiences who paid subsidies .
 In Look Back in Anger, John Osborne reviles the phoniness of postwar prosperity and self-satisfaction . The veneer of polite conformity that was not swept away until the end of the decade was intensely frustrating to many observers and especially the young .
 The 1950s saw much original work, in theatre, literature and cinema especially, of more enduring interest than what was to follow . But in fact, the 1950s was the most original work of the decade .
 What Western Europe had lost in power and political prestige it was now making up for in the arts . Western Europe has lost power and prestige but is now making it up for it in arts .
 The late fifties were something of an Indian summer for the ‘high’ arts in Europe .
 European theatre entered a golden age of modernism in 1953 . Samuel Beckett’s En Attendant Godot premiered in Paris in March 1953 . It was the first production of the play in Paris since 1953 .
 English Stage Company at London’s Royal Court Theatre adopted Beckett, Brecht and Brecht . Also performed works by John Osborne, Harold Pinter and Arnold Wesker . All of their plays married stylistic minimalism to aesthetic disdain .
 In the late fifties an unparalleled generation of English theatrical knights was joined by younger performers fresh from the universities and a pool of innovative directors and producers including Peter Brook and Peter Hall .
 First proposed in 1946, Britain’s National Theatre was formally established in 1962 . Lawrence Olivier as its founding director and theatre critic Kenneth Tynan as his adviser and assistant . Its permanent home on London's South Bank was opened in 1976 .
 The National Theatre was a prime beneficiary of Arts Council munificence . Together with the Royal Shakespeare Company, it was to become the leading sponsor and venue for new British drama .
 Theatre became a more popular form of entertainment in the 1930s, but theatre is still popular . That did not mean, it should be noted, that theatre became more popular .
 Playwrights might write about working-class life, but it was the middle class that came to watch . The playwrights' work was often overlooked by the middle-class .
 By the early 1960s it was becoming possible to speak of a ‘European 5 theatre, or at least a theatre that took as its material controversial, contemporary European themes . Theatre was the first theatre in Europe to take on controversial themes .
 In the 1950s, European arts were swept by a ‘new wave 5’ of writers and film directors whose break with narrative convention and attention to sex, youth, politics and alienation anticipated much of what the generation of the Sixties came to think of as its own achievement .
 The most influential west European novels of the Fifties were all in various ways more original and courageous than anything that came later . Albert Camus’s La Chute was published in 1956, or Gunter Grass's Die Blechtrommel in 1959 .
 Franoise Sagan’s Bonjour Tristesse was original in their day . Even Colin Wilson's The Outsider, narcissistic accounts of post-adolescent selfabsorption were original .
 Written when their authors were respectively eighteen and twenty-24 years of age, their subject matter—and their success— anticipated the ‘youth revolution’ of the sixties by a full decade .
 European films acquired a lasting reputation for artistry and originality in the second half of the 1950s and early 1960s .
 Cinema in Western Europe graduated from popular entertainment into high culture . Indeed, there was probably a connection, as cinema graduation from entertainment into culture .
 The renaissance of European cinema was not driven by audience demand . Had it been left to viewers, French cinema would have remained confined to the ‘quality’ costume dramas of the early fifties .
 In any case, European mass audiences continued to show a marked preference for American popular films .
 French cineastes' admiration for American films stimulated a revolution among them . Ironically, it was their own admiration for the sombre, unadorned film noir style of the late 1940s .
 Jean Vigo and Jean Renoir championed the films of an earlier generation of French directors . For the same reason they championed—then neglected—the films of earlier generation . The films of the same generation were neglected .
 While all this suggested intuitive good taste, the theoretical penumbra in which it was packaged was of little interest—indeed often incomprehensible—beyond a very restricted circle .
 The practice, at the hands of Louis Malle, Jean-Luc Godard, Claude Chabrol, Jacques Rivette, Eric Rohmer, Agnes Varda and above all Francis Truffaut, changed the face of film .
 Between 1958 and 1965, French studios turned out an astonishing body of work . The films were shot at French studios between 1958 and 1964 .
 Eric Rohmer often lapsed into selfindulgence, but this was never true of Rohmer, the oldest of the group . Rohmer later to become internationally famous for his elegiac ‘moral tales’
 Francois Truffaut came to incarnate the style and impact of the New Wave . But it was the incomparable French director who would come to embody the style of the new wave . The film was released in 1968 in Paris, France, at the end of the year . Truff
 Truffaut was not only the main theorist behind the revolution in French cinema, he was also by far its most consistently successful practitioner . Renowned above all for a series of films starring JeanPierre Leaud as Antoine Doinel, including Les Quatre cents coups .
 "It was this combination of intellectual seriousness and visual accessibility that was so important for foreign emulators," she says . "I think it was the most important part of the world to be able to understand"
 French film had become the preferred vehicle for international moral debate . As the response to Alain Resnais’s . Hiroshima mon amour suggests, French film has become a vehicle for . moral debate.
 A group of 26 young German film directors gathered at Oberhausen in 1962 to proclaim ‘the collapse of the conventional German film’ and declared their intention to ‘create the new German feature film ... free from the conventions of the established industry,’ .
 Eric Rohmer's Ma Nuit Chez Maud stars Jean-Louis Trintignant as a provincial philosophy professor . The film is set in a snow-bound night at the home of Maud .
 A Catholic, Jean-Louis agonises over the ethical implications of the situation and whether or not he should/should not have slept with his host . He occasionally pauses to swap moral reflections with a Communist colleague . A Catholic he agonises about the moral implications of his actions .
 It is hard to imagine an American or even a British film director making such a film, much less getting it distributed . The film is directed by John Defterios .
 To a new generation of Euro-American intellectuals, Rohmer’s film captured everything that was sophisticated, worldweary, witty, allusive, mature and European about French cinema . Rohmer's film captured many of the world's most sophisticated films .
 Contemporary Italian films, though quite widely distributed abroad, did not have the same impact as contemporary Italian films . The films were widely distributed in Italy, but were not widely distributed overseas .
 Vittorio De Sica directed I Sequestrati di Altona from Sartre’s play, co-directed Boccaccio ’70 with Fellini and would go on to direct II Giardino dei Finzi-Contini at the
 In VAwentura and VEclisse, Antonioni’s hard-edged cinematography and unappealing, cynical, disabused characters anticipated the disaf . Godard in particular had decidedly eclectic tastes .
 He is reported to have been ‘mesmerized’ by Nicholas Ray’s Johnny Guitar starring Joan Crawford .
 Italian cinema lacked the seductive intellectuality of French films, but what they shared in abundance was style . The films were shot in Italy in the 1960s and '90s .
 It was this European style that distinguished the continental European scene for foreign observers . It was a variable balance of artistic self-confidence and intellectual pretension .
 By the end of the 1950s western Europe had not merely recovered from depression and war; it was once again a magnet for aspiring sophisticates . Western Europe had recovered after the war and depression but had not recovered .
 America was still, as it seemed even to many Americans, a little raw . But America still seemed to be still raw, even though it was still raw .
 Camelot, in turn, owed much to the European background and continental self-presentation of the President’s wife . Camelot owes much to her European background, and her continental self .
 If Jacqueline Kennedy imported European style to the White House, this would be hardly surprising .
 European ‘design’ in the later Fifties and Sixties flourished as never before, with the imprimatur of status and quality . European 'design' in the 1950s and 1960s flourished .
 A European label—attached to a commodity, an idea or a person --ensured distinction, and thus a price premium . A label can be attached to a commodities, ideas or people, and therefore a premium is high .
 ‘articles de Paris’ had a longstanding place in the luxury goods trade, dating at least to the late eighteenth century . Swiss watches had been well regarded for many decades .
 English manufacture had until quite recently carried this reputation, a legacy of Britain’s nineteenth-century industrial supremacy . If anything, it was English manufacture .
 Britishmade domestic goods, vehicles, tools or weapons had for long been highly prized on foreign markets . Britishmade products, vehicles and tools were highly prized in the 1980s .
 The only niche left to Britain’s retail merchants by the 1960s was high profile, low quality ‘trendy’ fads . The following decade was to exploit ruthlessly in the following decade .
 What was remarkable about European commercial style was its segmentation by product as well as country . European style was remarkable for Europe's commercial style, says author .
 Italian cars were notoriously shoddy and unreliable; yet their reputation did no discernible harm to Italy’s elevated standing in other markets, such as leather goods, haute couture and even domestic white goods . Italian cars—FIAT, Alfa Romeo .
 Ger12 Italians could certainly design cars, as any motor racing enthusiast would confirm . International demand for Ger12 cars could certainly be seen as a result .
 Coachbuilders removed mudguards, running boards and other redundant excrescences from small family cars . Milanese tailors in the same years were eliminating trouser turn-ups and inventing the sharp, clean lines and cut of the modern Italian suit .
 By 1965, anything turned on a German lathe or conceived by German-speaking engineers could walk out of a British or American showroom at a price of its own asking .
 Only Scandinavia had acquired a general reputation for quality across an eclectic range of products . Even there, the market had distinctive variations, with distinctive variations .
 Sweden's Volvo cars, despite their resolute lack of style, are indestructible . But the same consumer would be attracted to Sweden’s Volvo cars . Volvo cars are not stylish, but they have a reputation for their reliability . Volvo says they are 'indestruct
 The first international Men’s Fashion Festival was staged in San Remo, Italy, in 1952 . Italy, with lower labour costs and less labour costs, was already a serious competitor as early as 1952, when the first international fashion festival was staged .
 Middle-class women took their clothing cues from a handful of Parisian designers and fashion houses . The latter’s status remained secure as long as middle-class girls took their clothes cues from Parisian fashion houses.
 By the early sixties European women were no longer wearing formal hats, styled outer garments or evening wear as a matter of routine . European women no longer wore formal hats or styled outer wear .
 The mass market in clothing was taking its cues as much from below as from above . It was taking cues from the clothing market as much as from the top of the market .
 Europe’s reputation as the capital of style and chic was secure, but the future lay with more eclectic vogues . Many of them European adaptations of American and even Asian prototypes, something at which Italians proved especially adept .
 In clothing as in ideas, Paris dominated the European scene and would do so for a little while to come . Paris dominated European fashion scene in the 1930s .
 At the time some of his audience found the suggestion a touch premature . After all, across the Iron Curtain, and not only there, ideology appeared all too alive and well .
 The western European state, as it emerged in those years, was increasingly detached from any doctrinal project . The rise of the welfare state had defused the old political animosities, writes David Cameron .
 More people than ever before had a direct interest in the policies and expenditures of the state . But they no longer came to blows over who should control it . More people now have a direct stake in state finances .
 The apparent routinization of public affairs in the hands of a benevolent caste of overseers was no guarantee of public apathy, says historian John Sutter . Public apathy is no guarantee, Sutter writes .
 The very generation which came of age in the Social Democratic paradise of its parents’ longings was most irritated and resentful at its shortcomings . Thus it was that the very generation that came of . age in . the Social . Democratic paradise was most irritable at its . shortcomings .
 A pregnant symptom of this paradox can be seen in an area of public planning and works in which the progressive state on both sides of the Cold War divide was unusually active . The progressive state in both Cold War states is unusually active in planning and public works .
 The post-World War Two combination of demographic growth and rapid urbanization placed unprecedented demands upon urban planners . Urban planners faced unprecedented demands for urban planners in the wake of the Second World War .
 In Eastern Europe, many urban centers had been destroyed or half abandoned by the end of the war . Twenty million people moved from the countryside into towns and cities in the first two post-war decades .
 In Lithuania by 1970 half the population lived in towns; twenty years before the figure had been just 28 percent . By 1970 half of Lithuania's population had been living in towns . In 1970, half of the Lithuanian population was living in small towns .
 Minsk went from 509,000 in 1959 to 907,000 just twelve years later . In the USSR, the urban population overtook the rural one in 1961 . Minsk is the capital of the Belorussian Republic .
 The inner city had survived undamaged, or had been carefully rebuilt from old plans . Most of the new building took place on the edge of the city, forming a long string of suburban dormitories .
 New slums were erected in the very heart of the town of Bratislava . Elsewhere, in the Slovak capital Bratisava, for example, the new slums have been erected . The slums are also being built in the city's heart, Brat
 As for smaller towns and rural villages, they had nothing to preserve and were transformed, virtually overnight, into industrial dormitories, lacking even the grace of a remnant of an old town .
 Agro-towns were pioneered in the 1950s by Nikita Khrushchev and later perfected by Nicolae Ceau§escu . Collective farm workers were forced into agro- towns .
 In Mediterranean Europe especially, the mass migration from countryside to cities placed similar strains on urban resources . Mass migration from the countryside to the cities has strained resources in Europe .
 Greater Athens grew from 1,389,000 people in 1951 to 2,540,000 in 1971 . Greater Athens in Greece grew from  1,389 people in 1951 to 2,540 in 1971 . In 1971, the population of Athens grew to 2.
 Milan's population rose from 1,260,000 to 1,724,000 in the same period . Barcelona’s population grew from 1.280,000, to 1.785,000 . Barcelona's population increased from 1,.280,00 to 1 .785,
 In all these places, as in smaller towns across northern Italy and in the rapidly expanding outer suburbs of London, Paris, Madrid and elsewhere, planners could not keep up with demand . In some areas, as well as in northern Italy, planners couldn't keep up demand .
 Like their contemporaries in Communist city offices, their instinct was to construct large blocks of homogenous housing . The homes were built on land cleared by war and urban renewal, or on green-field sites at the edges of cities .
 In Milan and Barcelona, the first generation of migrants from the south began moving from shanty towns into highrise apartments in the course of the 1960s . The result was depressingly reminiscent of the Soviet bloc . Many would-be tenants could not afford to rent anywhere near their place of
 They were forced into long daily journeys on inadequate public transport, or else in their newlyacquired cars, further straining the urban infrastructure . They were thus forced to travel long journeys on public transport or in cars .
 The distinctive ugliness of urban architecture in Western Europe in these years cannot be attributed to demographic pressures alone . But it is not the result of demographic pressure alone .
 Architect’s Department of the London County Council authorized mass housing projects like the Alton estate in Roehampton . In West Germany, many major cities were rebuilt with a breathtaking lack of imagination .
 Milan’s awful Torre Velasco, a reinforced concrete skyscraper built between 1957 and i960 by a private Anglo-Italian consortium, was typical of the aggressive hyper-modernism of the age . The point was to break all attachments to the past .
 Sarcelles, north of Paris, grew from 8,000 in 1954 to 35,000 seven years later . The earliest and therefore best known of these, at Sarceles, grew to a population of just 8,200 in 1954 .
 Sociologically and aesthetically it was rootless, resembling contemporary worker-dormitory suburbs in other countries (like the remarkably similar settlements of Lazdynai at the edge of Vilnius, in Lithuania) far more than anything in indigenous French housing design .
 The European 'style' so much admired in other spheres of life was here nowhere in evidence . The European ‘style’ was here none in evidence.
 ‘Ronan Point’ in London’s East End, actually had the good taste to fall down of its own accord in 1968 . One of the most egregious in London's East End was 'Ronan point'
 The Pompidou Center failed miserably to integrate with the surrounding district or complement the older architecture around it . The Center was a 1960s design, though not opened until January 1977 .
 Just why post-war European politicians and planners should have made so many mistakes remains unclear . In the wake of two world wars and an extended economic depression there was a craving for anything fresh, new and unlinked to the past .
 Pierre Agard, ‘L’Unite de residence’ in Esprit, October-November 1953 . am grateful to Dr Nicole Rudolph for the reference .
 Architects and sociologists may not have understood that their projects would, within one generation, breed social outcasts and violent gangs, but that prospect was clear enough to the residents .
 Even European cinema only a few years before had paid loving, nostalgic attention to old cities and city life . Now, even European cinema is focused instead on the cold, hard impersonality of the modern metropolis .
 A particular victim of post-war architectural iconoclasm was the railway station, the lapidary incarnation of Victorian achievement and often a significant architectural monument in its own right .
 The future of train travel in Africa was never seriously in question . But in the overcrowded circumstances of a small continent, the future of the train travel was never in doubt .
 The stations that were torn down in Europe were replaced by insipid, unappealing buildings performing the identical function . The stations were replaced in Europe with buildings that perform the same function .
 The destruction of Euston Station in London, Paris’s Gare Montparnasse, or Anhalter Bahnhof in Berlin had no practical purpose and was aesthetically indefensible . It was not practical purpose or aesthetically indefensible and was aest
 As early as 1958, preservationists in Britain founded the Victorian Society . The Victorian Society was founded by a group of preservationists .
 British volunteer groups were devoted to identifying and saving the country’s threatened architectural heritage . Similar networks emerged all across Western Europe in the following decade, pressing residents, academics and politicians to act to avert further loss .
 In the physical history of the European city, the 1950s and 1960s were truly terrible decades . The 1950s, 1960s and 1950s were 'terrible decades' for the city .
 The damage that was done to the material fabric of urban life in those years is the dark, still half-unacknowledged underside of the ‘thirty glorious years’ of economic development—analogous in its way to the price paid for the industrial urbanization of
 Major cities have sold their urban birthright for a mess of brutalist pottage . Frankfurt, Brussels, London, London among those who discovered too late that they had sold their birthright .
 It is one of the ironies of the 1960s that the 'renewed' and rebuilt cityscapes of the age were deeply resented by the young people who lived there .
 The first intimations of the coming explosion would be felt in the pre-fabricated cement dormitories of a soulless university ‘extension campus’, heedlessly parked among tower blocks and traffic jams of an overspill Parisian suburb .
 Sir Isaiah Berlin: ‘Now all the journalists of the world are licking your arses ... but not me, my dears.’ ‘All the journalists are licking their arses. But not me. My dears!’ He said. ‘I am
 Moments of great cultural significance are often appreciated only in retrospect . Moments of cultural significance can only be appreciated later in life .
 As we see, this was not a wholly unreasonable preoccupation; but it led, predictably, to some distortions of perspective . As we shall see, it led to some distortion of perspective.
 The 1960s were indeed a decade of extraordinary consequence for modern Europe . But not everything that seemed important at the time has left its mark upon History . The 60s was a decade that was extraordinary for modern European nations .
 The selfcongratulatory, iconoclastic impulse—in clothing or ideas—dated very fast . It would be some years before the truly revolutionary shift in politics and public affairs that began in the late 1960s could take full effect .
 The most important developments were not always in the best-known places . And the political geography of the Sixties can be misleading, the author says .
 By the middle of the 1960s, the social impact of the post-war demographic ex390 THE SPECTRE OF REVOLUTION plosion was being felt everywhere . By the end of the 1950s, Britain was experiencing a social revolution .
 In France, by 1968, the student-age cohort, of persons aged 16 to 24, was eight million strong, constituting 16. percent of the national total . Europe, as it seemed, was full of young people— in 1968, it seemed .
 In earlier times such a population explosion would have placed huge strains upon a country’s food supply; and even if people could be fed, their job prospects would have been grim . Even if people were fed they would have faced grim job prospects .
 Chief problem facing European states was not how to feed, clothe, house and eventually employ young people, but how to educate them . European states are struggling to cope with a growing number of young people .
 Until the 1950s, most children in Europe left school after completing their primary education, usually between the ages of 12 and 14 . Most children left school at the age of 12 or 14 .
 In many places compulsory primary education itself, introduced at the end of the nineteenth century, was only weakly enforced . The children of peasants in Spain, Italy, Ireland and preCommunist eastern Europe typically dropped out of school during the spring, summer and early fall .
 Secondary education was still a privilege confined to the middle and upper classes . Secondary education remained a privilege in the UK until the 1960s .
 In post-war Italy, less than 5 percent of the population had completed secondary school . Less than 5 per cent of Italy's population had finished secondary school.
 Governments in post-war Europe introduced a series of major educational changes . In anticipation of future numbers, governments introduced a number of major reforms .
 In practice most children in the early-post war years still left school at 11, it was raised to 14 in 1962 . In Italy, where most children left school aged 11, the age of 14 was raised in 1962 to 14 years .
 The number of children in full-time schooling in Italy doubled in the course of the decade 1959-1969 . In Italy, there were more than 50,000 children per year .
 Hitherto, the cultural fault-line in most European societies had fallen between those who left school after learning to read, write, do basic arithmetic and recite the outlines of national history . A privileged minority remained in school until 17 or 18, been awarded the highly-valued secondary-
 The grammar schools, lycees and Gymnasiums of Europe had been the preserve of a ruling elite . But now they have been replaced by a new generation of professionals .
 Classical curriculum once closed to the children of the rural and urban poor . They were now opened to an ever-expanding pool of young people from every social milieu .
 As more and more children enter and pass through the secondary school systems, a breach opened up between their world and the one their parents had known . As more children entered and passed through the . secondary school . systems, the breach opened . up between them and their parents .
 This new and wholly unprecedented generation gap constituted a de facto social revolution in its own right . The implications were still confined to the realm of the family, but not the family . This new generation gap constitutes a social revolution, but its implications are still confined .
 Most Europeans before i960 never saw the inside of a secondary school, fewer still could even have dreamed of attending university . i960 was created in the year of i960 .
 There had been some expansion of traditional universities in the course of the nineteenth century, and an increase in the number of other establishments of tertiary education, mostly for technical training .
 Families could forgo earnings of their children to keep them in school until 18, and who could afford the fees charged by secondary schools and universities alike . But higher education in Europe in the 1950s was still closed to all but a privileged few .
 Oxford, Cambridge, Cambridge and the £cole Normale Superieure remained off-limits to almost everyone . Despite the best intentions of an earlier generation of reformers, Oxford and Cambridge remained off limits to almost all .
 In 1949 there were 15,000 university students in Sweden, in Belgium 20,000 in the same year . In 1949, 15,500 university students were in Sweden . In Belgium, there were 20,500 students in 1949 .
 Europe is now on the cusp of mass secondary education . There would soon be irresistible pressure to expand higher education too . But with Europe now on a cusp, there would be irresistible demand for expansion .
 They had no space for expansion and their lecture halls, laboratories, libraries and residential buildings were incapable of accommodating thousands more young people . They had . no room for expansion .
 Despite being hundreds of years old in many cases, the universities of Europe had al no material resources of their own . Above all, and despite being hundreds . years old, Europe had . no material . resources of its own .
 If higher education in Europe was to respond in time to the ominous demographic bulge pushing up through the primary and secondary schools, the initiative would need to come from the center .
 By the time the first post-secondary cohort began to arrive, these new universities, however, were at least in place to meet the increased demand for places .
 Rather than open these new universities to a mass constituency, British educational planners chose to integrate them into the older, elite system .
 Students in the UK remained something of a privileged minority . The long-term implications were unquestionably socially regressive . Students are still something of the UK's privileged minority of students .
 For the fortunate few, the system worked very smoothly—and insulated them from almost all the problems faced by their peers elsewhere in Europe . But for the lucky few, it was very difficult to find a solution to their problems .
 For on the Continent, higher education has moved in a very different direction . For the first time in Europe, it has been in a different direction.
 Academic study in most continental universities was by ancient convention more than a little detached and unstructured . In any case, academic study in continental universities is more detached than usual . Academic study is more like to be more like an 'unstructured'
 Haughty and unapproachable professors offered formal lectures to students who felt little pressure to complete their degrees by a deadline . Being a student was as much a social rite of passage as a means to an education .
 Most central planners in Europe simply decreed the expansion of existing ones . Rather than construct new universities, most central planners just decreed expansion . Instead of constructing new universities in Europe, they simply expanded existing ones.
 At the same time they imposed no additional impediments or system of pre-selection . "They imposed no extra impediments," says former President Obama . "At least one of the most significant changes to the system of selection"
 In 1965 the 'Obviously this did not apply to small, elite academies like France’s £cole Polytechnique, or £coole Normale Superieure, which admitted their few students by a rigorous selective exam and then taught them very well indeed . On the
 Three universities alone were enrolling more than the total student population of Italy a mere eighteen years earlier . Many of their students would never graduate, many of them never graduate .
 In West Germany, there had been 108,000 students in 1950, and there were nearly 400,000 by the end of the Sixties . West Germany's traditional universities were already beginning to suffer from overcrowding .
 In France, by 1967, there were as many university students as there had been lyceens in 1956 . By 1967 there were more university students in France than in 1956, according to a French newspaper .
 All over Europe there were vastly more students than ever before before . The quality of their academic experience was deteriorating fast, says Simon Tisdall .
 Post-war government spending on education had everywhere risen very steeply . It had concentrated on the provision of primary and secondary schools, equipment and teachers .
 This was surely the right choice, and it was dictated by electoral politics, says David Cameron . This is surely the correct choice, says Cameron .
 Even by 1968 most young people in every European country were not students, especially if their parents were peasants, workers, unskilled or immigrants . At this juncture it is worth . recalling that even by 1968 . most young . people in . every European . country were . not students .
 Their opinions, and especially their politics, should not be inferred from those of their student contemporaries . Their opinions and politics should be taken to account for those of those of students .
 In other respects, young people shared what was already a distinctive—and common—culture . Young people shared a distinctive and common culture .
 Most young people in history have entered a world full of older people, where it is their seniors who occupy positions of influence and example . Young people enter a world of an older world, where their seniors are influential and influential .
 The gap separating a large, prosperous, pampered, self-confident and culturally autonomous generation from the unusually small, insecure, Depression-scarred and war-ravaged generation of its parents was greater than the conventional distance between age groups .
 In the mid-1960s only 44 percent of Italian university students graduated; these figures were to deteriorate still further in the course of the 1970s . At the very least, it seemed to many young people as though they had been born into a 2 .
 Popular music, cinema and television were full of young people and increasingly appealed to them as its audience and market . Popular music and cinema was increasingly popular with young people . It was also popular with women and minorities in the US and UK .
 By 1965 there were radio and television programs, magazines, shops, products and whole industries that existed exclusively for the young and depended upon their patronage . By 1965, radio and TV programs and magazines, magazines and shops, were all available for young .
 Many of the popular cultural forms of the Sixties age flowed with unprecedented ease across national boundaries . The 1963 Fete des Copains in Paris’s Place de la Nation was the founding event of Sixties youth culture in France .
 The presentation of these wares cut ostentatiously athwart conventional lines . But the presentation of this wares cuts out of traditional lines .
 The Beatles and their imitators took the rhythms of American blues guitarists and paired them with material drawn from the language and experience of the British working class . The most successful musicians of the time .
 This highly original combination then became the indigenous, trans-national culture of European youth . It became an original combination that became an integral part of Europe's culture .
 The content of popular music mattered quite a lot, but its form counted for more than that . The content matters a lot but the form counts for more .
 It was perhaps a peculiarity of the age that style could substitute so directly for substance . But perhaps it's perhaps a peculiarity that style can substitute for substance, he says .
 Popular music of the 1960s was insubordinate in tone in tone, in the manner of its performance . Its lyrics were frequently anodyne and anyway at best half-understood by foreign audiences .
 In Austria, to perform or listen to British or American pop music was to cock a snoot at one’s shocked parents, the generation of Hitler . In the Communist bloc ‘the Sixties’ as pop culture were of necessity experienced at second-hand . Pop culture
 The other iconic rock band of the Sixties, the Rolling Stones, was more conventionally bohemian in its subject matter, as befitted its middle-class London background .
 If much of the mainstream musical culture of the Sixties seemed to be about sex, it was largely a matter of style . This, too, was largely an issue of style, as was style .
 More young people lived away from their parents, and at a younger age than hitherto, than hitherto . More people now live away from parents than previously .
 Public displays of flesh and representations of unconstrained sexual abandon on film and in literature became more common in north-west Europe .
 For all these reasons, the older generation was convinced that sexual restraints had completely collapsed, and it pleased their children to nourish the nightmare .
 In fact, the ‘sexual revolution’ of the Sixties was almost certainly a mirage for the overwhelming majority of people, young and old alike . In fact the 'sexual revolution' of the 1960s was a 'mirage'
 So far, we can know, the sexual interests and practices of most young Europeans did not change nearly as rapidly or as radically as contemporaries liked to claim . So far as we know, we have no idea what sexual practices of young Europeans were at the time .
 On the evidence of contemporary surveys, even the sex lives of students were not very different from those of earlier generations .
 The liberated sexual style of the Sixties was typically contrasted with the Fifties, depicted as an age of moral rectitude and constipated emotional restraint . The liberated Sixties were depicted as the age of morality and restraint .
 When compared with the 1920s, or the European fin-de-siecle, the ‘Swinging Sixties’ were quite tame . But when compared with 1920s or the demi-monde of 1860s Paris, the 'Sixties' were tame .
 The generation of the Sixties placed unusual insistence upon looking different . In keeping with the emphasis upon style, the generation of Sixties insisted on style .
 Clothing, hair, make-up and what were still called ‘fashion accessories’ became vital generational and political identification tags . ‘Fashions’ are still a form of identity tags .
 European taste in clothing, music, photography, modeling, advertising and even mass-market magazines all took their cues from there . European taste took its cues from European fashion, music and fashion magazines .
 In view of the already-established British reputation for drab design and shoddy construction this was an unlikely development . But it proved short-lived .
 Time magazine dubbed it 'Swinging London' in April 1966 . 'The false dawn of the era' was the dawn of 'swinging London', Time magazine said in 1966 .
 Carnaby Street is a long-time haunt of male homosexuals now recycled as the epicentre of ‘mod’ fashion for homosexuals and heterosexuals alike . Most of them were imitations of clothing stores that had sprung up along the street .
 In Paris the clothing boutique ‘New Man’ opened in the rue de l’Ancienne Comedie on April 13th 1965 . The clothing boutique was the first French intimation of the sartorial revolution .
 For most of the Sixties it was still forbidden in many parts of Western and Eastern Europe alike to dispense information about contraception . Within 5 years of the 1960s, contraception was legalised in Europe .
 The Carnaby Street style was cloned all across Western Europe (though less markedly in Italy than elsewhere) It emphasized colorful, contoured outfits tending to the androgynous and mal-adapted to anyone over thirty .
 Red corduroy pants and fitted black shirts from ‘New Man’ became the staple uniform of Parisian street demonstrators for the next three years . Tight red corduroys were widely copied everywhere .
 Like everything else about the Sixties they were made by men, for men . But young women could wear them too and increasingly did so . The Sixties were made for men, but women could also wear them .
 In a second stage of the sartorial transition, the cheerful, primary colors of ‘mod gear’ were displaced by more ‘serious’ outer garments, reflecting a similar shift in music .
 The more self-consciously political fashion never really caught on in Britain, but by the end of the decade it was quasi-official uniform for German and Italian radicals and their student followers .
 Overlapping with both sets of fashions were the gypsy-like drapes of the hippies . The hippies wore the same drape as their hippies in 1960s .
 In contrast to the ‘Carnaby Street’ and ‘Street-fighting Man’ looks, which were indigenously European in origin, the hippie look was an American import . ‘Hippie’ in its nonwestern, ‘counter-
 Sales of sharply cut fashions in the mid-sixties were soon working hard to adapt their stock accordingly . Its commercial utility was obvious, and many of the outlets that had sprung up to service the demand for skin-tight, sharply cut clothing soon adapted .
 For a little while longer, headgear remained a reliable traditional indicator of regional origin and social class . Headgear was a reliable indicator of social class and regional origin .
 At most it washed up on the shores of Great Britain and Holland, leaving behind some sedimentary evidence in the form of a more developed drug culture than elsewhere .
 The frivolous side of the Sixties should not be dismissed as mere froth and show, says author . Fashion, pop culture, sex, sex shouldn't be dismissed, he says .
 It was a new generation’s way of breaking with the age of the grandpas—the gerontocracy (Adenauer, De Gaulle, Macmillan—and Khrushchev) still running the continent's affairs .
 The attention-catching, poseur aspects of the Sixties will forever be associated with the era's narcissistic self-indulgence . But the poseur elements of the 1960s still ring false when taken all at once, the author says .
 In their day, and to their constituency, they seemed new and fresh . But in their day - and to the constituency - they seemed fresh and fresh. But they were not .
 Even the cold, harsh sheen of contemporary art, or the cynical films of the later Sixties, appeared refreshing and authentic after the cozy bourgeois artifice of the recent past . The film series is a classic of American cinema, with some of the world's most famous films .
 The solipsistic conceit of the age was always an illusion, and it has not worn well . The young would change the world by ‘doing their own thing’, ‘letting it all hang out’ and ‘making love, not war’
 But it was not the only illusion of the time, and by no means the most foolish . It was not only illusion, but it was also illusion of time .
 In its newly fashionable usage, ‘Theory’ meant something quite different . In its new usage, 'Theory' means something different .
 In an age of vastly expanded universities, with periodicals, journals and lecturers urgently seeking copy’, there emerged a market for ‘theories’ of every kind—fuelled not by improved intellectual supply but by insatiable consumer demand .
 At the forefront of the theory revolution were the academic disciplines of History and the softer social sciences . The theory revolution was at the heart of the Theory Revolution .
 It was typically from a non-dogmatic but unmistakably leftleaning position . But it was self-consciously interpretive . It was selfconsciously interpreted .
 History was informed by social theory, and by an insistence upon the importance of class, particularly the lower classes . Here was history informed by theory and by insistence upon class, especially the lower class .
 The point was not just to narrate or explain a given historical moment; the point was to reveal its deeper meaning . The point of the story is to reveal the deeper meaning of a historical moment, the author says .
 Historical writing in this vein seemed to bridge the gap between past and present, between scholarly speculation and contemporary engagement . A new generation of students read it in this light, says historian .
 Other disciplines fared better, or worse, depending on one’s point of view . Other disciplines fare better .
 Cultural anthropologists proposed a comprehensive new explanation for variations and differences across societies . Borrowing from an earlier vein of speculation in the field of linguistics, cultural anthropologists—led by Claude LeviStrauss—proposed an explanation .
 What counted was not surface social practices or cultural symptoms, but the inner essences, the deep structures of human affairs . What counted mattered was the inner essence of the human affairs, the author says . The world's greatest power is the power of the mind, he says .
 As a way of sorting human experience it bore a family resemblance to the Annales school of history . Fernand Braudel built his reputation on the study of the longue duree, a bird’s-eye view of history describing slowly shifting geographical and social structures across long
 There was no sense in which structuralism could ever be demonstrated to be wrong . The iconoclastic ambition of its assertions guaranteed it a wide audience . It was thus not subject to empirical testing or disproof .
 The best-known practitioners were those who combined scholarly audacity with a natural talent for self-promotion . They entered the intellectual limelight just as television was becoming a mass medium .
 Michel Foucault might have been a star of the Parisian lecture circuit, like Henri Bergson fifty years earlier . In an earlier age he was a drawing-room favourite, like Bergson .
 Foucault himself foreswore the label ‘structuralist’, much as Albert Camus always insisted he had never been an ‘existentialist” and didn’t really know what that was . Camus insisted he never been 'existentialists
 Foucault at least would have been constrained to concede, it didn’t really matter what he thought . But as he would have said, it was not really mattered what he said .
 'structuralists' were people who minimized or even denied the role of individuals and individual initiative in human affairs . More importantly, ‘structuralist’s’ are people who minimize or even deny the role .
 The idea that everything is ‘structured’ left something vital unexplained . But for all its protean applications, the idea of 'structured' left something unexplained .
 Fernand Braudel, or Claude Levi-Strauss, or even Michel Foucault, the goal was to uncover the deep workings of a cultural system . For many of the world's leading thinkers, it was uncovering the workings of the system .
 This might or might not be a subversive scholarly impulse, but it does gloss over or minimize change and transition . Braudel’s work glosses over or minimizes change or transition .
 Even by the lax standards of Sixties-era Paris he remained remarkably ignorant of contemporary developments in medicine, biology and neurology, with no discernible harm to his practice .
 The intellectual affinities and political obsessions of the Sixties in Europe only make sense in the light of this continuing fascination with Marx and Marxism . In the 1960s, Europe was fascinated by Marxism and Marxism .
 Sartre’s unshaken faith was not universally shared, but there was general agreement across the political spectrum that anyone wishing to understand the world must take Marxism and its political legacy very seriously .
 Raymond Aron, Sartre’s contemporary, erstwhile friend and intellectual nemesis, was a lifelong anti-Communist . Aron was a long-time anti-communist . Sartrre was a friend of Aron's and intellectual rival .
 Between 1956 and 1968 Marxism in Europe lived in a state of suspended animation . Between 1956- 1968 Marxism lived—and, as it were, thrived—in a suspended animation.
 Stalinist Communism was in disgrace, thanks to the revelations and events of 1956 . The events of that year led to the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The Communist parties of the West were either politically irrelevant (in Scandinavia, Britain, West Germany and the Low Countries) or in slow but unmistakable decline . Or else, as in the Italian case, they are trying to distance themselves from their Muscovite inheritance .
 Official Marxism, as incarnated in the history and teachings of Leninist parties, was largely discredited . Official Marxism is largely discredited, especially in the territories over which it continued to rule .
 Even those who chose to vote Communist evinced little interest in the subject . Even those in the West who chose not to vote in the election were indifferent .
 At the same time there was widespread intellectual and academic interest in those parts of the Marxist inheritance that could be distinguished from the Soviet version and salvaged from its moral shipwreck .
 Well before 1914 there were already tiny political parties claiming the True Inheritance . Ever since the Founder’s death, there had always been Marxist and marxisant sects .
 Most late-nineteenth-century Socialist move10 The SPGB continues to the time of writing .
 Modern Marxist disputes have their roots in the Leninist schism that was to follow . Leninism was the party that split from the Communist Party in 1903 .
 It was the factional struggles of the early Soviet years that gave rise to the most enduring Marxist ‘heresy’ that of Trotsky and his followers . The factional struggle of the Soviet years helped give rise to Trotsky and followers .
 A quarter century after Trotsky’s death in Mexico at the hands of a Stalinist assassin, Trotskyist parties could be found in every European state that did not explicitly ban them . The Trotskyist party was banned in all of Europe in the 1930s and 1940s .
 They were typically small and led, in the image of their eponymous founder, by a charismatic, authoritarian chief who dictated doctrine and tactics . They were often small and often small, with an authoritarian chief .
 To the outsider, Trotskyist parties appeared curiously indistinguishable from Communists . They shared a similar allegiance to Lenin and were separated only by the bloody history of Stalin and Trotsky .
 Stalinism had been a political success, whereas Trotskyist record was one of unblemished failure . Trotskyists continued to speak of the 'permanent revolution' and to accuse official Communists of having aborted the workers’ revolution by confining it to a single country .
 Trotsky’s latter-day followers found success appealing . It was that very failure, of course, which Trotsky's followers found so appealing . Trotsky's failure, however, was that failure, he says .
 The Soviet revolution had been hi-jacked by a bureaucratic reaction analogous to the Thermidorian coup that put paid to the Jacobins in 1794 . The past might look grim, but their analysis of what had gone wrong would assure them success in the years ahead .
 Trotsky played a crucial role in the first years of the Soviet regime and bore some responsibility for its deviations . Yet even Trotsky carried the whiff of power— he had, after all, played some of the .
 To a new and politically innocent generation, the truly appealing failures were European Communism’s lost leaders, the men and women who never had a chance to exercise any political responsibilities at all . The most appealing failures of European Communism were those of the lost leaders .
 In the course of the 1960s all three were copiously re-published, or published for the first time, in many languages . In the past few years all three have been re-publicised in many different languages .
 The exhumation of the writings of Luxemburg, Lukacs, Gramsci and other forgotten early-twentieth century Marxists 11 was accompanied by the rediscovery of Marx himself . Marx himself.
 The unearthing of a new and ostensibly very different Marx was crucial to the attraction of Marxism in these years . Indeed, it was crucial for Marx to find a new, ostensibly different Marx, to find Marx .
 Marx could not be held directly responsible for the uses to which his mature writings had been put . But he was irrevocably associated with them . Even if this Marx was not directly responsible, he was responsible for their use .
 Whether in the service of Communism or Social Democracy, they were of the old Left . Whether they were Communists or Social Democrats they were old Lefters, they worked for the past .
 Karl Marx was a young German philosopher steeped in Hegelian historicism and the Romantic dream of ultimate Freedom . The new Left, as it was starting to call itself by 1965, sought out new texts, and found them in the writings of the young Marx .
 Marx chose not to publish some of his writings in the aftermath of the failed revolutions of 1848 . Marx had turned decisively away from them and towards the study of political economy and politics with which he was henceforth to be associated .
 Many of the writings of the early Marx writings were not widely known even to scholars . The writings of Marx were widely known to many even before scholars .
 When they were first published in full, under the auspices of the MarxEngels Institute in Moscow, in 1932, they attracted little attention .
 The Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts and The German Ideology . The revival of interest in them came thirty years after they were published .
 Suddenly it was possible to be a Marxist while jettisoning the heavy, soiled baggage of the traditional Western Left . Suddenly it is possible to have a Marxist view of the world's Left .
 To an older generation of Marx scholars, and to the established Marxist parties, this perverse insistence upon the very writings that Marx himself had chosen not to publish seemed deeply unserious . Marx himself chose not to have published the writings .
 Only the later writings, he insisted, were scientific and thus properly Marxist . Only later writings were scientific, he said .
 Communist Marxists foresaw how easily this new, humanist Marx could be adapted to contemporary tastes and fashions . What Communists and other conservative Marxists rightly foresaw was how easily he could adapt to modern tastes .
 The complaints of an early-nineteenth-century Romantic like Marx against capitalist modernity and the dehumanizing impact of industrial society were well adapted to contemporary protests against the ‘repressive tolerance’ of postindustrial Europe .
 The prosperous, liberal West’s apparently infinite flexibility, its sponge-like capacity to absorb passions and differences, infuriated critics . Critics say the West's flexibility has infuriated its critics . But the West has a long history of being tolerant and tolerant, tolerant .
 The repression that was missing on the streets must perforce have gone somewhere, it had moved into people’s very souls . The repression was missing in the streets, but it must have moved into the very souls of people, the writer says .
 Herbert Marcuse, a Weimar-era intellectual who had ended up in Southern California, offered a helpful conflation of all these strands of thought . Marcuse: "Herbert Marcuse's old epistemology" is a useful conflation .
 Western consumer society no longer rests upon the exploitation of a class of property-less proletarians, he said . Western consumers no longer rely on property-free people, he added .
 It diverted human energy away from the search for fulfillment and into the consumption of goods and illusions . Instead it diverted energy from search for fulfilment to consumption of things and illusions, it said .
 Real needs are displaced by false ones, whose fulfillment is the purpose of a consumer-centered culture . Real needs—sexual, social, civic, social --are displaced from false ones . "Real needs" are displaced from real ones, says the author .
 The emphasis upon sexual fulfillment as a radical goal was quite offensive to an older generation of Left-wingers . The emphasis on sexual satisfaction as a leftist goal was offensive to older generations of Leftists .
 Free love in a free society was not a new idea, some early nineteenth-century Socialist sects had espoused it . The mainstream tradition of European radicalism was one of moral and domestic rectitude . The first years of the Soviet Union had been distinctly morally relaxed .
 But however discomfiting, the conflation of sex and politics presented no real threat—indeed, as more than one Communist intellectual took pains to point out, the new emphasis on private desires over collective struggles was objectively reactionary .
 The truly subversive implications of the New Left’s adaptation of Marx lay elsewhere . The New Left's adaptation of the Marx novel was not to be realized .
 They were not even bothered by the anti-authoritarian aesthetic of a younger generation, with its demands for self-government in the bedroom, the lecture hall and the shop floor . All that they perhaps imprudently dismissed as a passing disturbance in the natural order of things .
 Young radicals identified Marxist theory with revolutionary practices in exotic lands, where none of the established categories and authorities seemed to apply . What caused far deeper offence was the emerging tendency of young radicals to identify Marxist theory and revolutionary practices .
 This close identification of Socialism with urban labor was more than just an elective affinity . The Socialist Party was linked to urban labor in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The ideological Left was the distinguishing mark of the ideological Left, separating it from well-intentioned liberal or Catholic social reformers . It was a distinguishing mark separating them from the well intentioned .
 The majority of the working population had never been Socialist or Communist . Except in Scandinavia, the majority of working population was never Communist . Its allegiances were spread across the political spectrum .
 Traditional Left-wing parties were heavily dependent on the votes of the working class and thus identified closely with it . Traditional Left parties still identify closely with the working-class and thus identify closely .
 In the developed countries of Western Europe miners, steelworkers, shipbuilders, metalworkers, textile workers, and manual workers of every sort were retiring in large numbers .
 In the coming age of the service industry their place was being taken by a very different sort of working population . The service industry is being replaced by a new kind of workforce .
 It is hard to know whether such slogans were witty, innocent or merely cynical . It's hard to be sure, in retrospect, whether they were witty or just cynical .
 The proletariat was no longer the only available vehicle of radical social transformation . But for anyone not wedded to this version of European history, the proletariat is no longer a vehicle of social change .
 ‘students’ and even simply the young, these constituted a far larger and more readily mobilized constituency for revolutionary hopes than the staid and satisfied working masses of the prosperous West . Together with 'students' and even students, the young . These constituted a . larger and
 In the wake of 1956, young west European radicals turned away from the dispiriting Communist record in Europe’s east and looked for inspiration .
 This new taste for the exotic was fuelled by decolonization and the aspirations of national liberation movements, in part by the projection on to others of Europe’s own lost illusions . This is fuelled by the rise of the Arab Spring in Europe, but also by the loss of Europe
 The revolutions in Cuba and China especially were invested with all the qualities and achievements so disappointingly lacking in Europe . The revolution in China and Cuba was invested with the qualities so disappointingly lacking from Europe .
 There was, of course, no shortage of violence just a few hours to the east, in the Soviet Union and its satellites . There was also plenty of violence in Russia and its Soviet Union .
 Tocqueville had long ago remarked upon its attractions for the pre-revolutionary intelligentsia of eighteenth-century France, and it had once played a part in the appeal of the Soviet Revolution itself . This self-abnegating admiration for alien models was not new in
 For their conservative elders, this casual invocation of extraneous models illustrated the undisciplined ease with which the venerable revolutionary syntax of old Europe was unraveling into an ideological Babel . For their conservatives, it was an easy way to express their disdain for the old-fashioned European language .
 Italian students proposed that universities were epicenters of knowledge production and students were thus the new working class . Students were stretching the terms of Marxist exchange to the limit, they say .
 At least they had dialectical precedent on their side and were playing within the accepted rules . But at least they were playing in accordance with the rules .
 The boys and girls of the Sixties just weren’t serious. As their critics had insisted from the outset, the boys  just weren't serious. The boys  of the 1960s were serious .
 The ‘Second 5’ world of Soviet Communism was stable only in appearance, and even then not for long, as we shall see . The 'Second 5 world' was stable in appearance only in . appearance, but even then . not even in appearance . As we see,
 Leading power of the West, shaken by assassinations and race riots, was embarking on a full-scale war in Vietnam . Vietnam was a time when the West was beginning a war in the country .
 American defense expenditure rose steadily through the mid-sixties, peaking in 1968 . The U.S. defense budget rose steadily in the mid-'60s .
 It says something about the peculiar circumstances of the Sixties, and the social background of the most prominent public activists, that many of the disputes and demands of the time were constructed around a political agenda and not an economic one .
 There was an economic dimension to the discontents of the hour, even if many of the participants were still oblivious to it . But there was also a social dimension, even though many of them were oblivious to the fact .
 A cycle of labor disputes throughout Western Europe in the early sixties hinted at troubles ahead . The prosperity of the post-war decades had not yet run its course and unemployment in Western Europe was at a historic low .
 France’s national Radio and Television organization, the ORTF, and the Commissariat a VEnergie Atomique, seethed with resentful technical staff, from journalists to engineers . The ORTF and VEV Atomique have taken just two prominent cases,
 Traditional styles of authority, discipline and address have failed to keep pace with the rapid social and cultural transformations of the past decade . Traditional styles had failed to cope with rapid social, cultural transformations, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Factories and offices were run from the top down with no input from below . Factories, offices and factories were run by the top from the bottom down .
 These were issues that had not featured prominently in European industrial conflicts since the Popular Front occupations of 1936 . Industrial conflicts had not been a feature of European industrial conflict since 1936 .
 Shop-floor militants voiced similar complaints about overcrowded, poorly managed universities . But they overlapped readily enough with the rhetoric of the student radicals .
 The sense of exclusion, from decision-making and thus from power, reflected another dimension of the Sixties whose implications were not fully appreciated at the time . The exclusion of people from power reflects another dimension that wasn't fully appreciated until the 1960s .
 Communist and Socialists on the Left, centrists and Gaullist on the Right. Communist and Socialist parties on both sides of the aisle . Gaullists and centrists on both left and right .
 By tacit agreement across the spectrum, smaller parties and fringe groups were forced to merge with one of the four big units or else be squeezed out of mainstream politics . Smaller parties were forced either to merge or be squeezed from mainstream politics.
 For different reasons, the same thing was happening in Italy and Germany . The same thing happened in Italy, Germany and Italy, says the BBC .
 From 1963, a broad Center-Left coalition in Italy occupied most of the national political space, with only Communist and ex-Fascist parties excluded . From 1963 to 1974, a Center-left coalition occupied most political space .
 The Federal Republic of Germany was governed from 1966 by a ‘Grand Coalition’ of Christian Democrats and Social Democrats . Together with the Free Democrats, the coalition monopolized the Bundestag in 1966 .
 Radical opposition was pushed not just to the fringes but out of parliament altogether . Radical opposition in western Europe has been pushed to the fringe of parliament . These arrangements ensured political stability and continuity .
 The best-known instance of this, in France during the spring of 1968, was also the shortest-lived . Best-known example of this was also in 1968, when it was in France .
 It owes its prominence more to shock value, and to the special symbolism of insurgency in the streets of Paris , than to any enduring effects . The film is a French film, based in Paris, that was shot by a French police officer .
 The student dormitories at Nanterre had for some time been home to a floating population of legitimate students, 'clandestine' radicals and a small number of drug-sellers and users .
 There was also considerable nocturnal movement between the male and female dormitories, despite strict official prohibitions .
 The academic administration at Nanterre had been reluctant to provoke trouble by enforcing the rules . But in January 1968 they expelled one ‘squatter’ and threatened disciplinary measures against a legitimate student . Daniel Cohn-Bendit, for insulting a visiting government minister, was a legitimate
 Following the arrest of student radicals who attacked the American Express building in central Paris, a Movement was formed, with Cohn-Bendit among its leaders . Further demonstrations followed, and on March 22nd, the movement was formed . The Movement is a Movement of French Students .
 The Nanterre campus was closed down following further student clashes with police . The Movement—and the action— shifted to the venerable university buildings in and around the Sorbonne, in Paris .
 It is worth insisting upon the parochial and distinctly self-regarding issues that sparked the May Events, lest the ideologically charged language and ambitious programs of the following weeks mislead us .
 The student occupation of the Sorbonne and subsequent street barricades and clashes with the police, notably on the nights of May loth-nth and May 24th-25th, were led by the (Trotskyist) Jeunesse Communiste Revolutionnaire .
 Marxist rhetoric masked an essentially anarchist spirit whose immediate objective was the removal and humiliation of authority . But the accompanying Marxist rhetoric, while familiar enough, masked an anarchist spirit .
 It had all the symbolism of a traditional M. This was a longstanding source of friction. It was a long-standing source of tension.
 In January 1966, after months of dispute at a student dormitory complex in Antony, in southern Paris, a newly appointed director had introduced what was then a radical regime . The new regime was introduced in January 1966 .
 Girls and boys over twenty one could henceforth entertain members of the opposite sex in their dormitory rooms . Girls over twenty-one could now entertain in their rooms .
 Those under twenty one could do so with written permission from their parents . Those under 20 one could use the photos without permission from parents .
 The Minister suggested that if Cohn-Bendit had sexual problems he should jump in the splendid new swimming pool . The Minister, rising to the provocation, suggested that .
 It was their own parents, aunts and grandmothers who looked down upon them from the windows of comfortable bourgeois apartment buildings as they lined up in the streets to challenge the armed power of the French state . It was the parents of those who lined up against them from their own bourgeois apartment
 Georges Pompidou, the Gaullist Prime Minister of France, rapidly took the measure of the troubles . The Gaullists Prime Minister quickly took the measures of his troubles .
 After the initial confrontations he withdrew the police, despite criticism from within his own party and government, leaving the students in de facto control of their university and the surrounding quartier .
 Pompidou—and his President, De Gaulle, were embarrassed by the well-publicized activities of the students . The students' activities were well publicized .
 They did not feel threatened by them, except briefly when they were taken by surprise, they said . But, except very briefly, they didn't feel threatened, they did well .
 When the time came the police, especially the riot police, could be counted on to restore order . The riot police were recruited from the sons of poor provincial peasants and never reluctant to crack the heads of privileged Parisians .
 The student riots and occupations had set the spark to a nationwide series of strikes and workplace occupations that brought France to a near-standstill by the end of May . France had been at a near standstill by May 31 .
 Some of the first protests were directed at their political chiefs for censoring coverage of the student movement . The protests were aimed at the excessive brutality of some riot police officers .
 The general strike spread through the aircraft manufacturing plants of Toulouse and the electricity and petro-chemical industries and, most ominously, to the huge Renault factories on the edge of Paris itself . It became clear that something more than a few thousand agitated students was at stake .
 The strikes, sit-ins, office occupations and office occupations were the greatest movement of social protest in modern France, far more extensive than those of June 1936 . June 1936 was the greatest social protest movement of modern France .
 Even in retrospect it is difficult to say with confidence exactly what they were about . Even in . retrospect it was difficult to . say . Exactly what was going on when they were there .
 The millions of men and women who had stopped work had one thing at least in common with the students . The millions stopped work at the end of the day had a lot of common with them .
 Whatever their particular local grievances, they were above all frustrated with their conditions of existence . Whatever their grievances, the locals were frustrated with them .
 They did not so much want to get a better deal at work as to change something about their way of life, they did not want to change how they lived, they wanted to make a difference .
 Some conservative commentators concluded that the wave of protest was driven not by discontent but by simple boredom . France was prosperous and secure and some concluded that some French citizens were not bored .
 There was genuine frustration, not only in factories like those of Renault where working conditions had long been unsatisfactory, but everywhere . There were genuine frustration not only at Renault, but at other factories across the world .
 The Fifth Republic had accentuated the longstanding French habit of concentrating power in one place and a handful of institutions . French President Nicolas Sarkozy was elected in 2007 .
 Even some of its own members (and especially their children) found it stifling . Even some members of the family were stifled by the stifling environment .
 The ageing De Gaulle himself failed, for the first time since 1958, to understand the drift of events . The ageing de Gaulle failed to understand his role in France .
 His initial response had been to make an ineffective televised speech and then to disappear from sight . He had made ineffective televised speeches and then disappeared from sight. He has been accused of being too secretive about his actions .
 He was defeated in a referendum on decentralizing government and decision-making in France . He resigned, retired and retreated to his country home, to die there a few months later .
 Pompidou, meanwhile, had proven right to wait out the student demonstrations . The French president was right to delay the student protests .
 De Gaulle and Pompidou were quick to take advantage of the Left’s mistakes . The French President was quick to use the Left's mistakes .
 At the end of May De Gaulle announced a snap election, calling upon the French to choose between legitimate government and revolutionary anarchy . The French were forced to choose whether legitimate government or revolutionary anarchy, according to the former French president .
 To kick off its election campaign the Right staged a huge counterdemonstration . The Right staged an anti-immigration rally in London .
 Massed crowds marched down the Champs Elysees on May 30th gave the lie to the Left’s assertion that the authorities had lost control . Far larger even than the student manifestations of two weeks before, the massed crowds were far larger than those two weeks earlier .
 The police were given instructions to re-occupy university buildings, factories and offices . The police have been told to reoccupy buildings and factories .
 In the ensuing parliamentary elections, the Gaullist parties won a crushing victory, l6 To visit the French Army in Germany, as it transpired, and assure himself of its loyalty .
 The May Events in France had a psychological impact out of all proportion to their true significance . The May events had an impact on the psychological level of the events .
 The revolution was apparently unfolding in real time and before an international television audience . Here was a revolution apparently unfolding before the international audience . It was the first time a revolution had taken place in the world .
 Its leaders were marvelously telegenic; attractive and articulate young men leading the youth of France through the historical boulevards of Left Bank Paris .
 Their demands for a more democratic academic environment, an end to moral censorship, or simply a nicer world . Their demands were accessible and, despite the clenched fists and revolutionary rhetoric, quite unthreatening .
 The May Events in France were curiously peaceful by the standards of revolutionary turbulence elsewhere, or in France’s own past . Above all, the May events in France was curiously peaceful . The May 18th and 19th of the French Revolution was a peaceful period .
 A number of students and policemen were hospitalized following the 'Night of the Barricades' on May 24th . There was quite a lot of violence to property, and a number of people were hospitalized .
 The radicals of 1968 mimicked to the point of caricature the style and the props of past revolutions . They were, after all, performing on the same stage. They were mimicking past revolutions. The radicals mimicked the style of past revolutionaries .
 The French ‘psychodrama’ of 1968 entered popular mythology almost immediately as an object of nostalgia, a stylized struggle in which the forces of Life and Energy and Freedom were ranged against the . numbing, gray dullness of the men of the past .
 Alain Krivine, the charismatic graduate leader of the Trotskyist students is today, forty years on, the sexagenarian leader of France’s oldest Trotskyist party . Alain was a charismatic student leader in the 1970s .
 Best-selling French books on the subject a generation later are not serious works of historical analysis, much less the earnest doctrinal tracts of the time, but collections of contemporary graffiti and slogans . But it is symptomatic of the fundamentally apolitical mood of May 1968 that the best-selling
 There were no women among the student leaders . Culled from the walls, noticel8 was not the only female student leader .
 In contemporary photographs and newsreels girls can be seen prominently perched on the shoulders of their boyfriends, but they were at best the auxiliary foot soldiers of the student army .
 The youth revolt of 1968 talked a lot about sex, but was quite unconcerned with inequalities of gender . The revolt of the 1960s was a youth revolt that was unconcerned about inequalities .
 What the slogan writers of May 1968 never do is invite their readers to do anyone serious harm . The slogan writers never do this, they say, is invite your readers to harm anyone .
 Even the attacks on De Gaulle treat him as a superannuated impediment rather than as a political foe .
 This was to be a victimless revolution, which in the end meant that it was no sort of revolution at all . The revolution was meant to be victimless, but it was not a revolution, it was to a 'victimless revolution' This was the end of the revolution
 The situation was very different in Italy, despite superficial similarities in the rhetoric of the student movements . The situation in Italy is very different, says the historian .
 In the first place, the social background to Italy’s conflicts was quite distinctive. In the second place, it was a social background . In the third place, Italy's conflicts were quite distinctive, says historian .
 The extensive migration from south to north in the first half of the decade had generated a demand for transport, services, education and above all housing that the governments of the country had never managed to address .
 The Italian ‘economic miracle’ arrived later than elsewhere, and the transition out of an agrarian society had been more abrupt than elsewhere . The Italian 'economic miracle' arrived later .
 The disruptions of first-generation industrialization overlapped and collided with the discontents of modernity . As a consequence, the disruptions of industrialization and modernity overlapped, they collided with modernity.
 Unskilled and semi-skilled workers were never absorbed into the established unions of skilled male workers in the industrialized north . Many of them women, many of them from the south, never joined the union of skilled men .
 Traditional worker/employer tensions are now multiplied by disputes between skilled and unskilled, unionized and unorganized workers . Traditional tensions were now multiplying by disputes with skilled and unkilled workers .
 The better-paid, better-protected, skilled employees in the factories of FIAT or the Pirelli Rubber Company demanded a greater say in management decisions . FIAT employees demanded greater say over shift hours, wage differentials and disciplinary measures .
 Their main objection was to exhausting piece rates, the unrelenting pace of mechanized mass production lines, and unsafe working conditions . They were opposed to the mechanization of mass production .
 Italy’s post-war economy was transformed by hundreds of small engineering, textile and chemical firms, most of whose employees had no legal or institutional recourse against their bosses’ demands . Most of these firms were small engineering and textile firms whose employees were not able to challenge their bosses
 These were not issues that the traditional parties and unions of the Left were equipped to address. These were issues that were not addressed by traditional parties, unions, unions .
 The main concern at the time was the dilution of the old labor institutions by this new and undisciplined workforce . On the contrary, their main concern was that this new workforce would dilution the old institutions .
 Dissident Communists, academic theoreticians of worker autonomy, and spokesmen for student organizations were quicker to identify new sources of discontent at the industrial workplace and absorb them into their projects . Their leaders were quick to identify the new sources .
 First-generation students faced conditions of life and work that were deeply unsatisfactory . There, too, a new and unorganized workforce (the massive influx of first-generation college students) faced conditions, too .
 There, too, an old elite exercised untrammeled decisionmaking power over the student masses, imposing workload, tests, grades and penalties at will at will .
 Administrators and established unions shared a vested, ‘objective’ interest in the status quo, says author . From this perspective, administrators and unions in schools and universities share a vested interest in status quo .
 Italy’s student population was drawn overwhelmingly from the urban middle class . Urban middle class represented an even greater threat to power and authority than the traditional forces of the proletariat . The fact that Italy's student population . was no impediment to such reasoning .
 In the thinking of the New Left it was not the social origin of a group that counted, but rather its capacity to disrupt the institutions and structures of authority . The New Left thought that social origin was not a social origin, but the ability to disrupt authority .
 Italian student organizers’ interest in the reform of academic institutions was always secondary to their identification with the workers’ movement, as the names of their organizations —Avanguardia Operaia or Potere Operaio (‘Workers’ Vanguard’) — suggest . Unlike
 The strike movement of 1969 was the largest in Italian history, and had a mobilizing and politicizing impact upon young Italian radicals out of all proportion to France’s brief, month-long protests of the previous year . In 1969, the strike movement was largest in Italy's history
 The ‘hot autumn’ of that year, with its wildcat strikes and spontaneous occupations by small groups of workers demanding a say in the way factories were run, led a generation of Italian student theorists and their followers to conclude that their rejection of the ‘bourgeois state
 Workers’ autonomy, as tactic and as objective, was the path of the future . Workers' autonomy—as tactic and objective -- was the future, the author says . The author of the book, "Workers' autonomy, is the future," he says .
 Not only were reforms in schools and factories alike, they were undesirable . But they were not only were . They were undesirable, but also undesirable .
 Just why 'unofficial' Italian Marxists should have taken this turn remains a matter of debate . Just why ‘unofficial’ Italians should have decided to take this turn?
 This might account for the disaffection of the extraparliamentary Left, it cannot fully explain their turn to violence . But while this might explain their disaffect, it does not fully explain why they turned violent .
 The putatively Maoist combination of revolutionary romanticism and workerist dogma was incarnated in the journal Lotta Continua (‘Continuous Struggle’)—whose name was often the case .
 Lotta Continua first appeared in the autumn of 1969, by which time the turn to violence was well under way . It was the start of the '60s, when the violence was rife .
 For anyone with an adult memory of the recent Italian past, this turn to violence could only end badly . Anyone with a memory of Italy's recent past could only be surprised by the violence .
 French students had played with the idea that public authority might prove vulnerable to disruption from below . But Italy’s radicals had good reason to believe that they might actually succeed in rending the fabric of the post-Fascist Republic—and they were keen to try .
 On April 24th 1969, bombs were planted at the Milan Trade Fair and the central railway station . Bombings were planted in the city centre and at the Trade Fair .
 The Agricultural Bank on the Piazza Fontana in Milan was blown up . Eight months later, after the Pirelli conflicts had been settled and the strike movement had ended, the Agricultural Bank in Milan blew up .
 The 'strategy of tension' that underlay the lead years of the Seventies had begun . The ‘strategy . of tension’ that underlined the . ‘Strategy of tensions’ had begun. ‘The strategy of tension was begun. The �
 Italian radicals in the Sixties could be accused of having forgotten their country’s recent past . Italian radicals were accused of forgetting their country's recent past.
 Until 1961, a post-war generation had been raised to see Nazism as responsible for war and defeat . But its truly awful aspects were consistently downplayed .
 The trial that year in lerusalem of Adolf Eichmann, followed from 1963 to 1965 by the so-called ‘Auschwitz trials’ in Frankfurt, belatedly brought to German public attention of the evils of the Nazi regime .
 In 1967, Alexander and Margarete Mitscherlich published their hugely influential study of Die Unfdhigkeit zu trauen . They argued that official recognition of Nazi evil had never been accompanied by genuine individual recognition of responsibility .
 Gunter Grass, Martin Walser, Hans-Magnus Enzensberger, Jurgen Habermas, Rolf Hochhuth, Edgar Reitz, all born between 1927 and 1932 . Their work focused increasingly upon Nazism and the failure to come to terms with
 A younger cohort of intellectuals, born during or just after World War Two, took a harsher stance . But a younger cohort, born in or after the war, took harsher stance.
 They saw all Germany’s faults through the prism of the failings not so much of Nazism as of the Bonn Republic . Lacking direct knowledge of what had gone before, they saw all the faults of Germany's faults .
 West Germany’s postwar democracy was not the solution; it was the problem . Rudi Dutschke, Peter Schneider, Gudrun Ensslin and Rainer Werner Fassbinder were among those who died .
 The Bundesrepublik conspired with its Western masters to deny the German past, to bury it in material goods and anti-Communist propaganda . The apolitical, consumerist, American-protected cocoon was not just imperfect and amnesiac, but it had actively conspired
 The youthful radical intelligentsia of the German Sixties accused the Bonn Republic of covering up the crimes of its founding generation . The Bonn republic was accused of cover-up by the Sixties .
 The cohort of Germans born between 1910 and 1930 refused to discuss the past . Their parents were born in 1910-1930 . They are now in the midst of a new generation .
 Their attention was relentlessly and a trifle uneasily focused on material well-being, stability and respectability . Skeptical of political promises and grand ideas, they were relentless and uneasy .
 "In the eyes of their sons and daughters they stood for nothing. As a result, in the . eyes of . their sons, they stood . for nothing," says President Obama .
 In their eyes the Federal Republic exuded self-satisfaction and hypocrisy, the Germans said . The Federal Republic was accused of being self-confident and hypocritical .
 In 1962 Germany’s leading weekly news magazine had published a series of articles investigating West German defense policy . The articles hinted at shady dealings by Adenauer's Bavarian defense minister, Franz-Josef Strauss .
 The government harassed the paper, arrested its publisher and ransacked its offices . With Adenauer's authorization and at Strauss’s behest, the government harassed it .
 In December 1966, the ruling Christian Democrats selected as Chancellor in succession to Ludwig Erhard the former Nazi Kurt-Georg Kiesinger . Four years later, four years later he was selected as chancellor .
 In those years the German Extra-Parliamentary Left moved into the universities with dramatic success . In the 1970s and 1980s, the Left became a major party in Germany's universities .
 Anti-militarism had a special place in German student protest as a tidy way to condemn both the Federal Republic and its Nazi predecessor . Anti-militaryism was a popular slogan in Germany in the 1930s .
 With the growth of opposition to the Vietnam War this conflation between past and present extended to West Germany’s military mentor . West Germany's military mentor was the father of one of the world's most successful statesmen .
 America, always ‘fascist’ in the rhetoric of a minority of radicals, now became the enemy for a far broader constituency . America became the target of a far wider constituency, with the rise of fascism in the US .
 'Amerika' for its war in Vietnam served as a surrogate for discussion of Germany’s own war crimes . Indeed, attacking ‘Aamerika’ for its criminal war in . Vietnam served almost as a . surrogate for . discussion of German war crimes, says
 In Peter Weiss’s 1968 play VietnamDiscourse the parallel between the U.S. and the Nazis is explicitly drawn . In the play, the parallels are explicitly drawn between the United States and Nazi Germany .
 This way of talking allowed West German radicals to despise the Bonn Republic both for its present imperialist-capitalist associations and for its past fascist ones . The Bonn republic was founded by the West German National Socialist Party in 1968 .
 It authorized the radical Left to recycle the claim that it was Germans themselves who were the true victims . The assertion was hitherto identified with the far Right, but it's now been embraced by the far right .
 For all their anger at the ‘Auschwitz generation’, young Germans of the Sixties were not really much concerned with the Jewish Holocaust . We should not, then, be surprised to learn that .
 West Berlin itself had taken on something of a counter-cultural tone in these years . They preferred to subsume it in academic demands for classes on ‘ Faschismustheorie’ .
 Fossilized by its peculiar isolation at the heart of international political tensions, dependant on handouts from Bonn and Washington, its future lastingly impermanent . The city was suspended in time and space, suspended in .
 This made it rather appealing to dissidents, radicals and others who sought out the political and cultural fringe . It also appealed to dissidents and radicals who sought to be on the fringe .
 West Berlin's survival as a bohemian outpost of the West depended entirely on the presence of U.S. soldiers . The irony of West Berlin’s situation was lost on many of its youthful residents, many said .
 The truly ‘repressive state apparatus’ was the imperial lackeys in Bonn . Their victims were those who opposed America’s war in Vietnam .
 In this peculiar logic Bild Zeitung, with its withering criticisms of student politics, was a revived Der Sturmer . Students were the new ‘Jews’ and Nazi concentration camps were just a serviceable metaphor for the crimes of imperialism .
 The German extra-parliamentary Left has lost touch with its roots in the anti-Nazi mainstream . It has also been losing touch with Germany's anti-fascist mainstream .
 Anti-Western emphasis in turn nourished a counter-culture that was self-consciously exotic and more than a little bizarre, even by the standards of the time . The anti-West emphasis in the 1960s was anti-Western and anti-American .
 One variant of Sixties cultural confusion saw sex and politics more closely entangled than elsewhere . Sex and politics were more closely intertwined than elsewhere in Germany .
 Radical circles in Germany sung the praises of nudity, free love and anti-authoritarian childrearing . Following Marcuse, Erich Fromm, Wilhelm Reich and other twentieth-century German theorists of sexual and political repression .
 Hitler's much advertised sexual neuroses were freely adduced to account for Nazism . Hitler’s much advertised . neuroses . were freely used to explain why he had a sexual problem . Hitler was not the only person to blame for his Nazi tendencies .
 A chilling analogy was drawn in certain quarters between Hitler’s Jewish victims and the youth of the 1960s, martyrs to the sexually repressive regime of their parents . And once again, a chilling analogy . was drawn .
 The emphasis on nudity was explicitly designed to recall pictures of helpless, naked concentration camp bodies . The emphasis of nudity was designed to evoke images of concentration camps .
 If Germans can look at the truth about our bodies, they will be able to face other truths as well, they can also look at other truths . German women's bodies are the subject of the debate .
 Dutschke declared Ohnesorg’s death a ‘political murder’ and called for a mass response . Within days, 100,000 students demonstrated across West Germany .
 Jurgen Habermas, hitherto a prominent critic of the Bonn authorities, warned Dutschke and his friends a few days later of the risk of playing .
 Those who talked loosely of the ‘hidden violence’ and ‘repressive tolerance’ of the peaceful Bonn regime didn’t know what they were doing . Those who set out deliberately to provoke the authorities into repression by . provoking them into repression did not know what
 Habermas appealed for democratic reason to prevail, calling upon students and government alike to respect republican legality . In March of the following year, as radical student leaders called repeatedly for confrontation with the Bonn 'regime' and the government threatened to retaliate .
 The following month Dutschke himself would pay the price of the violent polarization he had encouraged . He was shot in Berlin by a neo-Nazi sympathizer, on April 11th 1968 .
 Two people were killed and four hundred wounded in Berlin alone in the weeks following the attack . In the angry weeks that followed, two people died and 100 were wounded .
 Many of them were quietly financed from East Germany or Moscow, though this was not common knowledge at the time . Many of the artists were funded by the Soviet Union or East Germany .
 In Germany as elsewhere, the New Left kept its distance from official Communism . In West Germany, it was in any case a political irrelevance .
 Like much of the West German Left, the radicals had an ambiguous relationship with the German Democratic Republic to their East . The radicals had a relationship with West Germany's Communist Party .
 Their parents’ nostalgia for a lost German past was unconsciously echoed in their own dreams of an alternative, better Germany to the East . Perhaps not surprisingly, their parents' nostalgia for the lost past was echoed in the children's own dreams .
 The radicals’ hatred for the ‘hypocrisies’ of the Federal Republic made them susceptible to the claims of East Germany’s Communists to have faced up to German history and purged their Germany of its fascist past .
 The crimes of Communism was just a diversion from the crimes of capitalism, he says . Emphasis on Communism was a diversion, he adds .
 Communists, as Daniel Cohn-Bendit had expressed it in Paris, might be ‘Stalinist scoundrels’ But liberal democrats were no better, he said . ‘Liberal democrats’ were ‘no better’ than Communists .
 The German Left turned a deaf ear to rumblings of discontent in Warsaw or Prague . Thus the German left turned its ear to the German Left, it said .
 The face of the Sixties in West Germany, as in Western Europe at large, was turned resolutely inwards . West Germany as well as Western Europe, the face of Sixties was turned inwards.
 Rudi Dutschke visited Prague at the height of the Czech reform movement in the spring of 1968 . Local students were taken aback at his insistence that pluralist democracy was the real enemy . The Czech Republic is one of the world's most successful democracies .
 It is accompanied by a crisis of political power and by a weakening of the apparatus of coercion . The crisis of power will be accompanied by the weakening of power in the world, says David Cameron .
 The Sixties in the Soviet bloc were of necessity experienced very differently from the West . Paul McCartney was in the midst of the '60s in the USSR during the 1960s . The Beatles were in the early 60s and the '50s .
 The mainspring of Communism was the authority of Moscow, writes David Frum . It was the mood and policies of the Soviet leadership that counted, he says .
 Until his overthrow in 1964, it was Nikita Khrushchev who determined the history of Europe’s eastern half . The former Soviet Union leader ruled the country's eastern half until 1964 .
 Khrushchev’s generation of Soviet leaders still believed in the international class struggle . The Soviet Union still believes in the struggle for the world's first class .
 Khrushchev’s romanticized projection of Soviet revolutionary memories onto Latin American uprisings led him to make the missteps that produced the Cuba crisis of 1962 and his own downfall . Indeed, it was the romanticization of Soviet revolution that led to his downfall .
 Moscow's post-Stalinist rulers in a contradictory position . In this guise, the competition with Beijing placed Moscow’s post-stalinists in a contradiction position . Moscow's government has been in the spotlight for years .
 Kremlin continued to favour co-existence with the Western powers, and with its own citizens . On the other hand, the Kremlin continues to favour a peaceful relationship with the West .
 Stalin’s ‘Short Course’ was no longer authoritative source of Soviet history and Marxist theory . From 1959, Stalin's 'Short Course' no longer the authoritative source for Soviet history . Stalin's short course was published in 1959 .
 Soviet Union and more advanced satellite states became embryonic welfare states . In short, the Soviet Union became an embryonic welfare state, at least in form .
 Communist bosses in Kyrgyzstan urged collective farmers to meet official farm delivery quotas by buying up supplies in local shops . In a tragic-comic blend of centralized planning and local corruption, local corruption is rampant .
 By January 1964, following the disastrous 1963 harvest, the USSR was reduced to importing grain from the West . The USSR was forced to rely on the West for grain after the 1963 harvest .
 By 1965, two thirds of the potatoes consumed in the USSR and three quarters of the eggs came from private farmers . Three quarters of private farmers were private farmers, according to the USSR .
 In the Soviet Union as in Poland or Hungary, ‘Socialism’ depended for its survival upon the illicit ‘capitalist’ economy within, to whose existence it turned a blind eye . 'Socialists’ turned blind eye to the illicit 'capitalist' economy within .
 The economic reforms of the fifties and sixties were from the start of a fitful attempt to patch up a structurally dysfunctional system . The reforms were an attempt to fix up a dysfunctional system, but they were not successful .
 Though it was replaced by a mythologized version in which Stalin himself—and his crimes— passed half unacknowledged . Stalin's crimes were replaced by the mythologization of his crimes . The myth of Stalin's role in Stalinism was replaced with a new myth .
 The credibility of the Soviet system rested on its ability to get results from the land, says Soviet leader Mikhail Gorchkov . Gorchov: "Credibility of Soviet system rests upon its capacity to get effective results"
 For most of its eighty-year life, agriculture was on an emergency footing in one way or another . Agriculture was on emergency footing for most of it's eighty-years .
 Khrushchev and Brezhnev's liberalizations presented no immediate threat to the network of power and patronage on which the Soviet system depended . But otherwise the liberalization of the system was not a threat to power .
 It was just because economic improvements in the Soviet bloc were always subordinate to political priorities that they achieved so very little. Indeed, it was because of political priorities .
 Lenin had always worried more about his critics than his principles, his heirs were no different . Lenin worried more than his critics more than he did his principles . Lenin's heirs are no different.
 Intellectual opposition was something to which Communist leaders, Khrushchev included, were intensely sensitive . Intellectual opposition, whether or not it was likely to find a wider echo in the party or outside, was something that was intensely sensitive to .
 In 1959, authorities clamped down on Orthodox priests and Baptists, a form of cultural dissidence that had been allowed a certain freedom since Stalin’s fall . At the same time, in 1959, the authorities clamped down on those who were Orthodox .
 Khrushchev himself, if not his colleagues, was reliably unpredictable . However, he was reliable unpredictable, as was his colleagues .
 The 22nd Congress of the CPSU, in October 1961, revealed the extent of the schism between China and the USSR . The following month the Soviets closed their embassy in Albania, Beijing’s European locum . Moscow set out to present a new face to its confused and
 In 1962 Solzhenitsyn was allowed to publish his pessimistic and implicitly subversive novel One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovitch in Novy Mir . The same journal that had rejected Pasternak not six years before had rejected his novel .
 Solzhenitsyn’s later work would certainly never have been allowed into print even at the height of the ‘thaw’ But in comparison with what had gone before, the early Sixties were a time of literary freedom .
 The plotters against Khrushchev were irritated at his policy failures and his autocratic style . But above all it was his inconsistencies that made them uneasy, they were uneasy .
 The First Secretary might know exactly what was permissible and what was not, but others could be tempted to misunderstand his apparent tolerance .
 Within months of taking control, the new Kremlin leadership began to press down upon the intelligentsia . Putin's new regime began to push down on the intellectuals, Putin said .
 Under pseudonyms Abram Tertz and Nikolay Arzhak they smuggled out for publication in the West various works of fiction . Under the pseudonyms they had smuggled out various works to the West .
 Tertz-Sinyavsky had also published a short, critical essay on modern Soviet literature, On Socialist Realism .
 No law in the Soviet Union prohibited the publication of works abroad . Authorities claimed that content of their works was itself evidence of the crime of anti-Soviet activity .
 The Sinyavsky-Daniel trial was held in camera . A press campaign vilifying the two writers had drawn public attention to their fate .
 The trial proceedings were secretly recorded and transcribed by several people admitted to the courtroom . They were published both in Russian and English a year later, generating international petitions for the men’s release .
 The unusual aspect of the affair was that for all the brutality of the Stalin decades, no-one had hitherto been arrested and imprisoned solely on the basis of the content of their writings . No-one previously been arrested for solely based on content of writings .
 Intellectuals in the past have always been accused of deeds, not merely words . Even if material evidence had been freely invented for the purpose, intellectuals in the . past had always been . accused . of deeds . intellectuals . Not merely words, intellectuals have been accused .
 The treatment of Sinyavsky and Daniel aroused unprecedented protests within the Soviet Union itself . Contrasting as it did with the comparative laxity of the Khrushchev years, the treatment of the pair aroused unprecedented protest .
 Vladimir Bukovsky, then a 25-year-old student, was arrested in 1967 for organizing a demonstration in Pushkin Square in defense of civil rights and freedom of expression . Bukovsky was then 25-years-old when he organized the demonstration .
 Already in 1963 he had been arrested by the KGB, charged with possession of anti-Soviet literature . He was committed to a psychiatric hospital for compulsory treatment .
 By any standards save those of its own history, the regime was immovable, repressive and inflexible . The regime was 'immovable and repressive' and 'inflexible' by any standards except those of itself .
 The prospects for truth telling about the past, and reform in the future, seemed to have receded . But the prospects for reform have also receded in the U.S.
 The Soviet regime was settling in for an indefinite twilight of economic stagnation and moral decay . Whatever face it presented to the Western powers, the Soviet regime at home was settled in .
 A year after his release, Sinyavsky emigrated to France and took up a post teaching Russian literature at the Sorbonne .
 The principles of the Soviet imperium had been handily illustrated in Budapest in November 1956 . In 1956, the Soviet Union held a series of meetings in Budapest, Hungary .
 Some of the surviving victims of the show trials of earlier years were still languishing in prison a decade later . Moreover, in Czechoslovakia and Romania some of the survivors of earlier trials still languished in prison .
 Eastern Europe was a recent colonial extension of Communist rule . And yet, Eastern Europe wasn't so different, just because of its colonial rule .
 By the 1960s, Communism was the only form of rule most inhabitants of the Soviet Union had ever known . In the shadow of the Great Patriotic War it had even acquired a certain legitimacy .
 The memory of Soviet occupation and the enforced Soviet take-over was still fresh . But further West the memory of the Soviet occupation still lingered .
 Hungarian refugee scholar Francois Fejto had replied to Sartre's assertion in 1956 that Hungary’s revolution had been marked by a ‘rightist spirit’
 Fejto’s insistence on the credibility of an anti-Stalinist Left catches the tone of east European intellectual opposition for the following twelve years . The insistence on a credibility of a left-wing party caught up with the rise of the Soviet Union .
 The point was not to condemn Communism, much less overthrow it; the goal was to think through what had gone so horribly wrong and propose an alternative within the terms of Communism itself . The point of the point was to not condemn Communism but to propose a alternative .
 These 'revisionists' had in many cases been orthodox Marxists until 1956 . In Poland the best known was the young Marxist philosopher Leszek Kofakowski .
 Like most contemporary Western Marxists they were wedded to the notion that it was possible to distinguish clearly between the credibility of Marxism and the crimes of Stalin . But most contemporary Marxists still believe that Marxism and Stalin's crimes were committed by Stalin .
 For many Eastern European Marxists, Stalinism was a tragic parody of Marxist doctrine . The Soviet Union was a permanent challenge to the credibility of the project of Socialist transformation . For many East Europeans, it was a serious challenge to Marxist theory .
 This was partly from necessity, of course, but partly too from sincere conviction . This is partly partly because of necessity, and partly because it was from genuine conviction. This is not the first time I've seen this kind of thing .
 In the longer run this affiliation would isolate and even discredit the reform Communists of these years, notably in the eyes of a rising generation . The point of reference was not the Stalinist past but the capitalist present .
 From 1956 to 1968, the revisionist moment in Eastern Europe afforded writers, filmmakers, economists, journalists, journalists and others a brief window of optimism about an alternative Socialist future . From 1956 until 1968, Eastern Europe was a period of optimism .
 It was a peculiarity of Poland in the Gomulka years that Marxist philosophers and Catholic theologians could find some common ground in their defense of free speech and civil liberties . It was an embryonic anticipation of the alliances that would be forged in the Seventies .
 The most propitious terrain for ‘helpful’ criticism was the Communist management of the economy . The Communist government managed the economy in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Conventional Marxism was purportedly grounded in political economy, so that economic policy (once liberated from the dead hand of Stalin) was a permissible arena of intellectual dissent . One reason for this was that . conventional Marxism was supposedly grounded in . political economy so that . economic policy was once liberated from
 East European intellectuals of the time still took Marxism very seriously and treated the problem of Communist economics as a vital theoretical starting point for serious reforms . Another reason was that many east European intellectuals still took Marxist ideas seriously .
 By the early Sixties, the economies of Europe’s Communist states were showing the first intimations of serious disrepair . But the main explanation was simply that, by the early 1960s, European economies were showing signs of disrepair. The main explanation .
 They were committed to the mass production of redundant primary industrial goods . The company was committed to mass production .
 The commodities—consumer goods above all --for which there was a growing demand were not produced, or else not in sufficient quantity, or of the necessary quality . The commodities --consumer goods --for . which there were not . produced, for example, were not in enough quantity or of
 The peculiar inefficiencies of Communism had been partly camouflaged in the first post-war decade by the demands of reconstruction . Communism's peculiar inefficiency had been camouflaged by reconstruction demands .
 The problems, it is increasingly conceded, must lie in the Communist economic system itself . The problems must lie within the Communist system itself, it has been conceded .
 Self-styled ‘reform economists’ were thickest on the ground in Hungary . The country has been hit by a wave of anti-immigration protests in recent years .
 Reform economists have acknowledged that the land collectivization of the forties and fifties had been a mistake . Reform economists acknowledged that it was a mistake to collectivize land .
 The Soviet obsession with large-scale extraction and production of primary industrial goods was an impediment to growth . They also recognized, though more cautiously, that the Soviet obsession was a problem . The Soviet government recognized the problem, but also acknowledged it was an economic problem .
 The Soviet Union’s own forced industrialization and destruction of private property had been a disaster, the authors say . In short, they conceded—though not so many words—that the blanket application to eastern Europe was a disaster . The Soviets conceded, though not so much, that
 Communist economies might incorporate price signals and other market incentives into collectivist system of property and production . And even more radically, they began to seek ways in which price signals might incorporate market incentives .
 The Sixties debates on economic reform in eastern Europe had to walk a fine line . The debates in the Sixties had to be careful not to walk the line .
 But admitting the failure of central planning or collective property was another matter . The failure of collective property or central planning is another matter, he said .
 Collective farms were granted substantial autonomy and not just permitted but actively encouraged to support private plots on the side of the farms . Collective farms are permitted to grow their own private plots in the community .
 Certain commodity prices were tied to the world market and allowed to fluctuate via multiple exchange rates . Commodities were allowed to be tied to world markets and fluctuated via exchange rates.
 Best-known reform economist of the Sixties was a Czech, Ota Sik . The Hungarian school had the broadest influence and the most practical impact .
 In retrospect it is clear that the reformers were deluding themselves if they supposed that a ‘third way’ between Communism and capitalism was ever realistic . The reformers are deluded themselves, writes Andrew Keen .
 But this was not because of any formal shortcoming in their economic analysis . Instead, it was because of a lack of formal shortcomings in the economic analysis.
 "Their true error lay in a curiously naive misreading of the system under which they lived," the author says . Their true error was that they misread the system of life, he adds .
 What mattered to the Communist leadership was not economics but politics, it was politics . The Communist Party was not interested in economics, it wanted to be a party .
 In the meantime, however, the regimes were interested above all in stability . In the past, they were interested in stability and stability .
 The first, 'Kadarism' was not readily exportable—and it was very much part of the Hungarian leader’s own strategy to assure the Kremlin authorities that there was no Hungarian ‘model’, merely a limited practical solution .
 Hungary’s situation was indeed unique, with Kadar cynically dangling access to the prosperous West before his fellow Hungarians as a sort of reward for good behaviour . Kadar was a tacit confession of Communism's own failure, with the Hungarians dangling the chance to travel to the
 "Genuine liberation was unthinkable, but a reversion to repression highly unlikely," says Mao Zed Zedell . Zedell: "A reversion of repression is highly unlikely"
 Kadar’s Hungary—‘the best barracks in the laager } —was much envied, though only fitfully emulated . Kadar's Hungary was much admired, but only emulated.
 Tito's Yugoslavia was even more obviously sui generis . Tito’s Yugoslavia was the second model of Yugoslavia, after Yugoslavia . The second model was Yugoslavia, a state of Yugoslavia .
 Yugoslavia had managed to avoid the problems of its neighbors . This was not because Yugoslavia had avoided the problems . Yugoslavia's problems were not solved by Yugoslavia's neighbors .
 Many of the economic dysfunctions of the Soviet satellites were just as familiar to Yugoslavs . Yugoslavs' suspended animation between East and West was a product of historical chance rather than ideological choice .
 These innovations were born of ethnic and geographical divisions as well as economic necessity . The innovations were created in the 1920s and 1930s .
 In a federal state whose constituent republics and peoples shared little beyond unhappy and mutually antagonistic memories, the imposition of uniform instructions from Belgrade looked a lot like a return to pre-war practices .
 Tito's role in Yugoslavia helped shape the Yugoslav model, rather than the alternative Socialist blueprint with which his Western admirers wishfully credited Tito in these years . It was these considerations—rather than the creative, alternative Socialist Blueprint with which Tito wished to be credited with which he
 Such a checklist of cheap consumer goods would have been much less to the fore in Bulgarian or Romanian memory, for example—and the ‘first trip to Trieste’ was quite out of the question .
 Yugoslavs were not prosperous and they were not free, but nor were imprisoned in a hermetic system . Yugoslavs are not prosperous, but they are not imprisoned in hermetic systems, writes David Frum .
 Nikita Khrushchev, who actively disliked Romania, had sought to assign it a uniquely agricultural role in the international Communist distribution of labor . The Soviet Union wanted to use the country as a source of labor in the world .
 The Romanians secured the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Romanian territory in 1958 and took an increasingly independent path . Having played an accommodating role in the imprisonment and suppression of the Hungarian revolt, the Romanians played an important role .
 Under Dej and Ceau§escu, Romania declined to get involved in Moscow’s quarrels with China . Romania refused to allow Warsaw Pact maneuvers on its territory . Under Ceau�řu and Dej, Romania did not get involved .
 The Romanian leaders made overtures to Tito . Dej even addressed the Yugoslav National Assembly in 1963 . They underwrote Romania’s neo-Stalinist industrialization .
 Romania’s dealings with the West steadily increased; while trade with Comecon countries fell . The country's overall foreign trade at the start of the 1960s fell from 70 percent of Romania's foreign trade to 45 percent .
 Djilas was imprisoned for four years when The New Class appeared in the West . He was re-incarcerated for a further four years shortly after his release . The strategy was even more difficult to follow, as Djilis was jailed for four more years .
 The international image of Communist Romania was curiously positive . Whereas Albania, China’s European surrogate, held no attraction for anyone save nostalgic Stalinists and ultra-besotted Maoists .
 The men in Bucharest gleaned a host of unlikely Western admirers from Russia . Simply by distancing themselves from Moscow, the men in Romania gleaned some of the world's most unlikely admirers .
 De Gaulle was doubtless right that Romanian Communism would not have been appropriate for the West . But he was also right that it would have been inappropriate for the west .
 In contrast to other satellite states Romania allowed no space for any internal opposition . Bucharest intellectuals in the Sixties played no part in domestic debates and had to be satisfied with reading the latest nouveaux romans from Paris .
 Richard Nixon became the first U.S. President to visit a Communist state when he went to Bucharest in August 1969 . Richard Nixon was the first President of the United States to visit Romania .
 Tito and Ceau§escu, like Kadar and the neo-Stalinist leadership in the GDR, successfully negotiated the shoals of the Sixties . Like Kadar, they successfully negotiated a deal with the Soviet Union .
 Each in his own way, they assured their authority and control at home while maintaining at least a modus vivendi with Moscow . Each in their own way they assured themselves of their authority in Russia .
 The result was deep frustration among ‘revisionist’ intellectuals, not just at the regime in general but at the lost opportunity for a new direction, the unfinished business of the Polish October . The result is deep frustration .
 In the Letter the authors depicted a bureaucratic, autocratic regime, deaf to the interests of all but the ruling elite that it served . The authors depicted the regime as a bureaucratic and autocratic government .
 Poland’s only hope, Kuroii and Modzelewski concluded, was a genuine revolution based on workers’ councils, freedom of the press and the abolition of the political police .
 The day after presenting their Letter, the two men were arrested and charged with advocating the overthrow of the state . The two men have been charged .
 On July 19th 1965 they were sentenced to prison terms of three and three and a half years respectively . The pair were jailed for a total of five years .
 The Kurori-Modzelewski Affair sparked a heartfelt response in the university . The university responded to the controversy surrounding the affair .
 The secret trial of the two students came as a shock, and there were demands not merely for their release but for their Letter and earlier research paper to be made public . There were demands for their . release .
 Ten years later Poland was a land of privilege, inefficiency and censorship . Ten years after Poland's independence, Poland was the country of privilege and inefficiency .
 Written in 1832 but dangerously contemporary in its portrayal of nineteenthcentury rebels struggling against oppression, the play had attracted lively and distinctly engaged audiences . The play is set in London, London and London .
 In late January the Communist authorities announced that the play would have to be cancelled . Communist authorities said that the Communist Party had to cancel the play .
 The response was a wave of student-organized petitions to the Polish Parliament, sympathetic resolutions at the Warsaw branch of the Polish Writers’ Association and speeches by KoZakowski and other prominent professors and writers .
 The strike and ensuing protests were crushed with considerable violence . It provoked one Politburo member and two senior cabinet ministers to resign in protest .
 In a long series of trials held between September 1968 and May 1969, students and other intellectuals from Warsaw, Wrodaw, Cracow and Zodz were sentenced to terms ranging from six months to three years for ‘participation in secret organizations’
 The harshest sentences were handed out to those like Adam Michnik, Jan Litynski and Barbara Toruriczyk who had also been active in the initial student protests . Those like Michnik and Litynki were also involved in the student protests.
 A disproportionate number of the students and professors arrested, expelled and imprisoned in Poland in the years 1967-69 were of Jewish origin . This was not a coincidence, and this was not an isolated coincidence, says historian .
 The inner-party opposition had coalesced around the cause of anti-Semitism . Under the direction of Mieczyslaw Moczar, the Interior Minister, this . opposition .
 From Stalin’s death until 1967, anti-Semitism kept out of official Communist rhetoric . Anti-Semitism was endemic in eastern Europe and the Soviet Union itself .
 After the war most of Eastern Europe’s surviving Jews had gone west, or to Israel . Most Eastern Europe's surviving Jews have gone west or to the west .
 Of those who remained, many fled in the course of the persecutions of Stalin’s last years . Many fled, if they could, in the . course of . the . of those who stayed, if . they . could, . many fled .
 There were still substantial communities of Jews remaining in Poland and Hungary . Most of these were not practicing Jews and typically did not think of themselves as Jewish at all .
 In the case of those born after the war, they often did not even know that they were . Their parents had thought it prudent to keep quiet .
 In Poland especially, the still considerable numbers of Jewish Communists were mostly indifferent to their Jewish background . Some of them were naive enough to suppose that their indifference was shared by Poles .
 Israel and its Arab neighbors fought in the Six Day War in June 1967 . Israel and Arab neighbors were at odds to win the war, but the war was never won .
 Soviet support for the Arab cause legitimized vocal criticism of Israel, Zionism—and Jews . Soviet support legitimized the opposition to Israel and Zionism . It legitimized anti-Semitism and anti-Zionist views .
 'Let those who feel that these words are addressed to them, irrespective of their nationality, draw the proper conclusion' Let those who think that these . feel that they are . addressed to . them, regardless of their . nationality .
 The reference to lews as Poland’s Fifth Column was carried on radio and television and heard by millions of Poles . Millions of Poles heard the reference on television and radio .
 Whether Gomulka was expressing his own views or was seeking scapegoats for the policy failures of the past decade, it was never clear . Or was merely anticipating Moczar’s efforts to unseat him?
 Distinctions were openly drawn between good’ Communists, with national Polish interests at heart, and others whose true affiliation lay elsewhere . Distinctions between good' Communists and good' Communist Communists .
 In 1968, parents and relatives of Jewish students arrested or expelled were themselves sacked from official positions and academic posts . Parents and other relatives of Jews were also sacked from academic positions .
 Prosecutors paid special attention to the names and origins of students and professors who appeared in court . The trial was a first for Communist Poland, a first in Communist Poland .
 Of Poland’s remaining 30,000 Jews some 20,000 departed in the course of 1968-69, leaving only a few thousand behind, mostly the elderly and the young . Michnik and his fellow students, now serving terms in prison, are among those behind .
 The losers, beyond Poland's Jews, were the country’s educational institutions . Poland itself, its international reputation once again, was inextricably associated with the victimization of its minority .
 The relative ease with which Poland’s rulers were able to isolate and destroy the student protesters derived from their success in separating the intellectuals and their discontents from the rest of the nation . Anti-Semitism naturally played a useful role in Poland's success in isolating and destroying the protesters
 Warsaw's dissident intelligentsia paid little attention to the bread and butter concerns of the working population . Warsaw’s neo-Stalinist enemies were quick to point out that the working people were not paying attention to their concerns .
 The mass of the Polish people was studiously indifferent to the persecution of Jews and students alike, and Jewish students especially . In return, the mass of Polish people were studiously .
 In this respect, 1968 in Poland had one positive outcome, albeit deferred . In 1968, 1968 was the first year of democracy in Poland .
 Czechoslovakia in the early Sixties was caught in an uncomfortable transition from national Stalinism to reform Communism . The country was a hybrid of Stalinism and reform Communism in the 1960s .
 The show trials and purges of the 1950s had come late to Prague and their impact had been both greater and more enduring than elsewhere . Prague had a history of show trials, purges and show trials that had come to Prague .
 There was no rotation of the old Stalinist elite, no Czech Gomulka or Kadar . Instead, the Czech Communist Party was in charge of the Communist Party . The Czech Republic has been in the grip of the Soviet Union since 1989 .
 The purpose behind both commissions was somehow to acknowledge the regime’s recent criminal past without loosening any control of the present . The purpose of both commissions is to acknowledge a regime's recent criminal history, but not to loosen up any control .
 Victims of the Stalinist trials were released and rehabilitated—in many instances at the behest of the same politicians, judges, prosecutors and interrogators who had condemned them in the first place . The victims were released, rehabilitated and released by the same people who condemned them .
 Antonin Novotny waited many years to be sure which way the wind was blowing before following Khrushchev’s example and denouncing the Soviet dictator .
 De-Stalinization in Czechoslovakia was deliberately delayed as long as possible . The statue of Stalin on the heights overlooking Prague was left untouched until October 1962 .
 The leading victims of Stalinist terror in Czechoslovakia had all been intellectuals, usually of middle-class origin, many of them Jews . Many of the victims were Jews .
 Upward social mobility for workers was a distinguishing feature of the 1950s in the Czech and Slovak lands . Czechs and Slovaks saw upward social mobility as part of their social mobility .
 The percentage of working-class children in non-vocational higher education in Czechoslovakia rose from under 10 percent in 1938 to 31 percent by 1956, nearly 40 percent in 1963 . Working-class students rose from just 10 percent to almost 40 percent by 1960s .
 Income distribution in Czechoslovakia by the early Sixties was the most egalitarian in Soviet Europe . Income distribution was egalitarian in the early 60s and early 70s .
 The Communist leadership had advanced Czechoslovakia to ‘full Socialism’ as the new Constitution of i960 proclaimed . The Communist leaders had thus indeed advanced Czechsoslovakia .
 The Soviet Union had achieved a level of stagnation that was unacceptable even by Soviet standards . However, this achievement had been accomplished at the price of a . level of . stagnation . Even by the Soviet standards, stagnation was unacceptable .
 The economic reforms begun in 1963 might not be universally welcomed by shop-floor employees . But among writers, teachers, filmmakers and philosophers the prospect of a loosening of the Stalinist shackles released an avalanche of criticisms .
 A writers’ conference in Liblice in 1963 was devoted to Franz Kafka . The conference was dedicated to the Czech author .
 Italian Communist leader Palmiro Togliatti wrote to ask Novotny and his colleagues to delay news of the rehabilitation of Slansky and other trial victims until after the forthcoming Italian elections .
 In April 1963, Ladislav Novomesky, a rehabilitated Slovak writer, made open and admiring mention at the Slovak Writers’ Congress of his comrade and friend’ Clementis, a Slansky trial victim . Clementis was a victim of the Slansky
 The relatively liberal mood of these years was a belated echo of the Khrushchev thaw . Czechs were more liberal in the 1970s than in the 1960s and 1980s .
 Despite the changed tone in Moscow following Brezhnev’s coup, the artistic renaissance in Czechoslovakia continued to unfold . The artistic renaissance was impeded only by sporadic censorship and pressure . Czechsoslovakia was one of the last bastions of artistic freedom .
 Playwrights, poets and novelists often doubled as screenwriters in these years . Kundera included many of whom, many, doubled as film writers in this era .
 In 1966 Ludvlk Vaculik published The Axe, a fictional account drawing on his own father’s Communist ideals . The Axe is the son's account of his father's disillusionment with the Communist Party . Ludlvk vaculik: "The Axe"
 In the same year Kundera himself published The Joke, a neoexistentialist and avowedly autobiographical novel of the Stalinist generation in Czechoslovakia .
 At the Fourth Czechoslovak Writers’ Congress in the summer of 1967 Kundera, Vaculik, the poet and playwright Pavel Kohout and the young playwright Vaclav Havel attacked the Communist leadership of the time for the material and moral devastation it had wrought .
 They called for a return to the literary and cultural heritage of Czechoslovakia . The country should take up once again its ‘normal’ place in the center of a free Europe .
 Brezhnev had long regarded Czechoslovakia as the least ideologically reliable element in the Warsaw Pact . He said it was the least ideological ally in the Soviet Union in the West .
 The aging Stalinists in Prague Castle had tried for so long to hold the line . It was because they knew this that they knew that they had tried to keep the line.
 If they did not clamp down firmly on the intellectual opposition emerging in 1967, it was not for want of trying . If they didn't clamp down on intellectual opposition in 1967 it was because they were trying .
 Slovak minority in the south and east of the country was poorer and more rural than the Czechs to the northwest . Slovak minorities were poorer than Czechs in the north and south .
 Slovaks were the poor relations in multi-ethnic inter-war Czechoslovakia . Released from Hungarian rule in 1918, they were not always treated well by Prague . Czechs were released from Hungary in 1918 .
 Many Slovak political leaders had welcomed the breakup of the country in 1939 and the Nazi-sponsored appearance of an ‘independent’ puppet state with its capital in Bratislava .
 The urban and heavily Social Democratic Czechs of Bohemia and Moravia backed Communist candidates in the post-war elections . Conversely, the Catholic Slovaks remained indifferent or opposed to the Communists .
 Surviving Slovak Jews suffered along with their Czech confreres . The small number of surviving Slovaks Jews suffered in the Holocaust .
 ‘bourgeois nationalists’, Communists, Jews and intellectuals were fewer in number in Slovakia and much more isolated from the rest of society . ‘Bourgeois nationalist’s, Communists and Jews were fewer than in number .
 For them the rapid urbanization and industrialization of the first post-war decade carried real benefits . For them they were also real benefits. For them, they were able to see the benefits of urbanization in their form .
 In contrast to Czechs, they were by no means displeased with their lot . Czechs were not unhappy with their own lot .
 The mood in the Slovak region of the country changed sharply after i960, however . i960 was the first time i960 had been released in Slovakia . The country's mood has since changed dramatically since the release .
 The new‘Socialist’ Constitution made even fewer concessions to local initiative or opinion than its predecessor . Such autonomy as had been accorded Slovakia in the post-war reconstruction of the country was now taken back .
 The stagnation of the economy hit the heavy industry of central Slovakia harder than anywhere else . Of more immediate consequence for most Slovaks, however, was the stagnation of economy .
 The reform economists’ proposals for decentralization of decision-making and increased local autonomy had been welcomed in Bratislava . Some of the reforms, such as profitrelated wage incentives, were hardly calculated to appeal to the unskilled workers in Slovakia’s inefficient industrial plants .
 Slovak Communists themselves began to talk of the need for federalization and of the difficulties of collaborating with the aging Communist apparatchiks in Prague . The Slovak Communist Party itself now began to .
 There was talk of long-forgotten pre-war indignities, as well as Stalinist purges of Slovak Communists . There was also talk of the Stalinist purgeges of the Communist Party .
 For the first time in years, there was a hint of troubles of yet another order . Meanwhile, and for the first . time, there were troubles of the . first time . order .
 The ‘Strahov Events’, as they were later dubbed, were efficiently and violently suppressed by the police . But they added to the charged atmosphere of the moment, all the more so because they seemed to suggest that a Communist state might not be immune to the student mood
 Novotny, like Gomulka in Poland, was uncertain how to respond to such challenges . He said: "I don't know how to deal with such challenges."
 He turned to Brezhnev for help in dealing with his local critics . Lacking the anti-Semitic option, he turned to the Soviet leader for help .
 Dubcek’s intentions were obscure to observers, this is probably because he himself was far from sure just where to go . Dubckek was not sure just what he wanted to do with the project .
 At first this ambiguity worked in his favor, as different factions competed for his support and offered to strengthen his hand . At first, it worked for him, but now it has been complicated .
 On March 22nd Novotny resigned the presidency and was replaced a week later by General Ludvik Svoboda . On March 25th Novotnny resigned from the presidency .
 Slovakia's Central Committee adopted an ‘Action Program’ calling for equal status and autonomy for Slovakia, the rehabilitation of past victims and ‘democratization’ of the political and eco-ecosystem . Five days after that, the Central Party adopted an 'Action Program
 The events of the spring and summer of 1968 in Czechoslovakia hinged on three contemporary illusions . The events occurred in the spring, summer and fall of 1968 . The Czech Republic was ruled by the West in 1968 .
 Dubcek: Reforms could be folded into the 'Socialist' project . Reforms now being discussed could be rolled out into the ‘Socialist’ project, he says . Dubceks: 'The first, widespread in the country, was that the freedoms and
 A new government headed by Oldrich Cernik was installed on April 18th and encouraged by huge public demonstrations of affection and support . The new government was installed by the government of the Netherlands .
 The people needed to strengthen the arm of the Communists’ own reformers by pressing them to move forward even faster. The people need to strengthen their own arm, the Communist Party said .
 Dubcek rejected Vaculik’s manifesto and its implication that the Communists should abandon their monopoly of power . Dubkek rejected the idea that the Communist Party should abandon its grip on power .
 As a lifelong Communist he would not countenance this crucial qualitative shift and anyway saw no need to do so . He would not have been able to change his position as a Communist Party leader .
 The fault line between a Communist state and an open society was now fully exposed, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com.com .
 Dubcek made this mortal miscalculation it was above all because the Czech reformers had crucially misinterpreted the lesson of 1956 . Dubcec made a mortal mistake because of the lessons of 1956, he says . Dubcke made a mistake because he misjudged the
 Imre Nagy’s mistake, they thought, had been his departure from the Warsaw Pact and declaration of Hungarian neutrality . Nagy's mistake was that he had declared Hungarian neutrality, but it was his departure .
 So long as Czechoslovakia stayed firmly in the Pact and unambiguously allied to Moscow, Leonid Brezhnev and his colleagues would surely leave them alone . The Czech Republic was firmly allied with Moscow .
 Soviet Defense Minister Andrei Grechko was quietly authorized to draw up a contingent plan for military operations in Czechoslovakia . With every liberalizing step in Prague, Moscow grew ever more uneasy . Unbeknownst to Prague, the KGB chief Yuri Andropov was already speaking of
 Russian students visiting Prague could now read and hear people's opinions long since banned at home . Students visiting Prague now have access to people banned from speaking in Russia .
 The Soviet leader was not merely unconvinced, he came away increasingly skeptical of Dubcek’s prospects . The Soviet Union leader was skeptical of his chances .
 Dubcek said Russia's right to act preventively to head off a threat to socialism in any socialist country . This pronouncement, a lightly veiled assertion of the Kremlin’s right to action preventively, may well have given Dubcec pause .
 There was little he could do, and so he continued to insist that his domestic reforms posed no threat to the socialist system . But there was little to do, so he kept insisting that his reforms pose no threat .
 The Soviet decision to invade Czechoslovakia was not formally taken until August 18th . The decision was made by the Soviet government . The invasion took place in the early weeks of August 18, 1968 .
 Brezhnev seems to have been reluctant—intuitively sensing that however easy the victory, its aftershocks might prove troublesome . But it had become all but inevitable well before then .
 Soviet leaders knew perfectly well that there was no such risk, and not just because Washington had its hands full in Vietnam . But the Soviet leader knew there were no such risks, and that it was not the case .
 Washington and Moscow had co-signed a Treaty of Nuclear Non-proliferation five weeks earlier . The United States was not about to jeopardize such gains for the sake of a few million misguided Czechs .
 500,000 Warsaw Pact troops from Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, the DDR and Soviet Union marched into Czechoslovakia on August 21st 1968 .
 The invasion met some passive resistance and quite a lot of street protests, especially in Prague . The invasion was at the urgent behest of the Czech government . It was otherwise unopposed .
 The unfriendly reception was a source of some surprise to the Soviet leadership . The Soviet leadership had been led to expect that their tanks would encounter widespread support .
 Dubdek and his colleagues were arrested and forced to sign a paper renouncing parts of their program and agreeing to the Soviet occupation of their country . The Kremlin was now perforce obliged to accept that the reformers had the support of the Czech and Slovak people and allow them to
 Prague's 'normalization' of the Prague reforms began almost immediately . Nevertheless, the repression of the reforms was almost immediately followed .
 Among the Soviet leaders there was considerable support for the imposition on Prague of a military dictatorship . The Czech Republic was invaded by Czechoslovakia in 1961 .
 The request was hardly spontaneous. This was the preference not only 13, but the request was not spontaneous . This was not the preference of 13 .
 The importance of spreading responsibility for the attack across the largest possible number of fraternal states overrode other considerations . Their presence hardly justified the trouble .
 Brezhnev chose to let Dubcek stay in office a few months longer, pursue the federalization of the country . But he also kept a Warsaw Pact presence just in case . The Soviet leader chose to see how events unfolded, and see how they unfolded .
 Palach lived for three days before dying of his burns on January 19th 1969 . Palach died three days after suffering from burns to death .
 The next time pro-democracy demonstrators took to the streets (following Czechoslovakia’s victory over the USSR in a game of ice hockey) the Kremlin exploited the occasion to remove Dubcek and replace him with one of his erstwhile colleagues .
 As a Slovak and former trial victim , Husak was the ideal candidate to purge the land of the reformist heresy without prompting accusations of a return to Stalinism . Husak is a former Slovak trial victim and former prisoner .
 The repression that followed was less obtrusive than in the past, but highly effective . The repression is now far more subtle than the past .
 Prague Spring activists were asked to sign statements renouncing their actions and rejecting Dubcek reforms . Men and women who had been active or prominent in the Prague Spring were ‘interviewed’ by the government .
 Those who refused lost their jobs and, along with their relatives and children, became social pariahs . Those who did not comply with the law were ostracised from society .
 The ‘screening’ and purging of these intellectuals was carried out by lower ranking bureaucrats, policemen and party officials—more often than not the victims’ own colleagues . The 'screening' and 'purging' of intellectuals is carried out in the hands of lower
 Only one of Dubcek’s leading colleagues had refused to sign the Moscow document renouncing his actions . It had not escaped the authorities’ notice that only one of his colleagues had signed the document .
 The threat of violence was of course always implicit, but the fact that it was rarely invoked merely added to the collective humiliation . The threat to violence was always implicit .
 Czechoslovakia was being made complicit in its own defeat . Once again, as in 1938 and again in 1948, Czechs were complicit in their own defeat.
 East European army units engaged in invasion of Czechoslovakia had been led to believe they were defending the country against West German or American invaders . Some of them had later to be quietly withdrawn, their reliability was seriously questioned .
 In Poland, repression in Prague both stimulated student protests and strengthened the hand of the authorities in stamping them down . In Prague, student protests both stimulated and strengthened by the repression, as we have seen .
 In April 1969 in the Latvian capital Riga, a Jewish student, Ilia Rips, set herself on fire to draw attention to the Soviet treatment of Dubcek . The Jewish student set herself alight in a bid to raise awareness of the situation in the Soviet Union
 The attitude of Czechs and Slovaks themselves, hitherto among the most pro-Russian nations in the Soviet bloc, now shifted irrevocably to a stance of sullen acquiescence . Czechs, Slovaks and Czechs themselves were once pro-Russia .
 Unpopularity at home or abroad is a small price to pay for the stability that this would henceforth ensure, says the Prime Minister . The country's stability would be a better place to be, he says .
 After 1968, the security of the Soviet zone was firmly underwritten by a renewed appreciation of Moscow’s willingness to resort to force if necessary . The Soviet zone remained underwritten after 1968 .
 In Prague, the evisceration of the reform movement left an especially bitter taste . Prague's reform movement was the heart of the Czech Republic's reform .
 Eighty thousand Czechs and Slovaks fled into exile following the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 .
 Red Army troops burst into a meeting of Czech party leaders and a soldier lined up behind each Politburo member . Mlynar recalled that ‘at such a moment one’s concept of socialism moves to last place .
 It is that connection which marked the definitive turning point in the history of Communism, more even than the Hungarian tragedy of 1956 . The connection between the communist regime and the Soviet Union marked a turning point .
 Alexander Dubcek and his Action Program were not a beginning but an end . Dubceks' Action Program was not an end, it was an end to the program, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The closing of the long post-war cycle of growth and prosperity dispelled the rhetoric and projects of the New Left . The optimistic emphasis on post-industrial alienation and the soulless quality of modern life would soon be displaced by a renewed attention to jobs and wages .
 In the East, the message of the Sixties was that you could no longer work within ‘the system’; in the West there appeared no better choice . In the West, the West appeared to be the better choice. In the 1960s the message was that working within
 Only the truly radical stuck with their determination to remain outside the political consensus . In Germany and Italy, as in the United States and Latin America, this commitment led them into clandestinity, violence and crime .
 In the short run, the practical achievements of the Sixties seemed rather thin . In the 1960s, the 'Sixties' was the most successful period of American history .
 The baby-boom generation itself never wanted for employment . Universities tried, I7 tried, but the baby boom generation never wanted to be unemployed .
 The cohort born after 1953 entered the employment market just as jobs were getting harder to find . It was its immediate successor, the cohort born in 1953, which entered the job market in the 1950s .
 Access to divorce, abortion and contraception was facilitated almost everywhere in the next decade . Restrictions upon sexual behavior—whether as depicted or practiced—largely disappeared .
 Italian workers won the right to protection against unfair dismissal in May 1970 . The Statuto dei Lavoratori of May 1970 was the first Italian labor law to protect workers from unfair dismissal . Italian workers were able to sue for unfair dismissal under Italian law .
 'Revolution' was hardly the 'revolution' envisaged in the slogans and actions of the generation of 1968 . Taken all in all, such changes constitute an underlying cultural transformation of European society; but they were hardly the ‘revolution’ envisaged .
 The same movements that purported to despise and abhor ‘consumer culture were from the outset an object of cultural consumption, reflecting a widespread disjunction between rhetoric and practice . ‘Consumer culture’ was from the start of the movement to be a cultural consumption of the material .
 Those in Paris or Berlin who aggressively declared their intention to ‘change the world’ were often the people most devoted to parochial and even bodily obsessions . They were often focused on their own impact and absorbed in the contemplation of themselves .
 The Sixties seemed at last to pass un-mourned and with few enduring monuments, this was perhaps because the changes that they did bring about were so all-embracing as to seem natural and, by the early Seventies, wholly normal . But perhaps because they did
 At the start of the decade Europe was run by and—as it seemed—for old men . Europe was ruled by and, as it seemed, for old men. Europe is no longer an easy place to be .
 Authority, whether in the bedroom, the home, the streets, educational establishments, workplaces, the media or politics, passed unquestioned . Authority was not questioned in the bedrooms, the homes, schools, workplaces or politics .
 Authority had either withdrawn from most spheres of social life, or . or else was acknowledged only in the breach . Authority was either withdrawn, or or acknowledged in the . breach of authority .
 The transition was spread over a period of years and its dimensions could only be fully appreciated in retrospect . Elsewhere, Britain, perhaps, perhaps—the transition was spreading over a decade, perhaps .
 It was one of the self-delusions of the age that the Sixties were an era of heightened political consciousness . The Sixties was a time of heightened awareness, but it was a self-confusion .
 The deflation of the causes, and the demobilization of the coming decades, confers in retrospect an air of failure upon a decade of frenetic political activity . This is the case, writes David Gergen .
 The peccadilloes of a fallen elite might continue to arouse a certain prurient interest, but after the Sixties they could no longer shock . After the 1960s they could not longer shock the public .
 In Eastern Europe, the ‘revisionist’ interlude and its tragic denouement saw off the last illusions of Marxism as a practice . ‘Revisionist' interlude saw off illusions of Marxist Marxism as practice .
 In the West, Marxist and para-Marxist theories soared clear of any relationship to local reality, disqualifying themselves from any future role in serious public debate . In the UK, Marxist theories have failed to connect with local reality .
 In 1945 the radical Right had discredited itself as a legitimate vehicle for political expression . The radical Right was discredited by 1945 . In 1945, the radical right was discredited as a vehicle for politics .
 Robert Hewison: The unique circumstances that made it possible had passed forever . Even before the effervescence of the Sixties had subsided, the unique circumstances of the '60s had gone forever .
 Within three years of the end of the most prosperous decade in recorded history, the post-war economic boom was over . The post-9/11 was over three years after the peak of the boom was reached .
 Western Europe’s ‘thirty glorious years 5’ gave way to an age of monetary inflation and declining growth rates, accompanied by widespread unemployment and social discontent . Western Europe's 'thirty years 5' ended with a period of economic stagnation .
 Most of the radicals of the Sixties, like their followers, abandoned ‘the Revolution 5’ and worried instead about their job prospects . ‘The Revolution 5' was the first ‘revolution’ in the 1960s .
 A few opted for violent confrontation; the response their actions elicited from the authorities . The damage they wrought, and the response they elicited, led to much nervous talk of the ‘ungovernable 5 condition of Western societies’
 There was to be no return to the optimism—or the illusions—of the first post-war decades . But there was to have been no return .
 Two external shocks brought the Western European economy to a shuddering halt . The impact of the slowdown was only just beginning to be felt when external shocks were felt .
 President Richard Nixon unilaterally announced that his country was abandoning the system of fixed exchange rates in 1971 . Nixon made the announcement on August 15th 1971 .
 The background to this decision was the huge military burden of the Vietnam War and a growing U.S. Federal budget deficit . The decision was made in the wake of a growing military burden in Vietnam War .
 There was a growing fear in Washington that foreign holders of U.S. currency would seek to exchange their dollars for gold, draining American reserves . The dollar was tied to a gold standard, and there was growing fear that it would drain American reserves.
 The United States could not expect to maintain the dollar indefinitely at its fixed and increasingly over-valued rate . Having opted to fight an expensive war of attrition on the other side of the world, the U.S. could not afford to keep the dollar at a fixed rate .
 If the dollar was to float, then so must the European currencies, it would be called into question . All of the carefully constructed certainties of the postwar monetary and trading systems were questioned . The European Monetary and Trading System is now in disarray .
 Fixed rate system was established before the end of the Second World War in anticipation of a controlled network of national economies . The fixed rate system, established in 1945, was over .
 A conference in Paris in 1973 formally buried the financial arrangements so laboriously erected at Bretton Woods and agreed to establish in its place a new floating rate system .
 International accords on floating-rate regimes were powerless to restrain . But uncertainty produced by America’s retreat from a dollar-denominated system encouraged growing currency speculation, which international accords were powerless .
 This undermined the efforts of individual governments to manipulate local interest rates and maintain the value of their national currency . This in turn undermined individual governments' efforts to manipulate interest rates .
 The international economy was hit by the first of the two oil shocks of the 1970s . And it was in this already unstable situation that the international . economy . The world's first oil shock was in 1970s, when it hit the global economy .
 The United States federal budget deficit grew from $1. billion in 1965 to $25 billion in 1968 . On October 6th 1973, Yom Kippur in the Jewish cal'The U.S. budget deficit in the United States was $25. billion .
 Arab oilexporting states had announced plans to reduce oil production . Ten days later they announced an oil embargo against the United States in retaliation for its support for Israel and increased the price of petroleum by 70 percent .
 The Yom Kippur War ended with an Egyptian-Israeli cease-fire on October 25th, but Arab frustration at Western support for Israel did not abate . The Arab-Israeli conflict ended with a cease-fence .
 On December 23rd the oil-producing nations agreed to a further increase in the price of oil . Oil-producing countries agreed to an increase in prices of oil in December .
 Oil prices had remained virtually unchanged over the decades of economic growth . The price of oil, unlike almost every other primary commodity on which the modern industrial economy rests, had remained unchanged . Western Europe especially, it is important to recall .
 One barrel of Saudi light crude went for $1.93 in 1955; in January 1971 it went for just $2.18 . In January 1971, Saudi crude oil went for a record price of $3.5 per barrel .
 Given the modest price inflation of those years, this meant that in real terms oil had actually got cheaper . In real terms, oil got cheaper in the 1980s and 1990s .
 OPEC, formed in i960, had been largely inert and showed no inclination to constrain its major producers to use their oil reserves as a political weapon . OPEC has been largely ineffectual since it was formed .
 The West had grown accustomed to readily available and remarkably cheap fuel . It was a vital component in the long years of prosperity . The West has grown accustomed .
 Oil is a vital part of the European economy, and is seen as vital to the continent's economy . Oil production has been a key factor in Europe's economic growth .
 Solid fuel had accounted for 83 percent of Western Europe’s energy consumption in 1950 . Solid fuel accounted for just 8.8 percent of the energy consumed in Western Europe . In 1950, solid fuel was used to fuel Europe's energy production .
 Seventy-five percent of Italy’s energy requirements in 1973 were met by importing oil . For Portugal the figure was 80 percent; for Portugal it was 80% .
 The UK would for a while become self-sufficient thanks to newly discovered reserves of oil in the North Sea . The UK had only begun production in 1971, when oil was discovered in 1971 .
 Floating exchange rates and oil price increases introduced an unprecedented element of uncertainty, says IMF . Floating exchange rate rates and price increases have introduced unprecedented uncertainty, IMF says .
 Prices and wages had risen steadily, if moderately, over the course of the previous two decades . But inflation now took off, with inflation now taking off .
 OECD: Inflation rate in non-Communist Europe for the years 1961-1969 was steady at 3. percent . From 1969-1973 it was 6. percent; from 1973-1979 it averaged 11. percent. According to the OECD, inflation rate in the region was steady .
 French prices inflated at an average of 10. percent per annum in the 1970s and 1980s . Prices inflated at least 10 percent per year in France .
 In Italy the inflation rate averaged 16. percent; in Spain it averaged 18 percent . In Italy, inflation rates averaged 16 percent . Italy's inflation rate is 16 percent; Spain's rate is 18 percent. In Italy it was 16 percent.
 The UK inflation rate exceeded 24 percent per annum in 2013 . The UK average was 15. percent, but in its worst year inflation was 24 percent . Inflation in the UK was the highest in the world at 15.9 percent .
 Price and wage inflation at these levels is not historically unprecedented, economists say . It's not unprecedented for inflation to be inflationary in the U.S.
 After the stable rates of the fifties and sixties it was a new experience for most people—and for their governments . The rate of inflation was stable in the 1950s and '60s, but it was still rising in the 1960s, '80s, and '
 In the past, inflation was associated with growth, often over-rapid growth . Inflation is associated with inflation, often associated with over-growth .
 In 1970s Europe the conventional pattern seemed no longer to apply . But in 1970s European politics seemed to be on the wane . In the 1980s Europe was on the edge of a power vacuum .
 In retrospect this outcome is less surprising than it seemed to contemporaries . In retrospect, the outcome is not surprising than they seemed to have been .
 By 1970 the great migration of surplus agricultural labor into productive urban industry was over . There was no more ‘slack’ to be taken up and rates of productivity increase began inexorably to decline .
 Workers’ representatives were pressing their case for higher wages and other compensation upon economies that were already showing signs of exhaustion even before the crisis of 1973 .
 Real wages had begun to outstrip productivity growth; profits were declining; new investment fell away . New investment was also falling away from the United States .
 The excess capacity born of enthusiastic post-war investment strategies could only be absorbed by inflation or unemployment . It is not the only way to deal with inflation, unemployment, it is inflation .
 The depression of the 1970s seemed worse than it was because of the contrast with what had gone before . The depression was the result of a contrast between the two decades before and after the 1980s .
 By historical standards the average rates of Gross Domestic Product growth in western Europe through the 1970s were not especially low . The average rate of growth was not particularly low .
 France, Germany and the UK had average growth rates of 1. percent over the years 1913-1950 . Norway had the highest average growth rate of 4.4 percent in the same period .
 The pain was made worse by growing export competition from new industrial countries in Asia and ever more costly import bills as commodities increased in price . Nevertheless, the pain was real, made worse .
 By the end of the decade the numbers out of work in France exceeded 7 percent of the workforce; in Italy 8 percent; in the UK 9 percent . In the UK, 9 percent is 9 percent; France's unemployment rate is 7 percent, Italy's 8 percent .
 In some countries, unemployment levels in the seventies and early eighties were comparable to those experienced in the 1930s . In France and Italy they were actually worse. In some cases, unemployment rates were worse.
 One immediate result of the economic down-turn was a hardening of attitudes towards ‘foreign workers of all sorts’ One immediate reaction to the economic downturn has been hardening attitudes towards foreigners .
 Unemployment rates in West Germany did not climb above 8 percent of the labor force despite a slump in demand for manufactured goods . It was because most of the unemployed workers in Germany were not German, and thus not officially recorded .
 Audi and BMW laid off large numbers of their workforce in 1974 and 1975 . Four out of five BMW employees who lost their jobs were not German citizens . Audi: ‘Guest workers’ who went first were ‘guest workers'
 Federal Republic permanently closed its recruiting offices in 1975 . Recruitment offices in North Africa, Portugal, Spain and Yugoslavia were closed . In 1975, the Federal Republic closed its recruitment offices in all four countries .
 290,000 immigrant workers and their families left West Germany for Turkey, Yugoslavia, Greece and Italy in 1975 . In 1975, 300,000 workers and families left Germany for countries such as Greece, Turkey and Yugoslavia .
 In that same year, 200,000 Spaniards returned to Spain in search of work . Returnees to Italy now outnumbered emigrants for the first time in modern memory in modern history .
 By the midseventies, nearly a third of a million Yugoslav emigrants had been obliged to return to the Balkans . The expectation of employment in the Balkans was no better than in Germany or France .
 The northern European jobs crisis was being re-exported to the Mediterranean . Northern Europe's northern jobs crisis is being brought back to Mediterranean .
 TJnited Kingdom placed ever tighter limits on would-be immigrants from the South Asian sub-continent . France imposed strict restrictions on immigration from Algeria and its former African colonies .
 The combination of structural unemployment, rising oil import bills, inflation 3 . An average, of course, is just an average. An average .
 Even West Germany, the continents manufacturing capital and leading exporter, was not spared . West Germany was the continent's leading manufacturing capital .
 The country’s balance-of-payments surplus of $9,481 million in 1973 fell within a year to a deficit of $692 million . In 1973, the country had a $9.481 million surplus .
 The British national accounts were by now chronically in deficit . By December 1976 there appeared a serious risk of a national debt default . The International Monetary Fund was called in to bail Britain out .
 French payments balances fell into the red in 1974 and remained there for most of the ensuing decade . France's payments balances remained in the red for the entire period .
 Italy, like Britain, was forced to turn to the IMF for help in 1977 . Italy was forced in April 1977 to seek help from the IMF . The IMF has since emerged as a major source of support for the Italian government .
 As in the British case its leaders could then blame ‘international forces’ for the unpopular domestic policy measures that ensued . The British case was similar to that of Britain in the 1980s .
 In Keynesian thinking, budget shortfalls and payments deficits, like inflation itself, were not inherently evil . In Keynes' thinking, shortfalls weren't inherently evil, but they were not necessarily evil .
 In the Thirties they had represented a plausible prescription for ‘spending your way’ out of recession . In the 1930s, they had been a popular way to get out of the recession . Now, they have been replaced by a plan to spend your way out of
 Western European governments already spent heavily on welfare, social services, public utilities and infrastructure investment . But in the Seventies, all Western Europe governments already had to spend heavily .
 The risk now is of growing domestic pressure to re-impose protection against competition . If anything, the risk now was of growing pressure to rein in protection against trade .
 There was a further complicating element in the choices facing policymakers in the 1970s . There was also a complicating factor in the decisions facing policymakers .
 The economic crisis coincided with a far-reaching transformation which governments could do little to arrest . The crisis, however circumstantial and conjunctural its triggers, coincided with an economic transformation . Governments could do nothing to arrest the transformation of the economy .
 In the course of a generation, Western Europe had undergone a third ‘industrial revolution’; the smokestack industries that had been so much a part of daily life just a few years before were on their way out . Western Europe was experiencing a third 'industrial revolution'
 If steelworkers, miners, car workers and mill hands were losing jobs, it wasn’t just because of a cyclical downturn in the local economy, or even a by-product of the oil crisis . If you want to know more of the story, contact CNN iReport
 The venerable manufacturing economy of Western Europe was disappearing . Western Europe's manufacturing economy was disappearing in the 1990s .
 The evidence was incontrovertible, though policymakers had been trying hard to ignore its implications . The evidence is incontrovable, but policymakers had tried to ignore it for years .
 Between 1955 and 1985 100,000 mining jobs disappeared in Belgium . Ancillary trades of various kinds suffered accordingly . Belgium's mining industry suffered from the loss of jobs .
 Even greater losses were experienced in British mining, though spread across a longer period . British mining losses were also experienced in Britain in the 1930s .
 Steel, the other staple industry of industrial Europe, suffered a similar fate . Steel is a staple industry in industrial Europe . Steel was once a major industrial hub in Europe .
 It was not that demand for steel had fallen so very dramatically—unlike coal, it could not so readily be replaced . Steel demand has fallen so much that it could be replaced by demand for coal .
 As more non-European countries enter the industrial ranks, competition increased, the price fell . The market for expensively produced European steel collapsed . The price of European steel fell as competition increased and competition increased .
 Shipbuilding declined for similar reasons; motor car manufacturing and textiles likewise . Shipbuilding also declined . Textiles, textiles and shipbuilding declined in recent years .
 Courtaulds, the UK’s leading textile and chemical combine, reduced its workforce by 50 percent in the years 1977-83 . The company is now the world's leading chemical and textile combine .
 The recession of the Seventies saw an acceleration of job losses in virtually every traditional industry . The recession was the worst of the '70s and '80s recession of all time'
 Before 1973, the transformation was already under way in coal, iron, steel, engineering, engineering . thereafter it spread to chemicals, textiles, paper and consumer goods .
 The industrial zone of Lorraine, in north-west France, lost 28 percent of its manufacturing jobs . Lorraine lost 28 per cent of manufacturing jobs in the last decade .
 Industrial workforce in Liineburg, West Germany, fell by 42 percent in the same years . The industrial workforce in West Germany also fell 42 percent during the same period .
 When FIAT of Turin began its switch to robotization at the end of the 1970s, 65,000 jobs were lost in just three years . The company's switch to robots was due to be made to save millions of jobs .
 In the 1950s, 40 percent of the workforce was employed in industry in the city of Amsterdam . A quarter of a century later, the figure was just one employee in seven .
 In the past, the social cost of economic change on this scale would have been traumatic, with unpredictable political consequences . In this case, it has been traumatic for the country's economy to change at this pace . But it is not the first time in decades that such change has taken place
 Thanks to the institutions of the welfare state, protests were contained . The welfare state was able to contain the protests in the 1930s .
 In the years 1969-1975 there were angry marches, sit-ins, strikes and petitions all across industrial Western Europe, from Spain to Britain . Two major strikes by coalminers in 1972 and 1974 persuaded a nervous Conservative government that it might be the better part of val
 The miners and steelworkers were the best-known and perhaps the most desperate of the organized protesters of the time . They were not the most militant, but they were not most militant .
 The decline in the number of workers in old industries had shifted the balance of strength in trade union movements to the service sector . Service-sector unions are rapidly growing and their constituency is rapidly growing .
 In Italy, even as Communist-led industrial organizations lost members, teachers and civil service unions grew in size and militancy . Even as the older, Communist led industrial organizations lose members, unions grew .
 Combative service-sector unions —Force Ouvriere in France, NALGO, NUPE and ASTMS in Britain 4 — enthusiastically took up the cause of the young and the jobless . It was the combative service sector unions . Force Ouvry in France
 Faced with a raft of demands for job security and wage protection, European leaders initially resorted to proven past practice . European leaders have been forced to rely on proven past practices .
 Inflationary wage settlements were negotiated with powerful unions in Britain and France . In Italy a flat-rate indexing system linking wages to prices, the Scala Mobile, was inaugurated in 1975 .
 In West Germany the Federal government encouraged private consolidation rather than state control, but with similar cartelizing outcomes . The Federal government, following form of form, encouraged private consolidations .
 By the mid-seventies one holding company, Ruhrkohle AG, was responsible for 95 percent of the mining output of the district .
 What remained of the domestic textile industries of France and Britain was preserved, for the sake of the jobs it offered in depressed regions, by substantial direct job subsidies and protective measures .
 Bonn government covers 80 percent of the wage costs of industrial employees put on part-time work . Bonn's government has to cover the wages of industrial workers on part time work . In the Federal Republic, the government covered 80 percent .
 Swedish government poured cash into its unprofitable but politically sensitive shipyards . Sweden's shipyards are a politically sensitive industry . Swedish shipyards have been heavily criticized by the government .
 There are national variations in these responses to economic downturns . There were national variations of these responses .
 The French authorities pursued a practice of micro-economic intervention, identifying ‘national champions’ by sector and favoring them with contracts, cash and guarantees . UK Treasury continued its venerable tradition of macroeconomic manipulation through taxes, interest rates and blanket subsidies .
 Polls show little variation on how little variation there was on political lines . But what is striking is how little difference there was between political parties .
 A growing number of politicians came to the conviction that inflation now posed greater risks than high levels of unemployment . The human and political costs of joblessness were high, and the human costs of unemployment were high .
 Inflation could not be addressed without some sort of international arrangements for the regulation of currencies and exchange rates . Bretton Woods system was precipitately overthrown by Washington .
 Even the French were forced out of the ‘snake’ in 1974 and again in 1976 . The French were twice forced out by the French .
 A grid of fixed bilateral exchange rates would be set up, linked by a purely notional unit of measure, the European Currency Unit . The grid would be linked by the stability and anti-inflationary priorities of the German economy and the Bundesbank .
 The Deutschmark was first German initiative of its kind . It amounted in fact if not in name to the recommendation that, for Europe at least, the DeutschMark replace the dollar as the currency of reference .
 UK PM James Callaghan correctly understood that the EMS would prevent Britain adopting reflationary policies to address the country’s unemployment problem . Some countries stayed out .
 This was the true long-term significance of the new arrangements. Indeed, this was this was . Indeed, it was . The new arrangements will not only affect the future of the United States, but also the future .
 It was not so much that they succeeded in time in driving out the demon of inflation , but that they did so by depriving national governments of their initiative in domestic policy .
 This was a momentous shift, of greater consequence than was sometimes appreciated at the time . This was an important shift, and it was a significant shift, says the former president .
 In the past, if a government opted for a ‘hard money’ strategy by adhering to the gold standard or declining to lower interest rates, it had to answer to its local electorate .
 If the European state can't square the circle of full employment, high real wages and economic growth, then it will face the wrath of those constituents who felt betrayed .
 It was the heavily-taxed middle classes whose troubles translated most effectively into political opposition . It was white-collar public and private employees, small tradesmen and the self-employed . The middle classes' troubles translate most effectively to opposition .
 The greatest beneficiaries of the modern welfare state, after all, were the middle classes . The welfare state has been a boon to the middle class since the 1970s .
 As in the past, inflation was felt most severely by citizens of the middling sort . Inflation was made worse by the endemic high taxation of the modern service state .
 The fear that Europe’s democracies had lost control of their fate derived from a number of sources . The fear, widely expressed in the course of the 1970s, was widely expressed by the public .
 In the first place there was a backlog of nervousness provoked by the iconoclastic rebellions of the 1960s . What had seemed curious and exciting in the confident atmosphere of those days now looked more and more like a harbinger of uncertainty and anarchy .
 Governments seemed helpless to act on job losses and inflation, about which governments seemed helpless . Then there was the more immediate anxiety born of job losses .
 European leaders appeared to have lost control was itself a source of public angst . Politicians found some advantage in insisting upon their own inadequacy, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In Britain there was even passing talk of the inadequacy of democratic instituaries . In Britain, even passing . talk of . the inadequacies of democratic . institutes .
 Like De Gaulle, some senior British political figures met with police and military leaders to reassure themselves of their support in the event of public disorder . Some senior British figures in these years thought it prudent to meet with police .
 Even in Scandinavia and the Low Countries, the core legitimacy of representative institutions was never seriously called into question . The disarray of the world financial system, the unraveling of the post-war economy and the disaffection of traditional electorates called into questioning the easy confidence of the
 Behind these nebulous stirrings of doubt and disillusion, there was a very real and, as it seemed at the time, present threat . Behind these stirrings, there were real and real threats to the UK in the 1980s .
 Since the end of the Second World War, Western Europe had been largely preserved from civil conflict, much less open violence . Western Europe has largely avoided civil conflict since the war's end .
 Armed force had been deployed to bloody effect all across Eastern Europe, in the European colonies, and throughout Asia, Africa and South America . Armed force was deployed in Eastern Europe and in the colonies, including Asia and Africa .
 The Cold War notwithstanding, heated and murderous struggles were a feature of the post-war decades . Millions of soldiers and civilians were killed from Korea to the Congo .
 The United States itself had been the site of three political assassinations and more than one bloody riot . The U.S. had been at the sites of three assassinations, more than a riot .
 European policemen did beat or shoot civilians, the latter were usually foreigners, often dark-skinned . When European policemen beat or shot civilians, they were often foreigners . The victims were often dark skinned and often unarmed .
 Western Europe was rarely called upon by its governments to handle violent opposition . When they were, the violence was often of their own perpetrating . The forces of order in Western Europe were rarely called on by their governments .
 By the standards of the interwar decades, Europe’s city streets were quite remarkably safe . Europe's well-regulated society was contrasted with the rampant and uncaring individualism of urban America .
 The French police murdered an estimated two hundred Algerians, many of them drowned in the Seine, following a protest march through Paris . Watergate and the fall of Saigon had decidedly reduced America’s standing while the USSR, as the world’�s 7, had decidedly
 Chief of Police at the time was Maurice Papon, later indicted and found guilty of crimes against humanity for his collaboration in the wartime rounding up and despatch of French Jews to Auschwitz . Papon was later indicted .
 Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn’s Gulag Archipelago and his expulsion from the Soviet Union in February 1974, followed within a few years by the massacres in Cambodia and the plight of the Vietnamese ‘boat people’, ensured that there would be no revival of
 Nor, except in a very few marginal instances, was there a credible revival of the far Right, writes Simon Tisdall . The far Right was not a major party in Britain in the 1980s, he says .
 Italy’s neo-Fascist Movimento Sociale Sociale Italiano never received more than 6. percent of the vote in national elections . In any case took care to present itself as a legitimate political party .
 Like comparable parties of the nationalist fringe in Belgium, France or Britain, they had negligible electoral significance . The nationalists in West Germany were less concerned with such niceties of appearance .
 Communism and Fascism, in their classic incarnations, had no future in Western Europe . In short, Fascism and Communism had no way of success in Europe, writes David Frum .
 Western European society faced two violent challenges in the 1970s . Western Europe faced two major challenges, including the rise of the Soviet Union and the fall of Soviet Russia .
 The first of these was pathological, in the sense that it was born of a longstanding malaise, albeit cast in a very modern form . The first was a pathological, the sense of a long-suffering, but the second was a modern form of malaising .
 In the Basque region of northern Spain, in the Catholic minority of Northern Ireland, in Corsica and elsewhere, old grievances flared into violent revolt . The Catholic minority in Northern Ireland and Corsica are among the areas of unrest .
 The Basques and the Ulster Catholics, however, were another matter altogether . The Ulster Catholics and Basques were not the same thing .
 The emergence of modern Basque terrorism was a direct response to Franco’s policies, though its spokesmen and defenders always claimed deeper roots in their region's frustrated dreams of independence . Franco's policies have always been linked to the Basque separatist movement, though .
 ETA —Euskadi TaAskatasuna (Basquia and Freedom) was formed in December 1958 to lead the armed struggle for Basque independence . ETA was formed to fight for independence from Spain .
 Like the IRA and other comparable organizations, ETA had ambitions to function as a society within the state . ETA also had ambitions of becoming a society in the state, like the IRA, they said .
 This did not prevent ETA from assassinating Franco’s Prime Minister (Admiral Luis Carrero Blanco) in Madrid on December 20th 1973, or killing twelve civilians in a bomb attack in the capital nine months later .
 The execution of five ETA gunmen in September 1975, shortly before Franco’s death, did not have any moderating impact on ETA’S activities . Nor did the executions of five gunmen in Sept. 1975, when Franco was assassinated, have moderated their activities .
 What the Basque region got, under Spain’s post-Franco constitution, was a Statute of Autonomy . It was approved by referendum in 1979 . The Statute was approved in 1979 by referendum .
 E.ETA stepped up its campaigns of bombing and assassination . The group is angry at the prospect of losing support of moderate sympathizers .
 The economic transformations of Spain in the 1960s, and the large-scale migrations within the country and abroad, had wrought changes that the old nationalists and their fanatical young followers simply did not grasp . The economic . changes of the . 1960s and the . large . scale migr
 By the mid-eighties, less than half of the population of the Basque region had Basque parents, much less Basque grandparents . By the 1980s, the region's population was less than 50% Basque .
 As its political project lost touch with social reality ETA became ever more extreme . Having forgotten its aim it redoubled its efforts, to cite George Santayana's definition of fanaticism .
 Financed by crime and extortion, its operatives increasingly constrained to function from across the border in the Basque departements of south-west France . ETA survived and it survives still, murdering the occasional politician or village policeman .
 The Spanish state has failed to mobilize Basque sentiment in support of political independence, or to bludgeon the Spanish state into conceding its case . But it has failed either to mobilize support for political independence .
 ETA’s greatest ‘success’ came early in the 1980s, when its actions prompted the Socialist Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez to allow counterterrorist hit men to base themselves illegally on French soil and pick off ETA operatives .
 Gonzalez’s decision, only revealed many years later (see Chapter 22), has cast a retrospective shadow across the early post-Franco years of constitutional democracy in Spain .
 The Provisional IRA was much like ETA in its methods, and in some of its proclaimed objectives . It was also much like the IRA in terms of its methods and its proclaimed goals .
 The Irish Republican Army aimed at making Northern Ireland ungovernable, expelling the British, and uniting the six northern provinces with the rest of Ireland . ETA sought to make the Basque provinces ungovernability and thereby secure their exit from Spain, so did ETA .
 Since an independent Ireland already existed, there was—at least in principle—a practicable national goal for the rebels to hold out to their supporters . An independent Ireland was a feasible national goal, but there was no such thing as an independent republic .
 There was more than one Northern Irish community, but distinctions between them went back a long way . On the other hand, the distinctions between the two communities went back to a very long way.
 Northern Ireland—Ulster—was both a colonial remnant and an integral part of the metropolitan nation itself . Like French Algeria, Northern Ireland --Ulster -- was both colonial remnants and part of Northern Ireland .
 When London relinquished Ireland to the Irish, in 1922, the UK retained the six northern counties of the island on the reasonable grounds that the overwhelmingly Protestant majority there was intensely loyal to Britain . The majority of the counties were Protestant and had no desire to be governed from Dublin .
 Whatever they said in public, the political leaders of the new Republic were themselves not altogether unhappy to forgo the presence of a compact and sizeable community of recalcitrant Protestants .
 As this last observation suggests, the divisions in Northern Ireland were unusually complicated . Northern Ireland was unusually complicated in the 1930s .
 Referenges to seventeenthand eighteenth-century quarrels and victories might appear to outsiders absurdly ritualistic, but the history behind them was real . And it was ancient . The history behind these references was real and ancient .
 The Catholic/Protestant divide was never a class distinction in the conventional sense, despite the IRA’s efforts to import Marxist categories into its rhetoric . But the Catholic/Pentitant divide never was a class divide in the traditional sense .
 There were workers and priests—and a lesser extent landowners, businessmen and professionals—on both sides . There were both sides of the divide, including those of priests and priests .
 Many Ulster Catholics felt no urgent desire to be ruled from Dublin . Moreover, many Ulster Catholics were not keen on a Dublin-based government .
 In the 1960s Ireland was still a poor and backward country . The standard of living in the North, while below that of most of the UK, was still considerably above the Irish average .
 Old industries of Ulster, like those of the rest of the UK, were in decline by the end of the 1960s . It was already clear to planners in London that the overwhelmingly Protestant blue-collar workforce there had an uncertain future .
 It is fair to say that the British authorities had not given Ulster serious thought for many decades . But beyond this, it is fair that they had not considered it seriously for decades . It is not the first time the British government has given serious thought to the area .
 The IRA had declined to a marginal political sect, denouncing the Irish Republic as illegitimate because incomplete because incomplete . The IRA was reiterating its ‘revolutionary’ aspiration to forge a different Ireland .
 Faced with growing public violence and demands from Catholic leaders for London to intervene, the UK government sent in the British Army and took over control of policing in six counties .
 The army, recruited largely in mainland Britain, was decidedly less partisan and on the whole less brutal than the local police .
 Various efforts through the 1970s to build inter-community confidence and allow the province to run its own affairs fell foul of suspicion and intransigence on both sides . Various efforts to build confidence in the province fell through suspicion .
 Catholics mistrusts promises of power-sharing and civic equality emanating from Ulster Protestant leadership . Catholics had good precedent for mistrusting promises from Ulster Protestants . Ulster Protestant leaders have a history of mistrusting each other .
 The Provisionals were now seriously fearful of the intransigent gunmen of the Provisionals . The latter, always reluctant to make real concessions to the Catholic minority, were now .
 Without the British military presence the province would have descended further into open civil war . The British presence would have kept the province at bay for years . Without the presence of British troops, it would have been worse .
 At first London was sympathetic to Catholic pressure for reforms . But following the killing of a British soldier in February 1971 the government introduced internment without trial and the situation deteriorated rapidly .
 British paratroopers killed 13 civilians in the streets of Derry on 'Bloody Sunday' in 1972 .
 The Provisional IRA mounted what was to become a thirty-year campaign . It bombed, shot and maimed soldiers and civilians in Ulster and across mainland Britain .
 It made at least one attempt to assassinate the British Prime Minister . It also attempted to kill the Prime Minister in the 1980s .
 The Provisionals took their name from the April 24th 1916 declaration in Dublin, when the insurrectionists proclaimed a provisional government . Even if the British authorities had wanted to walk away, the Provisionals were not ready to accept responsibility .
 An overwhelming majority of the people of Ulster wished to maintain their ties to Britain . As a referendum of March 1973 showed and later polls confirmed, the majority of people in Northern Ireland wished to remain in Britain .
 The assassination of politicians and public figures shocked public opinion on both sides of the Irish Sea . Nor did it destabilize British politics, though the assassination of Lord Mountbatten, former Viceroy of India, surprised public opinion .
 Irish ‘Troubles’ further darkened an already gloomy decade in British public life . The Troubles contributed to the ‘ungovernability’ thesis being touted at the time .
 1,800 people had been killed and one Ulster resident in five had a family member killed or wounded in the fighting . By the time the Provisional IRA and Protestant paramilitary groups that had emerged in its wake, the fighting had been over . The British government might have been pleased to concede
 The other 'pathologies' of 1970s Europe were small indeed, though they contributed to the widespread atmosphere of unease . Against this background, the other ‘pathologies’ of the 1970s European politics were small .
 Selfstyled Angry Brigade’, purportedly acting on behalf of the unrepresented unemployed, planted bombs around London in 1971 . Self-styled 'Angry Brigade' planted bombs in London in 1970s .
 Francophone separatists in the Swiss Jura rioted in 1974 at their enforced incorporation into the canton of Bern . They modeled their tactics on those of the Irish, modeling their tactics .
 Crowds of rioters in Liverpool, Bristol and London battled with police over control of 'no-go' slums . Rioters in Bristol, Liverpool and Brixton district of London clashed with police .
 They were trying to achieve something and would have desisted if their demands were met . They would have been met if they had been met, but they would not have left .
 ETA, the IRA and its imitators were terrorist organizations; but they were not irrational . ETA and the IRA were terrorists, but not irrational. They are not irrational, they are irrational. ETA was a terrorist organization, but it was not irrational to attack .
 In due course most of them ended up negotiating with their enemies, in the hope of securing their objectives if only in part . Most of the time most of the negotiations were successful .
 But such considerations were never of interest to protagonists of the second violent challenge of the times . Such considerations were not of interest in protagonists of this violent challenge .
 In most of Western Europe, the airy radical theorems of the 1960s dissipated harmlessly enough enough . The 1960s were the most successful period of radicalism in Western Europe . But radicalism is still a problem in Europe .
 In two countries it metamorphosed into a psychosis of self-justifying aggression . But in two countries in particular they metamorphose into psychosis of aggression .
 A small minority of erstwhile student radicals set about ‘revealing’ the ‘true face’ of repressive tolerance in Western democracies . The 'true face' of repression in Western democracy is revealed in the book .
 If the parliamentary regime of capitalist interests were pushed hard enough, they reasoned, it would shed the cloak of legality and show its true face . They reasoned that if pushed hard, the regime would shed its cloak and show the true face of capitalism .
 Such a summary gives too much credit to the terrorist underground of the 1970s, too little . The U.S. government has been accused of being a terrorist organization in the past . President George W. Bush was assassinated by the CIA in 1993 .
 Most of the young men and women swept up in it, however familiar they were with the justificatory vocabulary of violence, played little part in its formulation . Most of those swept up, however . But most of the . young . people swept up . up in the . justific
 West Germany's hatred of the Federal Republic drew on sources deeper and darker than the mal-adapted rhetorical gymnastics of nineteenth-century radicalism . On the other hand, especially in West Germany, the emotional energy invested in their hatred of Germany drew on deeper sources of their hatred .
 The urge to bring the architecture of security and stability crashing down on the heads of their parents’ generation was the extreme expression of a more widespread skepticism, in the light of the recent past, about the local credibility of pluralist democracy, the author says .
 'revolutionary terror' took its most menacing form in Germany and Italy . It was not by chance, therefore, that ‘revolutionary terrorism’ took its form in Italy and Germany .
 The link between extra-parliamentary politics and outright violence first emerged in Germany as early as 1968 . Four young radicals were arrested on suspicion of burning two department stores in Frankfurt .
 Baader escaped from prison in the course of an armed raid planned and led by Ulrike Meinhof . Two years later Baader was released from prison .
 She and Baader then issued their ‘Concept City Guerrilla Manifesto’ announcing the formation of a ‘Rote Armee Fraktion ’ Their goal was to dismantle the Federal Republic by force .
 RAF and ancillary offshoots pursued a strategy of deliberately random terror . Between 1970 and 1978, the RAF and its affiliates targeted soldiers, policemen, businessmen and businessmen .
 In the early years they also targeted American Army bases in West Germany, killing and injuring a number of soldiers, notably in the late spring of 1972 . In the late 1970s, the group killed and injured a few soldiers, most of them soldiers .
 RAF kidnapped and executed Hans Martin Schleyer, the chairman of Daimler Benz and President of the West German Federation of Industries, and assassinated both Siegfried Buback and Jurgen Ponto, the head of Dresdner Bank . In their peak year of 1977, the
 Already in May 1976, Meinhof had been found dead in her Stuttgart prison cell . Already, already, she had already died in prison .
 She had apparently hung herself, though rumors persisted that she had been executed by the state . Rumors persisted that the state had executed her . She had hung herself in her home .
 Since the German terrorist underground had no defined goals, its achievements can only be measured by the extent of its success in disrupting German public life and undermining the institutions of the Republic . The terrorist underground's success can be measured only by extent of the success of disrupting public life .
 The most distinctively repressive governmental action of the time was the passing of the Berufsverbot in 1972 by the Social Democratic government of Willy Brandt .
 This decree excluded from state employment any person who engaged in political acts considered detrimental to the Constitution . The decree was ostensibly aimed at keeping supporters of Left and Right political extremes out of sensitive posts .
 In a culture already preternaturally disposed to public conformity this aroused fears of censorship and worse . But it was hardly the prelude to dictatorship that its critics feared and hoped .
 The Baader-Meinhof Group was able to tap into a fund of sympathy for its ideas among otherwise law-abiding intellectuals and academics . Much more worrying was the extent to which the Baader group in particular could tap into the fund of generalized sympathy .
 One source of local sympathy was a growing nostalgia in literary and artistic circles for Germany’s lost past . A growing nostalgia for Germany's lost past was growing in literary circles for the past .
 The distinctly nationalist tinge to German extreme-Left terrorism rang a chord, as did the terrorists’ claim that it was Germans who were now the victims of the manipulations and interests of others . Terrorists targeted American occupiers, multinational corporations and the ‘international’ capitalist
 These years saw an outpouring of films, speeches, books, TV programs and public commentary on the country’s problematic history and identity . These same years saw a outpour of films and speeches .
 In Reitz’s film the inter-war years especially are bathed in a sepia-like afterglow of fond memory . Even the Nazi era is hardly permitted to intrude upon fond recollections of better times .
 Reitz, like Syberberg and others, was publicly scornful of the American television series ‘Holocaust’ The series was first shown on German television in 1979 .
 If there were to be depictions of Germany’s past, however painful, then it was the business of Germans to produce them, he says . He says .
 The application of a ‘commercial aesthetic’ to Germany’s past was the U.S. way of controlling it, says the author .
 The struggle of German directors and artists against American ‘kitsch’ was part of the struggle against American capitalism . The struggle against the American 'kitsch' is part of a struggle against capitalism .
 Reitz and Fassbinder were among the directors of Deutschland im Herbst (‘Germany in Autumn’) a 1978 collage of documentary, movie clips and interviews covering the events of the autumn of 1977, notably the kidnapping and killing of Hans Martin Schley
 The film is notable not so much for its expressions of empathy for the terrorists as for the distinctive terms in which these are conveyed . It is notable for its distinctive terms of empathy .
 By careful inter-cutting, the Third Reich and the Federal Republic are made to share a family resemblance . The Third Reich is made to look like the German Republic .
 Deutschland im Herbst depicts West Germany as a police state akin to Nazism if only in its capacity for repression and violence . Considerable cinematic talent was deployed to depict West Germany's police state, akin to Naziism .
 Horst Mahler, a semi-repentant terrorist then still in prison, explains to the camera that the emergence of an extra-parliamentary opposition in 1967 was the 'antifascist revolution' that did not happen in 1945 .
 The implicit relativizing of Nazism in Deutschland im Herbst was already becoming quite explicit in intellectual apologias for anti-capitalist terror . In Germany, Nazism was already being used as an excuse to justify anti-capitalism .
 It was this easy slippage that helped account for the German radical Left’s distinctive insensitivity on the subject of Jews . The thought that what binds Nazism and capitalist democracy is more important than their differences is important, he says .
 On September 5th 1972, the Palestinian organization Black September attacked the Israeli team at the Munich Olympics and killed eleven athletes . Eleven athletes, as well as one German policeman, were killed .
 The link between Palestinian organizations and European terrorist groups was already wellestablished . Ensslin, Baader and Meinhof all ‘trained’ at one time with Palestinian guerillas .
 Germans, not Jews, were now the victims, and U.S. capitalism, not German National Socialism, was the perpetrator . Americans, not Germans, were the victims; and American capitalism was the perpetrators .
 There was a ‘new patriotism’ abroad in West Germany, and it is more than a little ironic that Baader, Meinhof and their friends, whose violent revolt was initially directed against the Germany-first self-satisfaction of their parents .
 Horst Mahler was one of the few surviving founders of Left terrorism in West Germany . Mahler is now on the far Right of the political spectrum . He was a founding member of the West German Left terrorist group .
 In external respects, contemporary Italian terrorism was not markedly different from the German kind . In external respect, it was similar to the German terrorism of the 1930s and '60s .
 It too drew on para-Marxist rhetoric from the Sixties, and most of its leaders received their political education in the university protests of that time . Most of the party's leaders were students at the time of the 1960s .
 Like Baader, Meinhof and others, the leaders of the BR were young , mostly former students, and devoted to armed underground struggle for its own sake . The BR was dedicated to armed struggle for the sake of its own .
 From the outset, Italian Left terrorists placed far greater emphasis upon their purported relationship to the ‘workers’ and indeed in certain industrial towns of the north, Milan in particular, the more respectable fringes of the ultra-Left did have a small popular following .
 Unlike the German terrorists, the Italian far Left was grouped around a tiny hard core of criminals . The far Left ranged from legitimate political parties through guerrilla networks to micro-sects of armed political bandits .
 These groups and sects replicated in miniature the fissiparous history of the mainstream European Left .
 In the 1970s each violent act would be followed by assertions of responsibility by hitherto unknown organizations, frequently by sub-sections and breakaways from the original unit .
 Beyond the terrorists themselves orbited a loose constellation of semi-clandestine movements and journals whose sententious ‘theoretical’ pronouncements offered ideological cover for terrorist tactics . Beyond terrorists themselves, there were also semi-secretive movements, journals and movements .
 The impact of their efforts to bring themselves to public attention should not be underestimated . If this list suggests in retrospect a desperate desire to inflate the social and revolutionary significance of a few thousand ex-students and their followers .
 Curcio, his companion Mara Cagol and their friends may have been living out in fantasy a romanticized fairy tale of revolutionary bandits . But the damage they wrought was real enough . Curcia, his companions and friends were real enough, but the damage was real .
 Between 1970 and 1981 not a year passed in Italy without murders, mutilations, kidnapping, assaults and other acts of public violence . Not a year in Italy passed in those years without a year of violence in Italy .
 Three politicians, nine magistrates, sixty-five policemen and some three hundred others fell victim to assassination . Three hundred others were assassinated in the course of the decade, including three hundred people .
 By the mid-seventies they had progressed to political assassination—at first of right-wing politicians, then po474 DIMINISHED EXPECTATIONS licemen, journalists and public prosecutors . In a strategy designed to ‘strip away the mask’ of bourgeois legality
 Until 1978 the Red Brigades had failed to provoke the desired backlash, despite a rising crescendo of attacks in the course of the previous year . Until 1978, the Red Brigade had not provoked a backlash against the Red Army .
 Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti refused even to consider the kidnappers’ demand for the release of political prisoners’ in exchange for Moro’s life . Moro was held hostage for two months; backed by the Communists and most of his own party .
 In spite of unanimous condemnation across the Italian political spectrum and appeals from the Pope and the Secretary General of the UN, the terrorists refused to relent . The terrorists refuse to relent. The Pope and UN Secretary General have appealed to the terrorists .
 On May 10th Aldo Moro’s body was found in a car brazenly parked on a street in the centre of Rome . The body of the Italian man was found on a car in a street on a Rome street .
 The Moro Affair certainly illustrated the incompetence of the Italian state . Interior Minister resigned the day after the body of the body was found, the Moro scandal .
 After eight years of frantic anti-terrorist legislation and nationwide manhunts, the police had manifestly failed to break the terrorist underground . The police had tried to find a way to break terrorist underground, but failed .
 The reverberations of the Red Brigades’ success in committing political murder at the very heart of the state and its capital city were significant . And the reverberations were significant, and the reverberation of the success was significant .
 Formazione Comuniste Combattenti assassinated a senior public prosecutor . Two weeks later, the Comunistist Party assassinated a public prosecutor in Italy .
 The very scale of the terrorists’ challenge to the state now began to extract a price . But the very scale . of the challenge to . the state . began to . extract a . price .
 Negri and his supporters insisted that the radical ‘autonomists’, neither clandestine nor armed, should not be confused with illegal secret societies . As in Germany, the police had actually found the leaders at one point, only to lose them again .
 The slogans of ‘mass illegality’, ‘permanent civil war’ and the need to organize ‘militarily’ against the bourgeois state were widely declaimed in respectable academic circles—including Negri’s own paper Rosso .
 Negri was affirming, and what the Red Brigades and their friends were practicing, was no different from the ‘cleansing power of force’ as exalted by Fascists . Fascists.
 By 1980 both the targets and the methods of terrorist Left and terrorist Right in Italy had become indistinguishable . The targets and methods of terrorism in Italy were indistinguishable, says the author .
 The re-emergence of neo-Fascist terror and the resurgence of Mafia violence illustrated and exacerbated the vulnerability of democratic institutions . Left terrorists interpreted these undertakings as a sign of their own success, says Julian Zelizer .
 Both extremes sought to destabilize the state by rendering normal public life intolerably dangerous . The far Right could count on some protection and collaboration from the very forces of order they sought to subvert .
 Democracy and the rule of law in Italy survived these years is a matter of no small note . Democracy and rule of the law is a vital part of Italy's history . Italy is one of the world's most successful democracies .
 From 1977 to 1982 especially, the country was under siege from random acts of extreme violence by far Left, far Right and professional criminals alike . In these same years, the Mafia and other criminal networks as well as the Mafia .
 While the more serious threat came from the extreme Right—better organized and much closer to the heart of the state—the 'Red' terrorists made the greater impact upon the public imagination .
 The Red Army Fraktion traded on widespread local sympathy for radical ideas . This was in part because, like the Red Army in Germany, they traded on local sympathy with radical ideas.
 Official Communists correctly saw this appropriation of the revolutionary heritage as the terrorists’ chief asset, as well as a symptom of the risk that they posed for the credibility of the mainstream Left . Official Communist Party officials correctly saw the appropriation as the terrorist's chief asset .
 The Red Brigades and the Red Army Fraktion were financed in part with money supplied by the Soviet secret services . They were like the similarly motivated but ineffectual Cellules communistes combattantes in Belgium and Action Directe in France .
 All the mainstream political organizations of the Left, Communists especially, were constrained to take and maintain their distance from violence of any kind . All of the mainstream parties in the U.S. have been involved in violence .
 The 'lead years' of the 1970s reminded everyone of just how fragile liberal democracies might actually be . But partly it was because the ‘lead years’ of the '70s served to remind everyone of how fragile democracies might be .
 The net effect of years of would-be revolutionary subversion at the heart of Western Europe was not to polarize society, as the terrorists had planned and expected, but rather to drive politicians of all sides to the safety of the middle ground .
 In the life of the mind, the nineteen seventies were the most dispiriting decade of the twentieth century . In the past, the seventies was the most difficult decade of American life .
 In a more threatening world, securing one’s self-interest took precedence over advancing common causes . In a world of threats, securing the nation's interests took precedence . The U.S. has been in a state of state of emergency since 2003 .
 There is no doubt that this change in mood was also a response to the heady indulgence of the previous decade . There is also a change in the mood after a decade of indulgence in indulgence, writes Simon Tisdall .
 The Sixties were marked by the naive, self-congratulatory impulse to believe that everything happening was new . The Seventies were an age of cynicism, of lost illusions and reduced expectations .
 It was an age depressingly aware of having come after the big hopes and ambitious ideas of the recent past, and having nothing to offer but breathless and implausible re-runs and extensions of old thoughts .
 It was, quite self-consciously, a ‘post-everything’ era, whose future prospects appeared cloudy . ‘Post-everything' era was a 'post, post-everything era, but future prospects were cloudy .
 The use of the hyphenated prefix postindicates sense of living in interstitial time, says Daniel Bell . As the American sociologist Daniel Bell observed at the time, ‘The use of . the . use of an interstitial . time, post-hyphenated .
 'Post-industrial' is a description of the real world, even if it left uncertain what might follow . The term had its uses, even though it was left uncertain of what might come next .
 ‘Post-Marxist’, ‘post-structuralist, and, most elusively of all, 'post-modern’ — it merely added to the obscurities of an already confused time . But when applied to categories of thought, it simply added
 The projects of the Sixties presumed a relationship between individual and class, class and society, society and state . That would have been familiar in its form if not its content to theorists and activists at any point in previous century .
 The culture of the Seventies turned not on the collective but on the individual, the author says . The culture turned to the individual in the '70s .
 Psychology now takes its place as the Ur-discipline of the Sixties . Just as anthropology had displaced philosophy, psychology now took its place . Psychology is now a major science discipline .
 In the course of the Sixties, the notion of ‘false consciousness’ had been widely taken up by young Marxists to explain the failure of workers and others to liberate themselves from identification with the capitalist interest .
 In a perverted variant this idea formed, as we have seen, the core premise of Left terrorism . The idea has been formed in the past, but it has been perverted by the Left . In the past it has emerged that the idea of terrorism has been used to justify terrorism
 The sexual variant on this theme was already a truism in certain milieux of the late Sixties . The idea that social and sexual repression were integrally linked was already an early truism .
 Marcuse, or Wilhelm Reich, stood in clear line of descent from both Freud and Marx . Marcuse sought collective transformation through individual liberation, seeking collective transformation .
 The followers of Jacques Lacan on the other hand, or contemporary theorists of feminism like Kate Millett and Annie Leclerc, were both less ambitious and more ambitious . The follower of Lacan was less ambitious than the followers of the Lacan .
 Instead they sought to undermine the very concept of the human subject that had once underlain them, they said . Instead, they wanted to destroy the idea that human subjects had once been underlained by them .
 Two widespread assumptions lay behind such thinking, shared very broadly across the intellectual community of the time . Two of the assumptions were shared by many in the intellectual world of the day .
 The first was that power rested not—as most social thinkers since the Enlightenment had supposed—upon control of natural and human resources, but upon the monopoly of knowledge, knowledge about the public sphere . The second was knowledge about how knowledge itself is produced and legitimized .
 At the time, this account of the human condition was widely associated with the writings of Michel Foucault . At the . time, it was widely and correctly associated with . Michel FouCault's writings of the . writings .
 Foucault was a rationalist at heart, but he was often obscurantantist . He was a French scientist and philosopher of the French Revolution .
 His early writings tracked closely the venerable Marxist claim that in order to liberate workers from the shackles of capitalism one had first to substitute a different account of history and economics for the self-serving narrative of bourgeois society .
 A second assumption, one that was to acquire an even stronger grip on intellectual fashions, went considerably further . The first assumption was that the future of the world's leading thinkers was to be a success .
 This was the seductive insistence upon subverting not just old certainties but the very possibility of certainty itself . This was a seductive attempt to subvert not just older certainties, but also the possibility of possibility itself .
 "All behavior, all opinion, all knowledge, precisely because it was socially derived and therefore politically instrumental, should be regarded with suspicion. All behavior ... should be viewed with suspicion," says David Cameron .
 The idea that judgments or evaluations might stand independent of the person making them came to be treated in certain quarters as itself the expression and representation of a partisan social position . The very idea that . evaluations . might stand . independent of . person making it .
 All iterations of judgment or belief could in principle be reduced in this way, says John Defterios .
 The natural outcome of such developments was a growing skepticism towards all rational social argument, says the author of the book . "The natural outcome is that the world is skeptical of rational social arguments," he says .
 The underlying and usually unacknowledged source of these predominantly French intellectual influences was, as so often, German . As so often in past decades, German was often German .
 The self-doubting Seventies were seduced by an altogether darker strain in German thought . The humanist sensibilities of an earlier generation were drawn to Marx and Hegel .
 Michel Foucault’s radical skepticism was an adaptation of Nietzsche, says Michel Poirier . He says he was inspired by the philosopher's work on skepticism . He calls the work of philosopher Alfred Drexler an example of Nietzsche's work .
 Other influential French authors, notably the literary critic Jacques Derrida, looked instead to Martin Heidegger, for their critique of human agency .
 To scholarly specialists on Heidegger or his German contemporary Carl Schmitt, this interest was more than a little odd . Schmitt's historicist realism was attracting attention among students of international affairs in Germany .
 Both Heidegger and Schmitt, after all, were identified with Nazism . Schmitt accepted academic office under Nazi auspices . Both were associated with the Nazis .
 The renewed interest in criticizing optimistic assumptions about progress, in questioning the underpinnings of enlightened rationalism and its political and cognitive by-products, established a certain affinity between early-twentieth-century critics of modernity and technical progress like Heidegger and disabused
 By the time German philosophy had passed through Parisian social thought into English cultural criticism, it had attained a level of expressive opacity that proved irresistibly appealing to a new generation of students and their teachers .
 The junior faculty recruited to staff the expanded universities of the time were themselves in most cases graduates of the Sixties, raised in the fashions and debates of those years .
 European universities of the previous decade were preoccupied with grand theories of various sorts . The next generation was above all a preoccupation with Theory as such . But whereas European universities were preoccupying with social and political issues, the next generation had a focus on Theory .
 Seminars in 'Cultural Theory' or 'General Theory' displaced the conventional disciplinary boundaries that had still dominated even radical academic debate a few years before .
 Lacan and Derrida elevated the vagaries and paradoxes of language into full-fledged philosophies . Lacan was a ready-made audience in the universities, with a ready made audience in universities .
 Marxism was relieved of its embarrassingly atavistic attachment to economic categories and political institutions and recycled as cultural criticism . Marxism is no longer an embarrassment of its attachment to political and economic categories .
 The inconvenient reluctance of the revolutionary proletariat to vanquish the capitalist bourgeoisie was no longer an impediment, it said . Lenin's "insufficient reluctance" no longer impediment to victory, he said . The revolutionary proletariat was able to defeat the capitalist class, he added .
 This narcissistic obscurantism was very much of its time, says the author . But in fact, it was the exhaustion of an intellectual tradition, he says .
 It was by no means the only symptom of cultural depletion in these years, it was also cultural depletion . Moreover, cultural depletion was not the only sign of cultural deprivation, it said .
 Even the sparkling originality of 1960s French cinema declined into self-conscious artistry . The film was shot in France in the 1960s and '60s .
 If one strand in the heritage of the Sixties was high-cultural pretension, the other, was a hardening crust of knowing cynicism . The other, its intimate inversion, was the hardening cynicism .
 The relative innocence of rock and roll was increasingly displaced by media-wise pop bands . Their stock in trade was a derisive appropriation and degradation of the style forged by their immediate precursors .
 ‘punk’ rock appeared in the Seventies in order to exploit the market for popular music . Much as popular romances and tabloid journalism once fastened on to mass literacy for commercial advantage .
 Presented as ‘counter-cultural’ it was parasitic upon mainstream culture . It invoked violent images and radical language for frequently mercenary ends . It was presented as counter-cultural but was parasitic on mainstream culture, it was said .
 The avowedly politicized language of punk rock bands, exemplified in the Sex Pistols’ 1976 hit ‘Anarchy in the UK’, caught the sour mood of the time . The avowly politicizing language of the punk rock .
 The punk bands’ politics were as one-dimensional as their musical range, the latter all too often restricted to three chords and a single beat and dependent upon volume for its effect . But the punk band’s politics were often one- dimensional as their music range was as one
 Sex Pistols and other punk rock groups wanted above all to shock . Like the Red Army Fraction, the sex Pistols wanted to shock the public . The group was inspired by punk rockers who wanted to be more shocking .
 Musical subversion now consisted of angry songs decrying ‘hegemony 5’ Their counterfeit political content masked political content, masking the steady evisceration of musical form . ‘Hegman’s’ songs decried ‘the hegemony 5�
 The punk generation’s cynicism at least was real, and honestly come by . However bogus their politics and their music, the punk generation's cynicism was real . However, however, their cynicism was actually real and honest .
 Monty Python and its successors and imitators blended broad slapstick, ribald social commentary and sardonic political mockery . Exploiting the rapidly growing television audience and the steady retreat of state censorship . The film series is a mixture of satire and satire .
 Public television channels provided humorists with copious raw material . Yet the same public television channels broadcast pointed and irreverent parodies of popular .
 'Eurovision Song Contest 5' was first broadcast in 1970 . It was an annual television competition broadcast in the UK .
 A commercial exercise glossed as a celebration of the new technology of simultaneous television transmission to multiple countries, the show claimed hundreds of millions of spectators by the mid-Seventies .
 West European punk left a particularly ugly aftertaste in the waning years of Communist Eastern Europe . It was taken up by nihilistic underground bands cynically fastening on to a heritage of dissidence for their own ends .
 The enthusiasm with which the Eurovision Song Contest promoted and celebrated a hopelessly dated format and a stream of inept performers reflected a growing culture of nostalgia, at once wistful and disabused . Eurovision is a growing cultural of nostalgia .
 If punk, post-modern and parody were one response to the confusions of the disillusioned decade, ‘retro’ was another . ‘Retro' was another response to a decade of confusion .
 The French pop group II Etait Une Fois sported 1930s clothing, one of many short-lived sartorial revivals from ‘granny skirts’ to the neo-Edwardian hairstyles of the ‘New Romantics’ The latter reprised
 In clothing and music, the temptation to recycle old styles has been replaced with innovation . In music and fashion, the tendency to mix and match with little self-confidence is subverted for innovation .
 The Seventies, a self-questioning time of troubles, looked backward, not forward . The 'Seventies' looked back, but looked forward, not back, in the Seventies .
 Timothy Garton Ash in the 1970s saw the political landscape of western Europe fracture and fragment . In the 70s, western Europe was starting to fracture, fragmenting .
 Since 1945 the two sides had drawn ever closer, but the pattern had not radically altered . The two sides were drawn closer to each other in 1945, but their relationship remained static .
 The spectrum of political options available to European voters in 1970 would not have been unfamiliar to their grandparents . European voters were able to choose between political options in 1970 and 1980s .
 The longevity of Europe’s political parties derived from a remarkable continuity in the ecology of the electorate . Europe's political parties have been in touch with the electorate for decades, says David Cameron .
 The choice between Labour and Conservatives in Britain or Social Democrats in West Germany no longer reflected deep divisions over policies, much less profound ‘lifestyle’ preferences as they would come to be known .
 In most places it was an echo of longstanding, trans-generational voting habits, determined by the class, religion or locality of the voter rather than by the party's program .
 Men and women voted as their parents had voted, depending on where they lived, where they worked and what they earned . The vote was carried out in the United States in the 1930s .
 A tectonic shift was taking place in the political sociology of European voters . But beneath the surface continuity was continuity . Underneath the surface was continuity in Europe's political sociology .
 The block vote of the white, male, employed working class, was contracting and splitting . The white working class was the universal bedrock of Communist and Socialist party support .
 To the extent of they persisted, such traditional voters were no longer the majority . Traditional voters are no longer a majority, the president says .
 Social and geographical mobility over the course of the postwar decades had diluted fixed social categories almost beyond recognition . In the first place, social and . geographical mobility . over the past few decades has diluted social categories .
 The Christian voting bloc in rural western France or the small towns of the Veneto, the proletarian industrial strongholds of southern Belgium or northern England, were now fissured and fragmented . The Christian vote bloc in western France, small towns in Italy and southern Belgium, was now fragmented .
 Men and women no longer lived in the same places as their parents and often did very different jobs . Men, women didn't live as much of their parents as they did their children's lives .
 Their political preferences began to reflect these changes, though slowly at first . Unsurprisingly, they saw the world rather differently as well as the world as well .
 The prosperity and social reforms of the Sixties and early Seventies had effectively exhausted the programs and vision of the traditional parties . Secondly, social reforms in the S.S. and early . Seventies were effectively exhausted by the social reforms .
 Liberal reforms deprived politicians of moderate Left and Right alike of a credible agenda, especially after the spate of liberal reforms of the Sixties . Their very success had deprived politicians . Politicians of moderate Right and Left alike alike .
 The institutions of the state itself were not in dispute, nor were the general objectives of economic policy . The state itself was not in doubt, and the objectives of the economic policy were not disputed .
 Thirdly, there are now alternative denominators of political allegiance . Thirdly there were now alternative denotes political allegiance .
 Ethnic minorities often unwelcome in white working-class communities of Europe . Ethnic minorities were not always invited into local political or labour organizations . Their politics reflected this exclusion .
 The Sixties had introduced into public discussion concerns utterly unfamiliar to an older political culture . And lastly, the generational politics of the Sixties introduced . concerns completely unfamiliar to older political . culture .
 The 'New Left' might have lacked a program, but it was not short of themes . The ‘New Left’ might have had a few themes, but they were not short .
 The fascination with sex and sexuality led naturally to sexual politics . Women and homosexuals, respectively subordinate and invisible in traditional radical parties, surfaced as legitimate historical subjects, with rights and claims .
 Youth, and the enthusiasms of youth, moved to center stage, especially as the voting age fell to eighteen in many places . Youth also became center stage in the 1980s .
 The prosperity of the time had encouraged a shift in people’s attention from production to consumption . From the necessities of existence to the quality of life, people were focused on quality of the life .
 In the heat of the Sixties few troubled themselves much over the moral dilemmas of prosperity—its beneficiaries were too busy enjoying the fruits of their good fortune . In the 1960s, few thought of the moral consequences of prosperity .
 Many came to look upon commercialism and material wellbeing of the Fifties and Sixties as a burdensome inheritance, bringing tawdry commodities and false values . But within a few years, many looked upon the commercialism of the 1950s and 1960s .
 The price of modernity, at least to its main beneficiaries, was starting to look rather high . The ‘lost world’ of their parents and grandparents was rather appealing .
 Political constituencies emerged from the elective affinities of large groups of voters defined by class or occupation, bound by a common, inherited, and often rather abstract set of principles and objectives . Hitherto—in Europe—political constituencies had emerged from . electives of large . groups
 Most of CAMRA networks are organized by and for the middle class . But there was nothing whimsical or quaint about other single-issue political networks . Most of them are by middle-class .
 In continental Europe the cultures of both Left and Right reflected a very different history . The cultures of continental Europe reflected a different history, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Britain’s Good Food Guide was founded and edited by Fabian socialists . Michelin was always and only a commercial enterprise, albeit directed to much the same audience .
 Anti-tax parties, like the agrarian protest parties of inter-war Europe, were primarily reactive and negative . They were against unwelcome change and asked of the state above all that it remove what they saw as unreasonable fiscal burdens .
 Other single-issue movements had more positive demands to make of the state, or the law, or institutions . Other single issue movements had positive demands for the state or law .
 Their concerns ranged from prison reform and psychiatric hospitals through access to education and medical services . They also included provision of safe food, community services, the provision of community services and access to cultural resources .
 All were ‘anti-consensus’ in their reluctance to confine their support to any one traditional political constituency and their willingness to consider alternative ways of publicizing their concerns . All were 'anti-Consensus'
 Three of the new political groups are of particular significance, for their scale and impact . The women’s movement, environmentalism, and peace activism are three of the most important groups .
 For obvious reasons, the women’s movement was the most diverse and far-reaching . The women's movement is now the largest in the world .
 More radical women’s groups are paying attention to homosexual rights, and the growing feminist concern with pornography . To these should be added the attention paid by the more radical women's groups to homosexuality .
 Within a decade it was again under fire, this time from networks of women’s groups, often led by coalitions of radical feminists and traditional conservatives who united around this one issue . Yet within a decade, the network of women's groups was under fire again .
 The women’s movement in Europe was from the outset a variable mix of intersecting objectives . The women's movement in the European Union has been a model for women's rights .
 In 1950, one quarter of West German married women were in paid employment outside the home . Of one and a half million new entrants to the labour force in Italy between 1972 and 1980, 1 and a quarter million were women . In Italy, of the 1.5 million new arrivals to
 By the mid-1990s women constituted over 40 percent of the total labour force in every European country except Portugal and Italy . By the 1990s women were in Europe's labour force, women constituted 40 percent .
 The flexibility of part-time jobs suited many working mothers, but in the straitened economic circumstances of the Seventies this did not compensate for poor wages and job insecurity . Part-time work was flexible, flexible and flexible, but not secure enough .
 Equal pay and the workplace provision of childcare facilities emerged early as the main demands of most working women in the West . The issue has remained at the forefront ever since . Equal pay, childcare and workplace provision have emerged as main demands for most women .
 Working women increasingly sought assistance in caring for their children . But they did not necessarily wish for more children of their own . Working women sought assistance from their children, but did not want more children .
 With increased prosperity and more time spent working outside the home, people wanted fewer say in the matter . Indeed, with increased prosperity, they wanted fewer, or more say in their lives .
 The demand for access to contraceptive information, and contraceptives, dates to the early years of the twentieth century . The demand gathered speed within a decade of the peak of the baby boom .
 The French Association Maternite was formed in 1956 to press for contraceptive rights . Four years later it was succeeded by the Mouvement Frangais pour le Planning Familial .
 By the early seventies contraception was widely available throughout Western Europe, though not in remote rural districts or regions where Catholic authorities held moral sway over the local population .
 The demand for reform of abortion laws became a leitmotif of the new women’s politics . The politics of radical feminism encountered the needs of apolitical everywoman . It is thus not surprising that the demand for reforming abortion laws was not surprising .
 In 1973, in tiny Latvia, in 1973, there were 60,000 abortions for 34,000 live births . In Latvia, the abortions were legal or otherwise, abortions were part of the life experience of millions of women .
 Where abortion was illegal, the risks it entailed, both legal and medical, united women across class, age and political affiliation . And where abortion was legal, it also united women in class and age, regardless of their political affiliation.
 The signatories were all well known, some of them writers Simone de Beauvoir and Franoise Sagan . Catherine Deneuve, Jeanne Moreau and Marie-France Pisier were among the signatories .
 The petition had been organized by the Mouvement de Liberation des Femmes . Halimi and de Beauvoir formed Choisir, a political organization dedicated to ending the ban on abortion .
 In January 1973, French President Georges Pompidou conceded that French law had fallen behind the evolution of public opinion . French law has fallen behind public opinion since 1973 .
 Pompidou’s successor, Valery Giscard D’Estaing, instructed his health minister, Simone Weil, to present parliament with a revision of the law . On January 17th 1975, the Assemblee Nationale legalized abortion (during the
 The French example was studied closely by women throughout Western Europe . Women were encouraged to follow the French example .
 The Italian parliament voted in 1978 to legalise abortion on May 29th 1978, three weeks after the discovery of Aldo Moro’s corpse . Three years after the introduction in 1975 of a new ‘family code’ to replace that of the Fascists, the Italian
 The decision was indirectly confirmed at a national referendum in May 1981, when Italian voters rejected both a proposal to loosen further restrictions on legal abortion and a move to re-criminalize it .
 They were slow to exploit established political institutions in pursuit of their goals . They were thus slow to use established political systems to achieve their goals, says the author .
 In Spain, the French strategy was followed more closely still, accelerated by the energies released by the collapse of the old regime . The French strategy is similar to that of Spain, followed by the Spanish government .
 The first feminist demonstration in Spain was organized in January 1976, within two months of Franco’s death . The first demonstration was held in Spain in January 1977 .
 Two years later adultery was de-criminalized and contraception legalized in the U.S. Admitted adultery in the 1970s .
 In 1979 one thousand women signed a public statement declaring themselves to have broken the law by undergoing an abortion . Spain under Franco's rule had one of Europe’s highest rates of abortion, comparable to those of Eastern Europe .
 The successful battle over abortion rights was the main achievement of women’s political groups in these years . Together with the right to divorce, the success of women's political groups was the biggest achievement of the women's groups .
 As a consequence, the personal circumstances of millions of women were inestimably improved . As a result of this, millions of people's lives have been improved, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 The availability of abortion, in conjunction with effective and available contraception, improved the life chances of many, especially the poor, especially in the poor . It offered working women the option of postponing their first child to a historically late point in their childbearing years .
 The Spanish birth rate per woman fell by nearly 60 percent between i960 and 1996 . Italy, West Germany and the Netherlands were close behind .
 Within a few years of the reforms of the Seventies, no west European country except Ireland had a birthrate sufficient to replace the previous generation . Ireland's birthrate was enough to replace its previous generation of children .
 In Britain the annual birthrate fell in the three decades after i960 from 2.71 children per woman to 1.84 . In France the birthrate dropped in three decades following i960 . In Britain it fell to 2.73 per woman; in France, it fell from 2
 As the economy slowed and the emancipation of women gathered pace, the demography of Europe was changing . With ominous implications for the welfare state in years to come, Europe's welfare state is changing . The welfare state will need to adapt to the changing demographics of Europe's population .
 The social changes wrought by the women’s movement were not, however, mirrored in politics itself . The social change wrought in the women's movement was not, though, as was in politics .
 No 'women's party' emerged, capable of siphoning off votes and getting its representatives elected . No ‘women’s party’ emerged, according to the poll .
 The Left proved generally more open to electing women than the Right . Christian parties of the Center-Right were for many years more likely than their Socialist opponents to nominate women to safe constituencies .
 Between 1975 and 1990 the number of women in Finland’s parliament rose from 23 percent to 39 percent . In Sweden from 21 percent to 38 percent; in Norway from 16 percent to 36 percent; and in Denmark from 16% to 33% . In Finland, women in the Finnish
 Women constituted just one in twelve of parliamentary deputies in 1990 . Farther south, in the parliaments of Italy and Portugal, women constituted one in 12 of parliamentarians .
 In the UK House of Commons they were just 7 percent of the total; in France’s Assemblee Nationale , a mere 6 percent . In France, they are just 6 percent; in the UK they were 7 percent .
 Environmentalists, men and women alike, had considerably more success translating their sentiments into electoral politics . Environmentalists had more success in translating their feelings into electoral .
 The longing for a more ‘natural’ world and the search for a personal politics of ‘authenticity had deep roots on both sides of the ideological divide, traceable to the Romantics and their horror at the depredations of early industrialism .
 By the early twentieth century both Left and Right had their cycling clubs, vegetarian restaurants, Wandervogel movements and ramblers, affiliated variously to socialist or nationalist dreams of emancipation .
 Environmentalism (like pacifism) often aroused in its wake of a revival of nationalism—or regionalism—but with a human face . Environmentalism is like pacifism, but with human face, writes David Frum .
 Anti-nuclear protesters of Austria who won a 1978 referendum forbidding their government from activating the nuclear power station at Zwentendorf would never have identified themselves as nationalists or even patriots . The ‘Alternative Alternative’ of West Berlin, or the anti-nuke protesters of
 But their anger against the pollution of the local environment above all suggests otherwise . Their relative indifference to similar havoc being wreaked elsewhere suggests otherwise.
 The ‘not in my backyard’ quality of the incipient Green Movement harked back to an earlier model . ‘Not in my backyard’ qualities of the movement are reminiscent of an earlier version of the Green Movement .
 There was nothing contradictory in the enthusiasm with which Portugal’s ageing dictator Antonio Salazar enforced the same environmental controls being urged upon their democratic governments by post-’68 radicals in Vienna or Amsterdam .
 Salazar was, in his way, a genuine enthusiast for ecological objectives . He maintained his fellow countrymen in a condition of unparalleled economic torpor .
 In Eastern Europe, the doctrine of unrestricted primary production left the environment at the mercy of official polluters of every sort . In the absence of any official countervailing voices, there were no official counter voices .
 Austria might be constrained by internal opposition to abandon nuclear power . Communist neighbors had no such compunction about building nuclear reactors in Czechoslovakia . Plans for massive dams just downstream along the Danube and Hungary, or steadily increasing output and air pollution in Poland .
 The moral and human costs of rampant industrial pollution and environmental degradation had not passed unnoticed in the Eastern bloc . But for all that, the moral and . human costs had not been passed unnoticed .
 Post-’68 Husak regime in Prague wreaked havoc along the common Danube frontier in pursuit of domestically generated kilowatts . The regime's willingness to wreak havoc on the Danube led to a rising backlash among otherwise politically quiescent Hungarians .
 The proposed Gabcikovo-Nagymaros dam was to become a significant source of domestic opposition to the Budapest regime itself . The dam would be a major embarrassment to relations between the two ‘fraternal’ neighbors .
 In Czechoslovakia, an older distaste for technological modernity had passed to a new generation of intellectuals via the writings of the philosophers Jan Patocka and Vaclav Belohradsky . The latter worked from exile in Italy after 1970, his neo-Heideggerian
 The idea that the effort to subdue and dominate nature to human ends might come at too high a price was familiar to readers on both sides of the Cold War divide through the writings of Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer in their Dialectic of Enlightenment .
 Within certain limits environmental protest offered a safe space for political action and national self-expression in otherwise restrictive regimes . With a Heideggerian twist, the suggestion that Communism itself was an illicit Western import, is the basis of an in3 in3 .
 In time, a common environmentalist critique would serve as a bridge between new forms of protest in East and West . In the future, it could be used as a common critique of the West .
 In the early Seventies neither side yet knew—nor in the Western case cared—much about the views or problems of their counterparts across the Iron Curtain .
 The west European environmentalists especially were far too busy building their local political constituency to pay attention to international politics, except in so far to these affected the unique object of their attentions . The West European environmentalists are far more concerned with their local politics than international politics .
 It was in 1973 that the first ecology’’ candidates stood in local elections in France and Britain . The same year that saw the founding Bauern Congress in West Germany, forerunner to the Greens .
 Fuelled by the first oil crisis, the West German environmental movement moved rapidly into the political mainstream . The movement was founded by West Germany's first oil oil crisis .
 By 1979, Greens had secured their own representation in the parliaments of two of the German Lander . Greens were backed by farmers, environmentalists, pacifists and urban squatters . The Greens were first elected to parliament in 1979 .
 Support at the Federal elections of 1983 increased from 568,000 to 2,165,000 and won them parliamentary representation for the first time . Four years later, in the wake of the second oil shock, their support at the 1983 elections of the Federal .
 The German Greens’ success was not immediately repeated elsewhere, although in time the Austrian and especially the French parties would do quite respectably .
 Environmentalism in Norway was at least as widely embraced as in Germany . Labour government's plans to exploit Northern Europe’s largest waterfall for hydro-electric power provoked widespread outrage .
 The proliferation of single-issue parties and programs took its toll upon the traditional organizations of the Left in particular . Single issue parties took their toll on traditional organizations such as the Left, says Julian Zelizer .
 Communist parties in Western Europe, undermined by steady erosion of their proletarian constituency, discredited by the invasion of Czechoslovakia, were most vulnerable . Communist parties were undermined by the steady erosion by the erosion of proletarian constituency and discredited .
 Italians did at least express public disapproval for egregious Soviet actions . The Italians did not speak out against the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia .
 This shift was driven in part by the shock of the 1973 coup d’etat in Chile, which convinced Berlinguer and other Communist intellectuals that even if the Communists won a parliamentary majority they would never be allowed to form a government .
 With 34. percent of the votes cast, it was just four percentage points and 34 seats short of the ruling Christian Democrats . It was an unprecedented score for a Western Communist party . The Christian Democrats are the only Western Communist Party to win a Western majority .
 The PCI was making a credible attempt to present itself as a ‘system’ party, perhaps even an alternative government-in-waiting . The party is making an attempt to become a credible .
 Like their Italian comrades, they understood that the best way to achieve this was by taking their distance, both from the contemporary Soviet Union but also, and more significantly, from their common Leninist past .
 If Western Communists were to overcome the burden of their history and reprogram themselves as a— the —democratic movement of the Left, they needed to jettison more than just ‘the dictatorship of the proletariat’ and other rhetorical dogmas .
 Berlinguer and Carrillo were unable to abandon their association with Soviet Communism . They also needed very publicly to abandon the association with the Soviet Communist Party itself .
 Eurocommunism was thus a contradiction in terms, despite the best efforts of its spokesmen . Eurocommunistism was therefore a contradiction of terms, says the author .
 Subordination to Moscow was the primary identification tag of any Communist party, Lenin said . Lenin intended, as Lenin had always intended, to be a Communist party's main identification tag . "Subordination" to Moscow is Lenin's preferred identification tag, he said .
 Until the disappearance of the Soviet Union itself the Communist parties of Western Europe were shackled to it . Western Europe was shackled by it until the collapse of Soviet Union .
 In Italy, where the PCI had succeeded in establishing itself in certain regions as the natural party of governance, the Communists held on to a sizeable vote, though never again scaled the heights of their 1976 successes .
 Eurocommunism’s steady decline continued almost uninterrupted . But elsewhere Eurocommunists’ steady decline was almost complete . Eurocommunistism was a major factor in Europe's decline .
 The Spanish Communists, who invented it, saw their share of the vote fall to just 4 percent by 1982 . The Spanish Communist Party was founded in 1968 .
 Leonid Brezhnev in Moscow actually gave his blessing to the Eurocommunists’ efforts to secure their local base by distancing themselves from him . The Eurocommunist party distanced themselves from the former Soviet leader .
 The Soviet move was a by-product of the strategy of international detente then being pursued . It did little for the would-be Communist reformers . The move was the result of a strategy of detente that was pursued .
 Soviet leaders were losing interest in Western Communist parties, says historian . But then, for all the support they continued to furnish in cash and kind, the Soviet leaders continued to provide in cash .
 Social Democrats, however, especially those in positions of influence, were another matter . Social Democrats are not the only ones to blame for the deaths .
 Social Democrats in Germany, still the crucible of a divided continent, were of very particular interest indeed . And Social Democrats are still a particular interest in Germany .
 Adenauer's foreign policy had been dominated by Adenauer’s view that the new Republic, firmly tied to the West, must be unwavering in its refusal to recognize the German Democratic Republic to its east . Hitherto, West German foreign policy .
 Adenauer refused to recognize states that had diplomatic relations with the GDR, with the exception of the Soviet Union . Claiming that the FRG alone represented Germany, Adenauer had also refused to recognized states with diplomatic relations .
 Bonn established diplomatic relations with Romania in 1967, followed by Yugoslavia a year later . Trade missions opened in Bucharest, Sofia, Warsaw and Budapest .
 Adenauer insisted that the division of Germany and unresolved frontier disputes to its east had to be addressed before there could be any detente or military disengagement in central Europe .
 Willy Brandt was willing to risk a breach with the conventions of West German politics . Brandt's experience as Mayor of West Berlin was in large measure because of his experience . The former West Berlin Mayor has been accused of corruption in the past .
 To these men it was obvious that the Western Allies would take no untoward risks to overcome the division of Europe . The West’s passive acceptance of the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia was reconfirmed by the invasion .
 If West Germans wanted to break the central European stalemate, they would have to deal directly with the authorities in the East . The West Germans would need to do it themselves, according to the West .
 Brandt and Bahr devised their approach to the east in order to achieve what Bahr called ‘ Wandel durch Annaherung —change through rapprochement.’
 The aim was to ‘overcome Yalta’ through a multitude of contacts,’ says historian . ‘To ‘normalize’ relations between the two Germanies and within Europe, without provoking disquiet at home or abroad.’
 Brandt quietly abandoned West German insistence upon the illegitimacy of the GDR and the non-negotiable demand for reunification . Brandt: "In a characteristic rhetorical innovation, Brandt abandoned West Germany's insistence on reunification" Brandt's speech was a characteristic
 Willy Brandt knelt in homage to the memory of the Warsaw Ghetto in Poland . Brandt was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work in the Holocaust .
 In 1972 his SPD emerged for the first time as the leading party in the Federal Parliament . He triumphed at home, too, in the elections of 1972 .
 Brandt side-stepped Bonn’s longstanding insistence that no final settlement of frontiers and peoples had been reached, that the Yalta divisions had no de jure status, and that the legal fiction of the continuity of the December 1937 frontiers of Germany must be
 Ostpolitik had to consider three distinct constituencies if they were to succeed in their ambitions . The framers had to think carefully about the three constituencies they were trying to reach .
 Western Europeans needed reassurance that Germany was not turning East . Western Europeans need reassurance of Germany not turning east, says German leader .
 French President Georges Pompidou’s first response to the Moscow Treaty had been to make encouraging overtures to Great Britain . Great Britain now holds out the attraction of providing a counterweight to a less pliable Germany .
 The French were appeased by German promises to anchor the Federal Republic ever more firmly in West European institutions . But in Paris as in Washington, remarks such as those of Helmut Schmidt in 1973, depicting a ‘changing world’ in which ‘the traditional categories of East and
 In 1969 a mere half-million phone calls had been placed from West to East Germany . In 1969, half a million phone calls were placed between West and East Germany.
 Telephone contact between the two halves of Berlin, virtually unknown in 1970, had reached the level of ten million calls per year by 1988 .
 By the mid-Eighties most East Germans had virtually unrestricted access to West German television . East German authorities even went so far as to lay cable into the ‘valley of the clueless’ around Dresden .
 The rulers of East Germany had particularly good reason to be pleased with these developments . East Germany's rulers were particularly pleased with the developments .
 In an ironic echo of changes in Bonn, GDR’s own leaders stopped referring to ‘Germany’ and instead began speaking with growing confidence of the GDR as a distinctive and legitimate German state in its own right, with a future of its own .
 Since 1963 the GDR had been ‘selling’ political prisoners to Bonn for cash, the sum depending upon the ‘value’ and qualifications of the candidate . The sum depending on the 'value and qualifications' of the prisoner .
 By 1977, Bonn was paying close to DM 96,000 per head to release prisoners from East German jails . Bonn paid DM 95,000 a head to secure the release of prisoners from the East German prisons .
 GDR released 34,000 prisoners, reuniting 2,000 children with their parents, and ‘regulating’ 250,000 cases of family reunification . By 1989 close to DM 3 billion had been extracted from Bonn by the GDR, in return for releasing 34
 One of the unintended consequences of these developments was the virtual disappearance of ‘unification’ from the German political agenda . ‘Unification' has been a virtual disappearance from the political agenda since the 1990s .
 The reunification of the divided country remained the Lebensliige of the Federal Republic, Brandt put it .
 By the mid-Eighties, re-unification no longer mobilized mass opinion . Re-Unification was a few years before it unexpectedly took place, it took place in mid-eighties .
 Polls taken in the Fifties and Sixties suggested that up to 45 percent of the West German population felt unification was the ‘most important’ question of the day . From the mid-Seventies, the figure never exceeded 1 percent .
 The third constituency for Bonn’s new approach, of course, was the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was the third constituency .
 All West German plans for ‘normalization’ to the east passed through Moscow and everyone knew it . From Willy Brandt’s first negotiations with Brezhnev in 1970, through Gorbachev's visit to Bonn nearly two decades later, all West German
 Bonn had consented to recognize the People’s Democracies, Bonn said . West Germans and Russians found much common ground in Poland .
 If reminiscences were perhaps illusory, the shared interests were real enough . But if the reminics were illusified, they were not illusious, it was real enough.
 Such people were accorded full citizenship if they could reach the Federal Republic . Defined by family or ethnic origin, such people could be accorded citizenship .
 Hundreds of thousands of residents of Ukraine, Russia, Romania, Hungary and elsewhere suddenly rediscovered German backgrounds they had taken great pains to deny for the previous half century .
 Western Allies had long been unwilling to go beyond de facto acknowledgement of the status quo, pending resolution of the ‘German Question’ in particular . The Western Allies, the United States especially, had long remained silent on the issue .
 The Soviet leaders were about to realize their hopes. The Western position was bound to change. But now that the Germans themselves were making overtures to their eastern neighbors, the Western position would change . The West was about to change .
 In December 1971, NATO ministers met in Brussels and agreed in principle to take part in a European Security Conference . The conference took place in Brussels, Belgium, in December 1971 .
 The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe opened in July 1973 in Helsinki, Finland . Within a year a preparatory session was under way in Helsinki .
 Helsinki conferees drew up conventions, drafted agreements, proposed ‘confidence-building’ measures to improve EastWest relations and much else besides .
 In August 1975 the Helsinki Accords were unanimously approved and signed . The Helsinki Accord was signed in August 1975 . It was the first of its kind in North America .
 On the face of things, the Soviet Union was the major beneficiary of the Accords . The Soviet Union benefited from the peace deal, but it was not the only one .
 Moscow’s endemic insecurity that these clauses in the Helsinki agreements, together with Principle IV affirming that ‘the participating States will respect the territorial integrity of each of the participating States, were accorded such significance . But it was an illustration of Moscow's endemic insecurity .
 Helsinki principles and protocols merely gift-wrapped existing international arrangements . Most of the 1975 Helsinki principles were given existing international agreements . Helsinki was the birthplace of the U.S. Embassy of Cuba .
 From this wordy and, as it seemed, it seemed to be a toothless checklist of rights and obligations was born the Helsinki Rights movement . The Helsinki Rights Movement was born from the wordy list of rights .
 Brezhnev had been right to count upon Henry Kissinger and his hard-headed successors to take seriously the non-intervention clauses at Helsinki . But it had never occurred to him that others might take no less seriously the more utopian paragraphs that followed .
 Yuri Orlov, Yelena Bonner and Anatoly Sharansky were among the first members of the Soviet Union . The U.S. government was founded by Soviet republic republic republics in 1964 .
 Helsinki Watch was set up to publicize rights abuses in Helsinki signatory states . Helsinki Watch is now an international umbrella organization set up in Helsinki .
 "Violence repression was not just ineffective but, to the extent of it was public knowledge, self-defeating," he says . "Violent repression was ineffective," he adds .
 Leonid Brezhnev and his colleagues had inadvertently opened a breach in their own defenses . The Soviet Union had been caught in the trap of their own cynicism .
 Ortega y Gasset: ‘Europe is not just about material results, it is about spirit. Europe is not about material . It is about the spirit, not just material, it's about spirit,’ he says .
 In Northern Europe, domestic and international change was played out against the ever-present backdrop of Great Power dealings and the East-West division of the continent . Jacques Delors is the author of the book, "Europe's Changing Days"
 Spain, Portugal and Greece were peripheral to Europe in more than just a geographical sense . Until the early Seventies, they were part of the continent in a broader sense .
 Despite being ‘Western’ in their Cold War allegiance , all three countries stood otherwise quite apart . Despite being 'Western' they stood apart .
 The standard of living in southern Spain and most of Portugal and Greece was comparable to that of Eastern Europe and parts of the developing world . In southern Spain, living standards were comparable to those in Eastern Europe .
 All three countries were governed in the early 1970s by authoritarian rulers of a species more familiar in Latin America than Western Europe . The political transformations of the post-war decades seemed largely to have passed them by .
 General Franco staged his military coup in 1936 and ruled unchallenged from 1939 to his death in 1975 . In Portugal, Antonio Salazar ruled from 1932 to 1970, and Spain, where General Franco had staged a military coup from 1936 .
 In Greece, a military cabal had overthrown king and parliament in 1967 . The country was governed by a junta of colonels . In 1967, the king was overthrown and parliament was ruled by a military coup .
 The spectre of their unstable past hovered oppressively across the unpromising future prospects of all three countries . It was an unstable past that hovered over the unenviable future prospects for them .
 The recent history of Greece, like that of Spain, was heavily back-shadowed by civil war . Civil war in Greece has been a major factor in the country's history .
 After the Communists abandoned the struggle, in October 1949, it was the Left’s turn to suffer sustained repression . The Left suffered sustained repression after the Communist Party abandoned its struggle .
 Wartime partisans (including many who had fought against the Germans in earlier years) were forced into foreign exile for decades to come . Many of the partisans were forced to live in exile for years .
 Those who remained, together with their children and even their grandchildren, were forbidden public sector employment until well into the seventies . Those who stayed in the public sector, including their children, were banned from public sector work .
 Communists were detained at length and treated with notorious brutality . At the notorious prison on the island of Makronisos, Communists were held at length . The prison was notorious for its brutality and brutality .
 Greece's political divisions were always dominated by distinctive local concerns . But the political divisions of Greece, however tidily they appeared, folded into Cold War categories . Greece was dominated by local concerns rather than Cold War divisions .
 In March 1949, at the height of the Tito-Stalin struggle, the slavishly pro-Moscow KKE issued a radio announcement endorsing demands for an independent Macedonia . KKE is a former Communist Party of Yugoslavia .
 By encouraging the territorial fragmentation of Yugoslavia this was intended to weaken Tito, but it had no such effect . Tito was not weakened by this, but he was weakened by the fragmentation of his territory .
 Communist victory would result in autonomy for the Macedonian north, with its Slav and Albanian minorities, and thence to the break up of the Greek state . Instead it undercut for a generation the domestic credibility of Greek Communism, by suggesting that a Communist victory .
 Greek nationalism was peculiarly insecure, even by regional standards . If this mattered so much, it was because Greek nationalism is insecure . It was because of the insecurity of the Greek nationalistic elite .
 Greece’s conservative post-war politicians emphatically opted for order and stability over democracy or reconciliation . Permanently on the qui vive for conflict with their former imperial masters in Turkey, in a state of war with Albania since 1940 .
 The Greek king, his army and his ministers presented themselves to the West as the most reliable allies in an unstable region . Conflating old Greek concerns with new international divisions the Greek king and his army presented themselves as a reliable ally in the region .
 The Treaty of Paris obliged Italy to cede the Dodecanese islands to Athens in 1947 . In February 1947, the treaty of Paris compelled Italy to hand over the islands to Greece .
 Greece was a major beneficiary of American aid, both following the pronouncement of the ‘Truman Doctrine’ and under the Marshall Plan . Greece is now a major recipient of American assistance .
 The country was admitted to NATO in 1952 . The Greek armed forces were the happy recipients of copious practical assistance with planning and materiel .
 The British had hoped to bequeath to liberated Greece a properly non-political army and modern police force . But in the circumstances of time and place, this proved impossible .
 Greek army emerged from eight years of war as uncompromisingly anti-Communist, royalist and undemocratic . The Makronisos* warders’ practice of forcing Communists to repent and then turn on those who refused was remarkably similar to Romanian Communist techniques in the prison
 Greek officers saw themselves as guardians of the nation and its integrity, rather than the ephemeral constitutional documents they were sworn to defend, as the guardians of its integrity . Indeed, much like the traditional Spanish officer corps in this respect, they saw themselves .
 Until 1963 the military were happy enough to give their support to Constantine Karamanlis, who led the re-named Greek Rally party to election victories in 1956,1958 and again in 1961 . He was suspected after the last and greatest of these successes of widespread electoral fraud .
 Karamanlis was not himself ideologically anti-Communist nor even especially close to the armed forces . He said he was not ideological anti-communist nor close to armed forces. Karamanis was not even especially open to the military .
 It's not irrelevant that he was born in Greek Macedonia and was profoundly anti-Slav . But it's not relevant that he wasn't born in Macedonian, he says . He says he was profoundly opposed to Slavic culture .
 Of peasant background and Orthodox faith, he was instinctively provincial, nationalist and conservative . He evinced no desire to enforce civilian oversight of the military or investigate too closely the growing rumors of anti-parliamentary political networks .
 Greece remained stable, if economically stagnant and more than a little corrupt . Under Karamanlis, Greece remained economically stagnant, but more corrupt . Greece's economy has remained stagnant and corrupt .
 Grigoris Lambrakis, was assaulted in Thessaloniki while speaking at a peace rally . Lambrakas was speaking at the peace rally when he was assaulted .
 Lambrakis' death five days later created a political martyr for the Left and the nascent peace movement in Greece . The authorities’ studied failure to investigate the murky background to the assassination gave rise to widespread suspicion . His death was the result of a failed investigation by the Greek authorities .
 Karamanlis narrowly lost the elections to George Papandreou’s Center Union . Six months later, the Center Union was backed by the country's growing urban middle class .
 The following year, Papandreou’s party and its allies did better still, winning an absolute majority of the votes cast and increasing their share from 42 percent to 52. percent . The next year, at a fresh round of elections, the party increased its share of votes to
 The new parliamentary majority demanded an investigation into the rigging of the 1961 elections . Tensions began to mount between parliament and the young King Constantine . The new parliament demanded an inquiry into the election rigging .
 The king’s conservative political sympathies were public knowledge, and he was under increasing pressure from the Right to dismiss Papandreou, who was eventually maneuvered into resigning . The king eventually resigned after the Right pressured him to resign .
 He was succeeded by a series of interim prime ministers, none of whom could form a stable parliamentary majority .
 Relations between parliament and court strained further further when a group 3 And to Costas Gavras’s influential 1969 film Z was based on the Lambrakis affair .
 Parliamentary government in Greece had by now ceased to function in all but name . Parliamentary government was by now a function in only but name.
 Conservatives and army officers warned darkly of growing ‘Communist’ influence in the country at large . Conservatives and Army officers warn of growing 'Communist' influence in Britain .
 The king would not work with the majority Center Union, which he accused of depending on the votes of the far Left . The opposition National Radical Union refused to back successive efforts to install ‘caretaker’ governments .
 In April 1967, the National Radical Union formed a minority government just long enough for the King to dissolve the parliament and call for new elections . The King dissolved parliament and called for a new election in April 1967 .
 Popular frustration at the parliamentary stalemate suggested that the forthcoming elections would produce a further swing to the Left . Popular feeling that the king had played an unacceptably partisan role in the king's role .
 Officers working inside the army’s longest established right-wing networks seized power on April 21st . The 'Communist threat' has been invoked in Greece since 1949 .
 King Constantine passively assented and swore the conspirators into office . Constantine passively, if unenthusiastically, assented to the decision .
 Constantine and his family fled to Rome, un-mourned . Eight months later, after a half-hearted attempt at a ‘counter-coup’, Constantine was forced to flee to Rome . Constantine was killed by a coup attempt .
 The junta appointed a regent and Papadopoulos was named prime minister . Papadopolopoulos was the first Greek prime minister to be named after the coup .
 Papadopoulos and his colleagues dismissed nearly a thousand civil servants, imprisoned or expelled politicians of the left and center, and turned Greece in upon itself for seven stifling years . Initially violent and always repressive, Papadopolopolopolos was always repressive .
 Anti-modern to the point of parody, the colonels censored the press, outlawed strikes and banned modern music along with mini-skirts .
 They also banned the study of sociology, Russian and Bulgarian in addition to Sophocles, Euripides and Aristophanes . Also banned from studying sociology, Russia and Bulgarian .
 The uniforms of palace guards and other ceremonial officials were replaced with gaudily ‘traditional’ Greek costume . The uniforms were replaced by 'traditional' Greek costumes .
 Politically-conscious travelers who boycotted the colonels’ Greece were readily replaced by tourists attracted to cheap, if suffocatingly over-regulated resorts . Tourism did not suffer .
 The junta even had widespread initial support in the rural districts from which the colonels mostly came, especially after they cancelled all peasant debt in 1968 . The colonels came from rural districts of the country .
 This was bound eventually to bring the military regime into conflict with the country’s urban middle class, whose interests as consumers and producers alike would triumph within a few years .
 In December 1969 the Council of Europe unanimously voted to expel Greece . Two months later the EEC broke off all negotiations with the junta . The regime was isolated abroad .
 It was altogether appropriate that the dictatorship should fall in the course of an incompetent attempt to apply force beyond its frontiers, to resolve the long-running Cyprus problem of Cyprus .
 The island of Cyprus was part of the Ottoman Empire since 1571 . It had been administered by Britain since 1878 and unilaterally annexed at the outbreak of World War One .
 Cyprus has a Greek-speaking, Eastern Orthodox majority increasingly disposed to seek union with the Greek state . Cyprus is far removed from the Greek mainland or other outlying Greek islands .
 The Turkish minority, some 18 percent of the island’s population, was understandably opposed to any such arrangement . Turkish minority was vociferously supported by the authorities in Ankara .
 The fate of Cyprus remained unresolved throughout the Fifties . Cyprus was caught between British efforts to dispose of its imperial inheritance and longstanding Greek-Turkish hostility .
 The majority of the island’s Greek-Cypriot leadership settled somewhat reluctantly for independence, which the UK granted in i960 . The officers were perhaps not as unpopular as their foreign critics asserted .
 The U.S. is presumed to have the sympathy of the United States. But they were presumed to be the sympathisers of the U.K.
 What was in essence a belated extension of the Greek civil war of the 1940s rapidly came instead of being seen as the latest cause cilibre in Europe’s century-old civil war .
 The new Republic of Cyprus was ruled by a Greek-Turkish ‘partnership’ arrangement . Archbishop Makarios was once exiled by London as an armed and violent terrorist . He is now the respected spokesman of ‘reasonable’ Greek Cypriot ambitions .
 The island's Greek and Turkish communities lived alongside each other in suspicious unease, interrupted by sporadic outbursts of inter-communal violence . Meanwhile the island’s Greek, Turkish and Greek communities lived in suspicious tension .
 Athens and Ankara both advertised themselves as the protectors of their respective compatriots . The governments in both countries threatened to intervene in the country's conflict .
 Attacks on Turkish Cypriots in 1963 led to the arrival of a UN Peacekeeping Force the following year . But prudence, and international pressure, kept them from doing so, even when attacks on Turkish-Cypriot in 1963 .
 Despite the Greek Cypriots’ near-monopoly of public employment and positions of authority, the situation in Cyprus appeared stable . Despite the Protestant majority’s exclusion of Catholics from privileges and power in Ulster—or perhaps because of it—the situation was stable .
 Students in Athens embarrassed colonels by publicly opposing their rule for the first time in 1973 . Military’s response was to divert attention and seek to shore up public support by re-asserting the Greek claim to Cyprus .
 General Ioannides, a ‘hard-liner’ who displaced Papadopoulos as junta leader, plotted with George Grivas and other Greek-Cypriot nationalists to overthrow Makarios and ‘re-unite’ the island with Greece . Makarios was
 On July 15th 1974, units of the Cypriot National Guard along with hand-picked Greek officers attacked the Presidential Palace, expelled Makarios and installed a puppet government in anticipation of direct rule from Athens .
 Turkey invaded Cyprus in order to protect the interests of the Turkish-Cypriot community . At this juncture, the Turkish government announced its own intention to invade Cyprus . The Turkish government did so, and promptly did so .
 Faced with widespread public anger at this national humiliation, the Greek dictators themselves turned to the ageing Karamanlis and invited him to return home from exile .
 By July 24th the former Prime Minister was back in Athens and had initiated the country’s return to civilian rule . The former PM was back and initiated the return of civilian rule in Greece .
 Karamanlis’s New Democracy party swept home in the November 1974 elections and repeated its success three years later . The New Democracy Party was elected in 1974 .
 The smoothness of Greece’s return to democracy was due to the skill in breaking with his own past . Karamanlis conveying an image of seasoned competence and continuity . Greece's smoothness was due in part to his skill, while at the same time conveying a seasoned
 Instead of re-establishing his discredited Center Union he formed a new party . Rather than reestablish his discredited center Union he had formed a party .
 He called a referendum on the discredited monarchy in December 1974, and when 69. percent of the voters demanded its abolition he oversaw the establishment of a republic .
 In order to avoid alienating the military he resisted calls to purge the army . Instead of imposing early retirement on the more compromised senior officers, he imposed early retirement .
 With the monarchy out of the way, and the army neutralized, Karamanlis had to address the unfinished business of Cyprus . With the military neutralized in Cyprus, the army was able to take over the island .
 Makarios’s return to the island in December 1974 . Neither he nor his successors had any intention of re-opening the Enosis question, but nor could they publicly ignore Turkey's presence on island .
 Karamanlis pulled Greece out of the military organization of NATO for the next six years in protest at the behavior of a fellow NATO member . The move attracted widespread domestic approval on Left and Right alike . Greece pulled out of NATO in 2011 .
 Greek-Turkish relations entered an ice age, marked by the Turkish minority’s unilateral declaration in February 1975 of a ‘Turkish Federated State of Cyprus’—only ever recognized by Turkey itself .
 Cyprus itself became an object of international concern . UN diplomats and lawyers spent fruitless decades trying unsuccessfully to resolve the island’s divisions .
 Greek politicians were relieved of responsibility for the island’s affairs . Meanwhile Greek politicians could turn to more promising horizons . Meanwhile, they remained constrained by domestic politics to express a continued interest in its fate .
 Greece became a full member of the European Community on January 1st 1981 . Greece joined the European Union in 1981 .
 Portugal had no recent experience of even the most vestigial of democracies . Unlike Greece, Portugal had never had a recent experience in democracy . Portugal is the only country to have a democracy .
 Salazar’s authoritarian reign had been peculiarly and self-consciously retrograde even by the standards prevailing when he first took over power in 1932 . The junta itself, however, did not escape retribution .
 Brigadier-General Ioannidis was convicted at a later trial for his role in the suppression of the Polytechnic revolt . He was convicted of his role as a Brigadier General at the time .
 Infant mortality was the highest in Europe, and 32 percent of the population was illiterate . 32 percent were illiterate, and the rich were very rich indeed . The rich were rich indeed, but the poor were very poor .
 Like the Romanian dictator Ceau§escu, Salazar was obsessed with the avoidance of debt . Salazar balanced every annual budget, and balanced budgets .
 Fanatically mercantilist, he built up unusually high gold reserves . He took care not to spend on investment or imports .
 Most of the population worked on small family farms in the north of the country and latifundia further south . As a result, his country was locked into poverty, most of its population working on small farms .
 Portugal was largely dependent upon the export or re-export of primary commodities, including its own people . With no local capital available to finance domestic industry and foreign investors distinctly unwelcome, foreign investors were distinctly unwelcome .
 Salazar kept Portugal out of devastating foreign wars of the century . He navigated his country between the Scylla of rapacious market capitalism and the Charybdis of state socialism .
 The only resistance to Salazar came from the military, the country’s sole independent institution . In the absence of domestic opposition, the only resistance was from the army .
 Salazar actively encouraged impecunious army officers to marry into the better-heeled bourgeoisie . The Portuguese armed forces were ill-paid .
 Until 1961 the regime could count on at least their passive loyalty, in spite of two abortive and easily crushed military coup attempts in 1947 and again in 1958 .
 Reform-minded junior officers in the army or navy chafe at the stagnation around them . But they lacked allies or any popular base or allies . Reformers in the British army and navy could not afford allies or popular base .
 Maurras died in 1952, aged 84, when Delhi forcibly annexed Portugal’s mainland . In7 Maurras was forced to leave Portugal in 1961 when Delhi annexed Portugal's mainland .
 Salazar was born in Vimeiro, Portugal, on April 28th 1889, just a week after Hitler . Salazar himself, the son of an estate manager, was born on that date .
 The loss of Goa was a national humiliation, but rebellion in Africa was more serious still still . The loss was national humiliation .
 Portugal’s considerable African ‘provinces’, as they were known, comprised Angola, Guinee-Bissau and the Cape Verde Islands in West Africa, and Mozambique in the south-east . Portugal was known as Portugal's most populous
 Angola has nearly half a million European residents in a total population of under six million . Angola is by far the most important country in the world, with a population of just six million people .
 Salazar reluctantly allowed foreign investment into the territory . The territory was taking on growing economic significance for Portugal itself .
 The plan failed to break the insurgency, although it had baneful and enduring effects on Angola’s society and rural economy . It had an enduring and enduring effect on the economy and society in Angola .
 In Angola the rebels were divided between different factions and the Portuguese army was able to contain them, at least for a while . In Angola, the rebels are divided between factions and were able to be contained by the army .
 In Mozambique, 60,000 Portuguese soldiers were kept busy protecting a European settler population numbering just 100,000 . In Guinee and Cape Verde, the charismatic Amilcar Cabral tied down over 30,000 troops in thankless guerilla warfare against ten
 By the start of the 1970s its African wars were consuming half the annual defense budget of Europe’s poorest country . By the beginning of the . 1970s, the African wars consumed half . annual defense . budget .
 One in every four Portuguese men of military age was being conscripted to serve in Africa . After 1967, after 1967, a compulsory minimum term of four years was four years .
 Portugal’s defense of its colonial holdings was expensive, bloody and increasingly hopeless . The armed forces knew this better than anyone. Portugal's defense was expensive and bloody .
 Marcello Caetano eased credit restrictions and encouraged the flow of imports from abroad . To secure his own power and distract attention from the country’s overseas woes, he had eased restrictions on credit restrictions .
 In the years 1970-73, Portugal underwent a brief consumer boom, fuelled by remittances from Portuguese working abroad . The boom was fuelled by a period of economic boom in the 1970s-73 .
 The oil crisis was followed by spiraling inflation brought on by the oil crisis . But it was followed in short order by the rise of inflation in the 1970s .
 Shanty towns in Alentejo region suffer from endemic indigence . Many recent arrivals from the impoverished region have been recent arrivals .
 The army increasingly resented fighting the country’s ‘dirty wars’ in far-away lands on behalf of an unpopular government run by unelected technocrats, and its discontent was now finding a widespread echo at home .
 The grievances of junior officers and their families are now shared by a rising generation of businessmen frustrated at their rulers’ incompetence . They understood that their country’s future lay in Europe, not Africa .
 On April 25th 1974, officers and men of the Armed Forces Movement (Movimento das Formas Armadas—MFA) ousted Caetano and his colleagues from office . They declared a provisional government whose goals were to be democratization and decolonization .
 The coup aroused little resistance, and the leaders of the old regime were allowed to fly into exile . Salazar was allowed to go to Madeira, then to Brazil, then Madeira .
 General Antonio de Spinola was appointed by his fellow officers to head the junta . He was a former deputy chief of staff of the Portuguese army and governor of Guinee from 1968 to 1972 .
 The secret police was abolished, all political prisoners were released and freedom of the press was restored . The leaders of Portugal’s Socialist and Communist parties returned from exile, their organizations legally permitted for the first time .
 Spinola brought centrists and socialists into his provisional cabinet . In July he publicly announced plans to offer African colonies full self-determination .
 Within a year the colonies were all independent . Indonesia had seized control of Portuguese East Timor . The colonies were soon independent .
 The decolonization was more than a little chaotic, but seen from Portugal it had the virtue of being quick . Guerillas in Guinee and Mozambique ignored Spinola’s insistence that they first lay down arms .
 The army’s retreat and violent clashes in the Angolan capital, Luanda, precipitated the return to Portugal of some 750,000 Europeans . It also precipitated, in the wake of the army's retreat, the return of around 750,00 Europeans .
 Many of them settled in Portugal’s more conservative north and would play a significant political role in coming years . Many of the migrants arrived in Portugal in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Spinola resigned in September 1974 . His conservative instincts were at odds with the increasingly radical projects of his younger colleagues . Spinola's conservative instincts clashed with those of his colleagues .
 For the next 14 months Portugal appeared to be moving towards a full-scale social revolution . Portugal's social revolution was a social revolution for the first time in 14 years .
 Nationalization was popular in the towns, and agrarian reform in the South was driven by ‘spontaneous’ occupations and land seizures by local tenants and labourers mobilized by the Communists and their allies . The Communists in particular benefited from their well-deserved reputation as
 The land was already sub-divided into thousands of small, family-run property holdings . But the same practices in the center and north of the country were decidedly unwelcome . The same practices were unwelcome .
 Rural and small-town northern Portugal was also actively Catholic, with an average of one priest for every five hundred souls in 1972 . The figure for south-central Portugal was 1:4500, and lower still in the far south .
 The anti-clerical, collectivizing projects of Communist unionists and peasant leaders encountered strong and vociferous opposition in the populous northern regions of Russia .
 In April 1975 the Communists were held to just 12. percent of the vote in the Constituent Assembly elections . The Communist Party was held to 12.5 percent of vote .
 Portugal will not be a country with democratic freedoms and monopolies, says Pedro Pinto . Portugal is not a country without democratic freedoms, Pinto says .
 Foreign commentators warned of an impending Communist coup, and Portugal’s NATO allies and western European trade partners held out promises of aid and affiliation if the country abjured Marxist revolution . Portugal's NATO allies were promised aid if the Marxist revolution abjured .
 On November 8th the Constituent Assembly in Lisbon was besieged by building workers . For two weeks there were rumors of an imminent ‘Lisbon Commune’ and even a civil war between north and south .
 Initially they had the tacit support of the PCP, but when it became clear that the bulk of the armed forces and even some of the left-wing officers were opposed to the uprising, even Cunhal backed off .
 In February 1976 the Portuguese military officially handed over power to the civilian authorities . The military was still in effective control of the country nearly two years after their coup . The Portuguese military took over power in February 1976 .
 Mario Soares formed Portugal’s first democraticallyelected government in nearly half a century . In the legislative elections of that same month, the Socialists once again came first, though with a slightly reduced vote .
 The prospects for Portuguese democracy remained cloudy—Willy Brandt was just one of many sympathetic observers who saw in Soares another Kerensky, an unwitting stalking horse for undemocratic forces .
 The armed forces remained confined to barracks, the role of their politicized fringes increasingly marginal . The role of the armed forces became increasingly marginal to the military .
 Soares’ moderate policies frustrated his party’s left-wing, to whom he had promised the coming destruction of capitalism in a Socialist Portugal . The Communists’ vote actually rose—improving to 14. percent in 1976 and thence to 19 percent three years later .
 In 1977 the Parliament passed an Agrarian Reform Law that confirmed the land collectivization of the immediate past but confined it to the South, with restrictions on the amount of land that could be expropriated from existing owners .
 This move ended the risk of rural conflict and a conservative backlash, but it could do little in the short run to alleviate the economic mess that democratic Portugal had inherited . Portugal's economic mess was inherited by a democratic Portugal, writes Simon Tisdall .
 Portugal suffered years of unemployment and under-consumption . Deprived of cheap raw materials from its former colonies, it was unable to export unskilled labour to Western Europe as in the past .
 Parliament revised constitution in the course of the next two years, reducing the power of the executive . It also quietly removed the anti-capitalist emphasis in the original document .
 For the next twenty years the Socialists and their opponents, centrist Social Democrats led by Anibal Cava^o Silva, were to alternate in office . The Socialists were to hold office for the next 20 years .
 The country remained strikingly poor by West European standards, a tribute to Salazar's enduring legacy . Salazar’s enduring legacy remains in the shadow of the Soviet Union .
 The Communists remained hard-line under Cunhal, who stayed in charge until 1992 . The Communists were popular in the rural south and the industrial suburbs of Lisbon .
 The repatriated colonials never succeeded in forming a far-right party of embittered nationalists . They never succeeded to form a far right party .
 In the circumstances of the circumstances, the emergence of a democratic Portugal was a very considerable achievement . The emergence of Portugal's democratic Portugal is a very significant achievement, says the Portuguese Prime Minister .
 To a visitor crossing from France into Spain in, say, 1970, the chasm separating the two sides of the Pyrenees seemed immense . To a French visitor crossing into Spain, it would have been a huge chasm .
 Franco’s thirty-year long reign accentuated the social backwardness and cultural isolation in which Spain had languished for much of the past two centuries . His authoritarian regime appeared even more at odds with modern European political culture than it had at the outset . Franco's authoritarian regime was
 Franco was a rigid and truly reactionary dictator, but unlike his neighbor Salazar he was also an economic realist . Franco was the rigid and reactionary dictator of the 1930s and '60s .
 In 1959 Spain adopted a National Stabilization Plan to stifle the country’s endemic inflation and open it up to trade and investment . Spain abandoned autarkic practices of the past two decades in favour of the plan .
 The private sector, hitherto constrained by corporatist regulations and a longstanding policy of import substitution, was freer to expand . But the private sector was freed to expand, the government said .
 The Spanish domestic economy had been protected against competition in the early years of Europe’s post-war boom . But it was opening itself to foreign commerce at just the right moment .
 As recently as 1963 the Spanish leader had not hesitated to execute a captured Communist, Juan Grimau, in defiance of widespread international criticism . The percentage of the labor force employed on the land in 1950s fell pre10 .
 Spain ceased to qualify as a ‘developing nation’ under UN criteria . Already, by the mid-Sixties, Spain had ceased to be a 'developing country’
 Spain faced none of the economic or social costs of decolonization . Spain was not burdened by the residue of empire and thus faced none . Spain faced no social or economic costs from decolonizing .
 The transport, education, medical and service infrastructure of Spain still lags far behind . Outside of Barcelona, the Costa Brava, parts of the Basque country and Madrid, the infrastructure lags behind .
 Even in 1973, per capita income in the country as a whole was still lower than that of Ireland and less than half the EEC average .
 The social consequences of even limited economic modernization were significant . Nevertheless, the social consequences were significant. Nevertheless, they were not all the same .
 Spain may have been largely shielded from the cultural impact of the Sixties elsewhere . But the economic disparities and disruption engendered by the Stabilization Plan produced widespread labour discontent .
 From the later Sixties through Franco’s death, strikes, lockouts, demonstrations and widespread demands for collective bargaining and union representation became a fixture of Spanish life .
 Franco's regime was adamantly opposed to any political concessions . But it could not afford to present too repressive a public face, at a time when so many foreigners were visiting the country . Franco’s death was the year before his death .
 Spanish authorities could not forgo cooperation and skills of a growing urban work force . Nor could the Spanish authorities forgo the cooperation of the . population .
 Catalonia's labor movement is overwhelmingly based in Catalonia and the heavy industries of the Basque region . They were constrained to concede the de facto emergence of the labor movement .
 Unofficial unions formed by public employees, banking staff and other white-collar workers’ and employees’ representatives could call upon nearly a decade of organization and experience by the time Franco died . Together with public employees and banking staff, this semi-clandestine network of workers'
 Labor protest in Spain has been kept firmly confined to bread and butter issues .
 By its last years, Franco’s regime—rather like that of Janos Kadar in Hungary—depended not on open and violent repression but rather on a sort of enforced passive acceptance . Franco‘s regime’depended on a decades-long de-polit
 Student protesters since 1956 had been seeking greater campus autonomy and a relaxing of moral codes and other restrictions . They were accorded a certain liberty to organize and protest within strictly circumscribed boundaries . They could even count upon some sympathy from the regime's internal critics .
 Independent political parties were banned in the 1970s . All properly political opinions were kept under wraps, and independent political parties banned . Independent parties were also banned .
 Until 1967 the country lacked even a constitution, and such rights and procedures as existed were largely window dressing for the benefit of Spain’s Western partners . Until 1967, the country had no constitution and was largely window-dressing .
 Franco had anointed the young Juan Carlos, grandson of Spain’s last king, to succeed him in due course . For most observers the question of the monarchy played little part in Spanish affairs .
 Even the Church, still a major presence in the daily life of many Spaniards, played only a limited role in public policy . Even the church was still a big presence in public life .
 Spain’s traditional role as a bulwark of Christian civilization against materialism and atheism was a staple of the primary-school curriculum . The Catholic hierarchy itself was kept well away from the reins of power, in marked contrast to the neo-Crusading ‘National Catholicism�
 Franco conceded for the first time in June 1968, allowing Spaniards openly to worship at a church of their choosing . Franco conceded to the principle of religious freedom for first time .
 Franco understood the risks of alienating a military caste that had inherited an over-developed sense of its responsibility for the preservation of the Spanish state and its traditional values . Franco understood very well that he was coming to power by a military coup, having come to power in a coup .
 Throughout the post-war years the Spanish Army was cosseted and flattered . The Spanish Army remained in touch with the British Army .
 Its victory in the Civil War was celebrated annually in the streets of major cities . Its losses were ostentatiously memorialized in the Valley of The Fallen, completed in September 1959 .
 Franco had for decades preserved his military from any foreign or colonial wars . Franco's military was preserved by the Francoist regime . Franco had been in charge of his military for decades .
 Unlike the French or Portuguese armies, they suffered no humiliating defeats or forced retreats . The French and Portuguese armies suffered no humiliating losses .
 Spain faced no military threats, and its domestic security was handled by police, genn . Students of the Sixties generation typically exaggerate in retrospect the role they were to play in their country’s struggle for democracy .
 Catholic leaders were able to play an active role in the transition to democracy, serving as a ‘bridge’ between radicals and conservatives . As a result, Catholic leaders, unsullied by any Francoist past, were .
 The army, largely confined to a ceremonial role, had become risk averse . Its traditional conservatism was expressed increasingly in enthusiasm for the return of the monarchy .
 The affairs of the country were run by a restricted network of lawyers, Catholic professors and civil servants . Many of them had active interests in the private companies favoured by their policies .
 Refusing to the end to consider any serious liberalizations or transfer of authority, he had already outlived his usefulness even to his own supporters . Many sympathized with demonstrators who earlier in the year had demanded lifting of restrictions on the press and political associations .
 The transition to democracy was managed from within the ranks of Franco’s own ministers and appointees, which helps account for its speed and success . Franco's government managed the transition from within its own ministers to democracy .
 In the initial stages of Spain’s exit from Franco ism, the traditional forces of democratic change in Spain played a subordinate role . In Spain, the Socialists, Communists, trade unions played a smaller role .
 Initially he kept on Carlos Arias Navarro, Franco’s last Prime Minister, together with his cabinet colleagues . The better to reassure the army and others that there would be no sudden breach with the past .
 Arias incurred royal disfavor when he clamped down on the newly-formed Democratic Coordination, a coalition of stillunauthorized parties of the Left, and arrested its leaders . Arias was arrested in 1976 after claming down on a coalition .
 Within two months the king had replaced Arias with one of his own ministers, Adolfo Suarez Gonzalez . Arias was replaced by one of King's own ministers .
 At forty four, Suarez was a typical late-Franco era technocrat; indeed, he had served for one year as the head of the Caudillo’s own Falangist National Movement .
 He formed a new political party, the Center Democratic Union . He set about persuading the sitting Francoist assembly to accept a referendum on political reform .
 The Francoist old guard agreed, and the referendum passed, on December 15th 1976, with over 94 percent in favor . The referendum was held in 1976 .
 At the same time trade unions were legalized and accorded the right to strike . Trade unions were also accorded to the right of strike .
 In June 1977 elections were held to form a Constituent Assembly with the task of writing a new Constitution . The assembly was formed in 1977 to write a new constitution .
 Suarez’s victory reassured conservatives that there would be no sharp lurch to the Left . The absence of a clear majority obliged him to work with Left-wing deputies who shared responsibility for the new Constitution that the new Assembly was to draft .
 Spain was to be a parliamentary monarchy; there was to have no official religion (though in a concession to the Church, Catholicism was recognized as a ‘social fact’); the voting age was reduced to eighteen; the death penalty was abolished .
 Assembly wrote into Spain’s new laws a right of autonomy for historic regions . Catalonia and the Basque country, notably Catalonia, will have autonomy in Spain's new laws .
 Statutes of Autonomy acknowledged linguistic variety and regional sentiment within Spain’s hitherto ultra-centralized state . They also recognized the disproportionate demographic significance of Catalonia in particular, and the depth of autonomist sentiment in the Basque country and Catalonia alike .
 Some Spaniards have been granted the right to vote in their country's first elections . But others have been denied the same privilege in their own country .
 Within four years Spain was to be divided into seventeen self-administerister regions, each with its own flag and capital city . Spain was divided into 17 self-administered regions . Each region was to have a flag, capital city and national capital .
 Catalans and Basques were to be recognized as distinct and separate . Galicians, Andalusians, Canaries and Canaries, Valencians, Valencis, Navarrese and many others were recognized as separate . Catalans, Basques, Galicians and And
 Madrid retains responsibility for defense, justice and foreign affairs . The constitution was an unacceptable compromise for Basque nationalists .
 ETA had deliberately stepped up its campaign of violence and assassinations in the months when the new constitution was under disdisparity . One month before it was declared legal, the PCE hosted in Madrid a public meeting of the Eurocommunist parties of Western Europe .
 Luis Suarez was forced to resign by his own party in January 1979 . Catalonia, the Basque region, Galicia and Andalucia all embarking upon separatist experiments in home rule .
 General strike breaks out in Basque Provinces . UCD politician Calvo Sotelo could succeed him in office . General strike broke out before he could take office .
 To its critics on the Right, democratic Spain appeared leaderless and on the verge of breaking up . Spain's democratic Spain appears leaderless to its critics . Spain has been in a state of crisis for years .
 Colonel Antonio Tejero Molin Molina of the Civil Guard seized the Cortes at gunpoint . The Cortes were seized by the civil guard at gun point .
 General Jaime Milans del Bosch, commander of Valencia military region, declares a state of emergency . He calls upon the King to dissolve the Cortes and install a military government . In a coordinated move, the Valencia military commander declared a state-of-emergency .
 Tejero and Milans del Bosch surely had tradition and precedent on their side . Though in retrospect their actions appear theatrical and bumbling, they seem to have had tradition on their own .
 There was little the Cortes itself, or the various political parties and their supporters, could have done to block a military coup d’etat . The sympathies of the army itself were far from certain, according to the historian .
 King Juan Carlos I’s outright rejection of the conspirators’ demands and his televised speech uncompromisingly defending the Constitution . The king was unambiguously identifying himself and the monarchy with the country’�s emerging democratic majority . The outcome, and the shape of subsequent
 Both sides were probably equally surprised by the courage of a young king who until then had lived in the shadow of his own appointment by the late dictator . But now his fate was irrevocably linked with parliamentary rule .
 The discredit that Tejero had brought on his ‘cause’ initially afforded an opportunity for the Cortes to cut the military budget and pass a long-overdue bill legalizing divorce . It also afforded them an opportunity to pass a bill that legalized divorce .
 As in Portugal, the political transition had come at a difficult economic moment . Portugal's political transition has come at an economic crisis . Portugal has been in the throes of a difficult period of austerity .
 Last governments of Franco era sought to buy popularity by increasing public spending and public sector employment, subsidizing energy costs, holding back prices while letting wages rise . In large measure this was the responsibility of the last governments of the Franco era .
 As in the 1930s, Spain was building a democracy in the teeth of an economic recession . There was talk of the country going the way of Argentina, with indexed wages and government-subsidized prices degenerating into hyper-inflation .
 Without the Pacts these divisions, and their social consequences, would almost certainly have been more severe still . The Pacts have almost certainly led to more severe divisions in society .
 Suarez’s Center Democrats were all but eliminated from parliament, winning just two seats . Suarez's Center Democrats had led the transition out of Francoism .
 By the mid-Eighties official unemployment data suggest that more than one in five of the workingage population was out of work . Henceforth Spanish politics were to follow the pattern of the rest of western Europe, regrouping around a center-Left and center-Right, in this
 In a country still lacking a fully functioning social safety net and where few people had private savings, these figures indicate widespread hardship . The figures show widespread hardship in the South African nation .
 In 1986, Gonzalez defeated many of his own supporters in a referendum on the question of NATO membership, which he now favored . Once in power, he maintained policies of economic austerity, began the modernization of Spanish industry and services .
 For a politician whose core support came increasingly from men and women too young to remember the Civil War, the old ideological Left was part of the problem, not the solution . For an openly-avowed goal was to overcome Spain’s backwardness—the much-debated at
 Gonzalez: Spain’s future lay not in socialism but in Europe . Gonzalez: Europe is the future, not socialism, but Europe .
 On January 1st 1986 Spain joined the European Community with Portugal . Spain and Portugal became part of the European Union in 1986 .
 The democratic transition of Mediterranean Europe was quite the most remarkable and unexpected development of the age . The transition was quite a remarkable development, writes David Frum .
 The regimes of Salazar and Franco disappeared not just from office but from memory . A new generation of politicians competed for the allegiance of a youthful, ‘modern’ electorate .
 The political state, not society, has fallen so far behind in Spain, it has fallen too far behind . Spain's political state has fallen far behind, says Spanish President Jose Antonio Lopez .
 The economic development of Franco’s last decade meant that daily life and expectations in Spain had changed far more than outside observers supposed, who still looked at the country through the prism of 1936-56 .
 Young people in Mediterranean Europe did not find it difficult to adapt to social routines long familiar further north . Indeed, they were already doing so before the political revolutions .
 Visitors to Lisbon or Madrid in the post-transition years were consistently taken aback at the absence of any reference to the recent past, whether in politics or culture . The absence of references to the past in politics and culture is seen in Lisbon and Madrid .
 The coming irrelevance of the 1930s was presciently captured in La Guerre Est Finie . Alain Resnais’s sad, elegiac film of 1966 in which the emigre Spanish Communist Diego travels clandestinely from Paris to Madrid, conveying subversive
 Pedro Almodovar's films offer a sort of self-conscious inversion of fifty years of authoritarian rule . The films are a potted exercise in the new counter-cultural conventions . The popular films offer an inversion to the fusty authoritarian rule of 50 years .
 Directed with with a cunning, existentialist wink at their subject matter, they typically depict bewildered young women in sexually charged circumstances .
 With each film the settings become glossier, the urban locations become ever more chic . The settings of each film have become more and more glossier with each new film .
 By 1988, with Mujeres al horde de un ataque de nervios (Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown) Almodovar had achieved a convincing cinematic encapsulation of a hectic and self-consciously modern society .
 It is ironic that these changes were made possible not by cultural or political radicals and innovators but by conservative statesmen from the old regime itself . It is all the more ironic that this was made possible by conservatives, not radicals, but by conservatives .
 Spain’s new constitution of 1978 was conspicuously silent about the regime it replaced . The constitution was aimed at reconciling the antagonistic poles of Spanish history, Left/Right; Church/anti-clericals; Center/periphery .
 Karamanlis, it is true, had been in exile during the colonels’ rule; but he was as irreproachably nationalist and narrow-minded as anyone as anyone . He bore direct responsibility for the tainted Greek elections of 1961 that played so central a role .
 It was the reassurance that such men held out to their own constituency that allowed them to dismantle the authoritarian institutions they had once loyed served . But it was the very reassurance . that such .men held out . to their . own constituency .
 Socialists succeeded by Socialists—Soares, Gonzalez, Papandreou—in implementing moderate and often unpopular economic policies forced upon them by circumstances . And they, in turn, were succeeded by . Socialists . They succeeded by so-called 'Soares' and 'Gonz
 The familiar odour of judiciously broken promises and conveniently misplaced memories hung heavy over Mediterranean public life in these years . It must go some way way to explain the skeptical, apolitical mood of a new generation in all three countries .
 Those who clung faithfully and unrepententantly to past commitments, from Communists to Falangists, were rapidly overtaken by events . Those who remained loyal to the Communist Party were quickly overtaken in events .
 Spain, Portugal and Greece were able to enter or re-enter the ‘West’ with little difficulty, despite their self-imposed political isolation . Their foreign policies had always been compatible—indeed, aligned—with those of NATO or EEC states .
 The institutions of the Cold War, not to speak of a common anti-Communism, had facilitated growing communication and collaboration between pluralist democracies and military or clericalist dictatorships . The Cold War institutions of Cold War facilitated growing collaboration between democracies and dictatorships, the author says .
 North Americans and West Europeans have long ceased to take offence at domestic arrangements in Madrid or Athens or Lisbon . After many years spent meeting, negotiating, planning or just doing business with their unelected counterparts .
 To most onlookers, southern Europe was not so much morally bankrupt as institutionally anachronistic . The unpleasant regimes of southern Europe were not so moral bankrupt that they were institutionally morally bankrupt .
 Their economies were already well integrated into international markets for money, goods and labour . And, of course, their economies were in essential respects similar to those of other Western nations .
 Even Salazar’s Portugal was recognizably a part of the international system of capitalism . But he was on the wrong end of it. Salazar's Portugal was recognised as an international part of capitalism.
 The emerging middle class, in Spain especially, modeled its ambitions no less than its dress upon managers, businessmen, engineers, politicians and civil servants . “Victor Perez-Diaz, Spain at the Crossroads.”
 For all their backwardness, the societies of Mediterranean Europe already belonged to a world they now aspired to join on equal terms . The transition out of authoritarian rule was above all facilitated by the opportunity afforded them to do so, writes David Cameron .
 Their elites, who had once faced resolutely backward, now looked north . Their elites now looked to the north .
 In January 1972, in Brussels, the EC formally approved the accession of Britain, Ireland, Denmark and Norway to take effect a year later . The accession to the European Union took place in 1972 .
 The successful British application was the work of Conservative Prime Minister Edward Heath . Heath is the only British political leader since World War Two unambiguously and enthusiastically in favor of joining his nation’s fate to that of its continental neighbors .
 British membership of the Community would prove controversial in later years . Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher opposed the emerging projects for evercloser union and demanded that Britain be refunded her ‘overpayments’ to the common budget .
 London was relieved to be part of a trading area that now supplied one third of Britain’s inward investment . But in the Seventies London had problems of its own .
 The first direct elections to a new European Parliament were held in 1979 . Until then, members of the European Assembly sitting in Strasbourg had been selected by the respective national legislatures .
 Norway's capital, Oslo, voted heavily in favor of the referendum . In the UK, the UK voted for the first time in a row over the issue .
 Anti-European coalition of radicals, environmentalists, ‘linguistic nationalists’ and farmers opposed to EEC’s restriction of the exclusive coastal fishing zone to just twelve miles .
 Denmark’s entry also brought in Greenland, at the time still governed from Copenhagen . Greenland was still governed by the Danish government from the time of entry .
 Greenland voted to leave the EEC in 1979, the only member-state ever to do so . Greenland achieved self-rule in 1979 after achieving self rule in 1979 . Greenland is only member state of the European Economic Community to have ever left .
 The adhesion of three ‘northern tier’ countries to the EC was relatively unproblematic for newcomers and old members alike . ‘Northern tier' countries were relatively unperturbed by the result .
 Ireland was poor but tiny, while Denmark and the UK were wealthy and thus net contributors to the common budget . Denmark and UK were both wealthy and therefore net contributors . Ireland is poor but small, while the UK and Denmark are wealthy and contribute to the budget .
 In 1995, Austria, Sweden and Finland joined what was by then the European Union . The new participants added to the coffers and clout of the expanding community without significantly increasing its costs, or competing in sensitive areas .
 Greece, like Ireland, was small and poor and its agriculture posed no threat to French farmers . Greece was like Ireland and Ireland, but it was not a threat to France farmers .
 There were no powerful arguments against its admission, which was championed by French President Giscard d’Estaing among others . The Orthodox Church had official and influential standing and civil marriage, to take one example, was not permitted until 1992 .
 The French put up strong opposition to Portugal and Spain . But when it came to Portugal, the French did not give up support .
 Wine, olive oil, fruit and other farm products cost far less to grow and market south of the Pyrenees . Spain and Portugal to be admitted to the common European market on equal terms .
 With the accession of three poor, agrarian countries, the Common Agricultural Fund took on heavy new burdens . France ceased to be the main beneficiary of the fund after the accessions .
 France succeeded in imposing a long ‘transition period’ which France imposed before allowing their exports into Europe on equal terms . The newcomers in turn were duly compensated for their own disadvantages .
 Spanish negotiators becoming notably adept at advancing and securing their country’s financial advantage . The Spanish and Portuguese did well enough out of Europe .
 By 1990 half of the European Community’s poorest regions were Greek . Greece did so well because it was so poor that it was able to do well .
 Greece's generosity could be absorbed by the Community’s national paymasters, chiefly West Germany . So long as there were no other poor countries waiting in line, this level of redistributive generosity was absorbed by West Germany.
 The generous precedents of the Mediterranean accession years would prove burdensome and controversial, as we shall see . But with the costly unification of Germany and the prospect of a new pool of indigent applicant-states from Eastern Europe, it would be costly and controversial .
 The unanimity required in the inter-governmental Council of Ministers ushered in interminable debates . It was needed to ensure that the unanimity needed in the council of ministers was unanimous .
 Decisions could take years to be agreed -- one directive on the definition and regulation of mineral water took eleven years to emerge from the Council chambers . Decisions on mineral water regulation could take several years to come up .
 There was a longstanding consensus that the European ‘project’ needed an infusion of purpose and energy . The personal friendship of France’s President Valery Giscard d’Estaing and German Chancellor Schmidt in the years 1975-1981 favored such an agenda .
 Negative economic integration is easier to advance by removing tariffs and trade restrictions, than agreeing on purposeful criteria requiring positive political action . But it's easier for negative economic integration to advance than to agree on specific criteria requiring political action.
 Only when powerful leaders of dominant states agreed for reasons of their own to work together toward some common purpose could change be brought about . Only when . powerful leaders agreed to . work together .
 Willy Brandt and Georges Pompidou launched the first system of monetary coordination, the ‘Snake’ Helmut Schmidt and Giscard d’Estaing developed it into the European Monetary System . Helmut Kohl and Francois Mitterrand would mastermind
 Giscard and Schmidt invented ‘summit diplomacy’ as a way to circumvent the impediments of a cumbersome supranational bureaucracy in Brussels . As in the past, Franco-German cooperation was the necessary condition for the unification of Western Europe .
 The impulse behind Franco-German moves in the Seventies was economic anxiety . The French-German alliance was formed in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The European economy was growing slowly if at all, inflation was endemic . Inflation was endemic and uncertainty resulting from the collapse of the Bretton Woods system meant that exchange rates were volatile .
 The Snake, the EMS and the ecu were a sort of second-best—because regional rather than international—response to the problem . The Deutschmark was replaced by the euro as the stable currency of reference for European bankers and markets .
 The euro was the logical next step in replacing national currencies with national currencies . A few years later the replacement of national currencies by the euro was also the logical step .
 The ultimate emergence of a single European currency was the outcome of pragmatic responses to economic problems, not a calculated strategic move on the road to a pre-determined European goal . The emergence of the single currency was therefore not a planned strategic move, says David Cameron .
 The successful monetary collaboration of Western European states served as an unexpected stepping stone to other forms of collective action . Nevertheless, by convincing many observers, many observers—notably skeptical Social Democrats—that economic recovery and prosperity could no longer be achieved at a national level alone .
 With no powerful constituency opposed in principle, the Community’s heads of state and government signed a Solemn Declaration in 1983 committing them to a future European Union . The Declaration was signed by heads of states and government in 1983 .
 The precise shape of such a Union was then hammered out in the course of negotiations leading to the Single European Act . The Act was approved by the European Council in December 1985 and entered into force in July 1987 .
 The SEA was the first significant revision of the original Rome Treaty . The SEA is the first major revision to the original treaty .
 Leaders of the twelve member nations took a decisive step forward in principle . And merely by replacing ‘Community’ with ‘Union’ the leaders of the 12 member nations have taken a significant step forward .
 The signatories avoided or postponed all truly controversial business, notably the growing burden of the Union’s agricultural budget . But the signatories avoid or postponed any truly controversial matters .
 EU leaders step cautiously around absence of any common European policy on defense and foreign affairs . They also stepped cautiously around the embarrassing absence of a common defense policy .
 Britain and France agreed to move towards a single internal market in goods and labour . They agreed to adopt a system of ‘qualified majority voting in the Union’s decision-making process .
 These were real changes, and they could be agreed to because a single market was favored in principle by everyone from Margaret Thatcher to the Greens, albeit for different reasons . The single market is favored by everyone, including Margaret Thatcher, but not the Greens .
 They facilitated and anticipated the genuine economic integration of the next decade . They facilitated . The two countries' economic integration, they say .
 A retreat from the system of national vetoes in the European Council was unavoidable if any decisions were to be taken by an increasingly cumbersome community of states . The EU has doubled its size in just 13 years and is already anticipating applications for membership from Sweden, Austria and elsewhere .
 The larger it grew, the more attractive—and somehow ‘inevitable’—the future European Union would become to those not yet inside it . The larger the EU grew, it would be attractive to those outside it, the author says .
 To citizens of its memberstates, the most significant feature of the European Union in these years was the amount of money flowing through its coffers and the way that money was disbursed . Most of the EU's leaders’ projects for closer integration, however, remain largely unknown .
 Regional expenditures are the leading source of budgetary expansion in Brussels . Cash subsidies, direct aid, start-up funds and other investment incentives are the most influential lever at Brussels' disposal .
 The reason for this was the confluence of regionalist politics within the separate member states and growing economic disparities between the states themselves . The result was the result of the country's regionalism and economic disparities .
 European states were still unitary, governed from the center with little regard for local variety or tradition . In the initial post-WWII years, European states still had little regard to local variety, tradition .
 Only the new Italian constitution of 1948 even acknowledged the case for regional authorities . The limited local governments that it stipulated remained a dead letter for a quarter of a century .
 The ERDF and other so-called ‘structural funds’ had two purposes, Brussels-based officials say . From the point of view of Brussels, officials, the ERDF has two purposes .
 The first was to address the problem of eco530 nomic backwardness and unevenness within a Community that was still guided by a post-war culture of growth . The Single European Act made quite explicit .
 With each new group of members came new inequalities that required attention, compensation if economic integration was to succeed . The social inequalities required attention and compensation for economic integration, he says .
 Denmark is the wealthiest member of the European Community, Greece is 44 . Denmark's average income stood at 126, Greece's at 44 . In 1982, Denmark was Europe's wealthiest member at 126 .
 Regional disparities are greater still greater than national averages . And these were national averages, and regional disparities were greater still .
 To correct geographical and market deformations that locked Spain's Galicia or Sweden’s Vasterbotten into dependency, agencies in Brussels would devote large amounts of cash . But it also sets up expensive, cumbersome and occasionally corrupt local bureaucracies in the process .
 Europe’s enormously costly regional funding projects would consume 35 percent of all EU expenditure by the end of the century . Between them the various ‘Structural’ and ‘Cohesion’ Funds would consume35 percent of EU expenditure . The European Commission in Brussels in Brussels
 Regionalist sentiment has been growing everywhere since the late 1960s . Regionalists have always been in touch with each other since then .
 Quondam 1968 activists sought to revive and use the old Occitan language in south-western France . Activists substituting regional affinity for political dogma for political ideology .
 Like their fellow activists in Brittany they found common cause with Catalan and Basque separatists, Scottish and Flemish nationalists . They expressed a common resentment at ‘misrule’ from Madrid, or Paris, or London or Rome .
 Andalusia, much of Scotland, Wallonia and many others were in the second category . Andalusian, Scottish and French-speaking Wallonia are in the other category .
 Wealthy regions like Catalonia or Baden-Wiirttemburg set up offices in Brussels . They learned how to lobby on their own behalf, for investment or for Community policies favoring local over national institutions .
 Political representatives from disadvantaged regions were just as quick to manipulate grants and aid from Brussels to increase their local popularity . Brussels' largesse could pressure compliant authorities in Dublin or London into encouraging and even supplementing Brussels’ largesse .
 Ireland successfully replaced or updated much of its dilapidated transport and sewerage infrastructure in this way . Ireland is not alone among poorer, peripheral member states it was not .
 The SEA expanded Community powers into many policy areas, including the environment, employment practices, local research-and-development initiatives . All of which entailed dispensing of Brussels funds directly to local agencies .
 This cumulative ‘regionalization’ of Europe was bureaucratic and costly, says Mr. Frida Ghitis . Ghitis: 'Regionalization' of Europe has been costly and bureaucratic . He says it was a waste of time and wasted .
 Alto Adige was now eligible for environmental protection funds; grants to support agriculture; . grants to improve vocational training, . and grants to encourage traditional handicrafts; . Grants to ameliorate living conditions in order to retain population .
 A further 57 million euros were to be put at the province’s disposal in the so-called ‘Third Period’ of European structural funding, scheduled to run from 2000-2006 . The province was due to receive a further 57million euros in funding from the ‘
 Richer countries were typically less beholden to Brussels and maintained closer control of their affairs . Under ‘Objective 27’ Richer nations were typically . less behold to Brussels .
 In France, despite the ‘decentralization’ enshrined in laws passed during the 1980s, the reins of budgetary power stayed firmly in Parisian hands .
 As a result, prosperous regions of France followed the international trend and benefited from their EU links . But poor districts remained dependent on state aid above all .
 Since 1990, a government department in Bolzano, the provincial capital, has been devoted exclusively to instructing local residents how to benefit from ‘Europe’ and European resources .
 The result, in the South Tyrol as elsewhere, was that—costly or not—integrating the continent ‘from the bottom up’ did seem to work .
 A certain sort of united Europe was indeed beginning to come into focus . The European Union was beginning to be united in the 1990s .
 The residents of this increasingly parcelized Community, whose citizens professed multiple elective allegiances of variable cultural resonance and daily significance, were perhaps less unambiguously ‘Italian’ or ‘British’ than in decades past . But they did not necessarily therefore feel more �
 The lush undergrowth of agencies, media, institutions, institutions and funds brought many benefits but won scant affection . It is said to be the most significant development in the country's history .
 The outcome was not just bureaucracy on an unprecedented scale but also corruption . Corruption was induced and encouraged by the sheer volume of funding available . Much of it required the exaggeration and even invention of local needs and thus inviting the sorts of venal abuses .
 ‘Europe’ in these years was not well served by its own achievements . Between a reputation for policy-making by distant unelected civil servants, and well-stocked rumors of political back-scratching and profiteering, 'Europe' in this year was not
 The familiar shortcomings of local politics, clientelism, corruption, manipulation, are resurfaced on a continental scale . The better-run nation states thought to have overcome now resurfaced .
 The decades-long drive to overcome continental disunity by purely technical measures was looking decidedly political, while lacking the redeeming legitimacy of a traditional political project pursued by an elected class of familiar politicians .
 Insofar as ‘Europe’ had a distinctive goal, its economic strategy was still grounded in the calculations and ambitions of the Fifties . Europe’s economic strategy remains grounded in its calculations, and ambitions, of the 1950s .
 For all their laudable efforts to transcend the shortcomings of national political calculation, the men and women who were constructing ‘Europe’ in the Seventies and Eighties were still curiously provincial . For all the laudable . efforts, the people who built 'Europe' in 'Europe
 Schengen Agreement signed in 1985 is revealingly symptomatic of its trans-national achievement of the time . The agreement was signed in June 1985, and it was the first to join the EU .
 Under the terms of this arrangement France, West Germany and the Benelux countries agreed to dismantle their common frontiers and inaugurate a shared regime of passport control . France, Germany and West Germany signed a deal to dismantle the frontiers .
 Germany and France would be easy to cross from Germany to France . It had long been unproblematic to move between, say, Belgium and Holland .
 The Agreement resolutely reinforced the external borders separating them from outsiders . In opening the internal frontiers between some EC member states, therefore, the Agreement . It also reinforced the internal borders separating some EC members from outsiders.
 Civilized Europeans could indeed transcend boundaries—but the ‘barbarians’ would be kept resolutely beyond them . The 'barbarian’ was kept beyond them, writes David Frum, a historian and author of the book .
 Donald Sassoon: Every politically significant revolution is anticipated by a transformation of the intellectual landscape . Donald Sassoons: Every political significant revolution has been anticipated by the transformation of our intellectual landscape.
 The economic crisis of the early Seventies undermined the optimism of Western Europe’s post-war decades . It fractured conventional political parties and propelling unfamiliar issues to the center of public debate . The crisis of early 1970s undermined Western Europe's optimism .
 Political argument on both sides of the Cold War divide was breaking decisively with decades of encrusted mental habits . The Cold War is breaking decisively, forming new ones .
 The first victim of the change in mood was the consensus that had hitherto embraced the post-war state, the neo-Keynesian economics that furnished its intellectual battlements . The change in the mood is the first victim to the change of the mood .
 By the late 1970s the European welfare state was starting to count the cost of its own success . By the 1980s the welfare state had begun to count its own cost of success .
 The post-war baby-boom generation was entering middle age, and government statisticians were already warning of the cost of supporting it in retirement .
 Being also the best-nurtured generation ever, they would almost certainly live longer . Moreover, being . also the . best-Nurtured . generation ever . They would also be the most likely to live longer.
 By 1980 unemployment benefits were a major budgetary consideration in every Western European state . And to this concern was now added the growing cost of paying unemployment benefits . Unemployment benefits became a major budget consideration in Western European states .
 Both assumptions were now open to question, but the demographic miscalculation was the more dramatic of the two . Both assumptions are now open-ended .
 By the beginning of the 1980s, in Western Europe, the population replacement ratio of 2.5 children per woman was being met or exceeded only in Greece and Ireland . By the end of the 1990s, Western Europe had reached the highest level of population replacement ratios .
 In prosperous Western Europe, then, it appeared that within two decades there would not be enough people around to pay the bills . Prosperity itself seemed to be the culprit, together with reliable contraception and a growing number of women working outside the home .
 Already the cost of pension and national insurance provision in some places weighed heavily on employers . It is a serious consideration in a time of endemic high unemployment in Britain .
 In Sweden, by 1977, one-third of the national product was taken up by social expenditures . The charge could only be met either by deficits or by raising taxes on the very constituencies of the Social Democratic .
 Public policy since the 1930s rested on a broadly unquestioned ‘Keynesian’ consensus . Public policy has since been based on the Keynesian-led consensus .
 This took for granted that economic planning, deficit financing and full employment were inherently desirable and mutually sustaining . This was taken for granted by the British Prime Minister .
 The array of social services and provisions to which Western Europeans had become accustomed were not sustainable . The first, quite simply, was that the array of services and . provisions to . which Western . Europeans had . become accustomed to are not sustainable, the author says . writes .
 Were it not for the rise of the birth rate in immigrant communities from Asia, Africa and the Caribbean, the figures would have been even lower . The second argument, offered with particular urgency in Britain—where 1 million people live in the UK, is offered with special urgency .
 Critics say the state should be removed as far as possible from the market for goods and services . The state, these critics insisted, should not be left out of the market . The government has been accused of over-regulating the market in the past .
 It should not own the means of production, it should not allocate resources and set prices or incomes . It should also not set prices, incomes, and should not set costs or incomes, it has been suggested .
 Most of the services currently furnished by the state could be provided more efficiently in the private sector . Citizens should pay for them out of income no longer directed to public resources, says 'neo-liberals'
 Earlier generation of pre-Keynesian liberals brought up on the ffee-market doctrines of neoclassical economics .
 In more recent times they were familiar to specialists from the work of Hayek and his American disciple Milton Friedman . They were familiar with Hayek's work in his work in the United States .
 Depression of the 1930s and demand-led boom of the Fifties and Sixties had been dismissed as politically myopic and economically anachronistic . But with the Depression of 1930s, such views had been typically dismissed as political myopic .
 ffee-market theorists had re-emerged, vociferous and confident, to blame endemic economic recession and attendant woes upon ‘big government’ and the dead hand of taxation and planning that it placed upon national energies and initiative .
 In many places this rhetorical strategy was quite seductive to younger voters with no first-hand experience of the baneful consequences of such views, the last time they had gained intellectual ascendancy, half a century before .
 Hayek and Friedman were able to seize control of public policy and wreak a radical transformation in the country’s political culture . But only in Britain were the political disciples of Hayek or Friedman able to take control of the public policy .
 The economy of the UK, though intensively regulated, was perhaps the least ‘planned’ of any in Europe . It is more than a little ironic that this should have happened in Britain of all places, for the economy .
 The only ideologically-driven aspect of British economic life were the nationalizations first introduced by the Labour government after 1945 .
 The core of Britain’s welfare state lay not in economic ‘collectivism’ but in universalized social institutions, anchored firmly in the early twentiethcentury reformism of Keynes's liberal contemporaries . Keynes’ contemporaries .
 The cost of running the welfare state in Britain was actually lower than elsewhere, thanks to under-funded services, inadequate public pensions and poor housing provision . These facilities were not very good, but they were widely perceived as an entitlement .
 However intensely such social goods were condemned by neoliberal critics as inefficient and under-performing, they remained politically untouchable . However, such social services were condemned as inefficient by critics as underperforming .
 Edward Heath's brief flirtation with free-marketers' proposals brought down on him a thunderstorm of derisory condemnation . Heath brought a group of free-marketeers together at Selsdon Park near London to discuss economic strategies for a future Conservative government .
 ‘Selsdon Man’ beat a hasty retreat. Accused of seeking to return to the Neanderthal primitivism of the economic jungle . Accused . of seeking . seeking to . return to Neanderthal Primitivism .
 If the British political consensus collapsed in the ensuing decade it was not because of ideological confrontation but as a consequence of failure of governments of all colours to identify and impose a successful economic strategy .
 Both Labour and Conservative governments tried to replace anarchy of British industrial relations with planned consensus along AustroScandinavian or German lines .
 The Conservatives, notably Edward Heath’s government of 1970-1974, had even less success, largely thanks to the well-founded, historically-engrained suspicion in certain sectors of the British working class .
 When he called an election to decide, as he put it, ‘who runs the country’, he narrowly lost to Harold Wilson . Harold Wilson, who prudently declined to take up the cudgels himself .
 Callaghan and his Chancellor of the Exchequer (Denis Healey) initiated a retreat from the central nostrums of post-war government practice . Driven by desperation and the conditions of an IMF loan, Callaghan .
 The Canadian government set out to control and reduce inflation and government spending even at the price of economic hardship and slower growth . The government also reduced social transfer payments and labour costs by protecting skilled workers .
 Labour government maintained to the end that it was adhering to its core values and defending the institutions of the welfare state . But it inaugurated a cautiously planned breakout, seeking to achieve by stealth the sorts of reforms that its predecessors had been unable to legislate .
 Labour succeeded only in alienating its own supporters without being able to take any credit for its achievements . Labour failed to take credit for any of its achievements, it said .
 By August 1977, UK unemployment levels had passed 1.1 million and kept on rising . The Labour government’s deep cuts in public spending contributed to the rise in unemployment .
 The Crisis?’—that helped lose him the general election he was forced to hold the following spring . The election was the result of the crisis that led him to lose his general election .
 Margaret Thatcher was not, on the face of it, a likely candidate for the revolutionary role she was to perform . Margaret Thatcher is not likely to be a candidate for a revolutionary role in Britain .
 Born in Grantham, Lincolnshire, she was the daughter of an earnest Methodist couple who ran a grocer’s shop . Born in a sleepy, provincial town in Lincolnshire .
 The highest level of resentful anger was to be found in the public service unions, covering underpaid government employees from dustmen to nurses . In 1950, at the age of 25, she was an employee of the British government .
 They were rather taken aback to discover that no such deals could be cut with Mrs. Obama . Mrs. Bush was also taken aback .
 A chemist and tax lawyer by profession, she first entered Parliament in 1959 . She won a seat in the solidly conservative borough of Finchley which she continued to represent until 1992 .
 Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy-Jacqueline Kennedy had a decidedly unfavorable public image . Yet this decidedly unfavorable image proved no impediment to Mrs. Kennedy's success .
 Thatcher’s advance—her willingness to court and confront unpopularity not only did her no harm among colleagues, but may even have been part of her appeal . Thatcher's advance may have helped her appeal among colleagues but may not have harmed her .
 A surprisingly broad range of hardbitten statesmen in Europe and the U.S. confessed, albeit off the record, to finding Mrs. Obama .
 She could bully and browbeat with less mercy than any British politician since Churchill . But she also seduced, seduced and seduced . She was the most powerful woman in British politics .
 From 1979 to 1990 Margaret Thatcher bullied, browbeat, browsed, seduced the British electorate into a political revolution . Thatcher was a bully who browsed and browsed the British public into a revolution .
 Some of the economic policies were already circulating in Conservative and Labour circles alike . Some of these are an extension of proposals already circulating .
 They came in the wake of a backlash against the libertarianism of the Sixties and appealed to many of Mrs. Mrs. Smith's children .
 By the end of the Seventies there was much anxious debate about Britain’s purported ‘ungovernability’, the widely-shared perception that the political class had lost control of economic policy and workplace .
 The Tories made great play not just with the need for economic rigour and proper money management, but with the nation’s ostensible longing for strong, confident rulers .
 Many Labour voters switched to Liberal candidates or else abstaining altogether . It did not so much win elections as watch Labour lose them .
 Margaret Thatcher’s radical agenda and determination to see it through can seem out of all proportion to her national mandate, an unexpected and even risky break with the longstanding British tradition of governing from as close to the political centre .
 Margaret Thatcher’s success in the 1980s was partly down to her lack of political experience . But it seems clear in retrospect that this was just what accounted for her success .
 As every opinion poll suggested, even those who didn't care for Thatcherite policies often conceded a certain admiration for the woman herself .
 Thatcher presided over a remarkable and somewhat disconcerting revival of the British state . Indeed, and for all her talk of the individual and the market, she presided over the revival of Britain's state .
 The direction of educational policy and regional economic planning reverted to central government departments under direct political control . Government ministries themselves found their freedom of maneuver increasingly constrained by the Prime Minister .
 Margaret Thatcher instinctively suspected the latter, like their peers in the educational and judicial establishment, of preferring the old statesubsidized paternalism . Margaret Thatcher feared the latter was preferring to be more paternalistic .
 Margaret Thatcher was a lower-middle class upstart with a soft spot for nouveau riche businessmen . Thatcher was not much liked by the country’s venerable governing £lite .
 Thatcherite revolution strengthened the state, cultivated the market and set about dismantling the bonds that had once bound them together . Thatcherite revolution set about dismantling bonds that once bound the two nations together .
 She destroyed forever the public influence exercised by Britain’s trade unions . She passed laws that limited union leaders’ ability to organize strikes, and then got them enforced in the courts .
 In 1984-85, she crushed a violent and emotional effort by the National Union of Miners to break her government’s policy of closing inefficient mines and ending subsidies to the coal industry . The armed state against a doomed community of industrial .
 The miners were badly led, their cause hopeless, their strike prolonged more from desperation than calculation . The miners' strike was prolonged more than calculation than calculation, the miners' cause was hopeless .
 Margaret Thatcher won a battle that Edward Heath had lost immensely strengthened her hand . The Provisional IRA attempted to assassinate her in the midst of the strike . But the fact that Thatcher won the battle that Heath had won immensely strengthened .
 Thatcher, like all the best revolutionaries, was fortunate in her enemies . Thatcher was lucky in his enemies. Thatcher's enemies were also her enemies.
 They allowed her to claim that she alone spoke for the frustrated, over-regulated, little people . The little people were freed from decades of domination by vested interests and by the . parasitical beneficiaries of taxpayer largesse .
 Britain’s economic performance did improve in the Thatcher years, after an initial decline from 1979-81 .
 Business productivity and profits rose sharply after a shakeout of inefficient firms, increased competition and the muffling of the unions .
 The Treasury was replenished (on a one-time basis) with the proceeds from the sale of nationally-owned assets . The Treasury has been replenished with proceeds from sale of national assets .
 By 1983 the political as well as the financial benefit of liquidating the country’s state-owned or state-run assets led the Prime Minister to inaugurate a decade-long national auction, 'liberating’ producers and consumers alike .
 In the first round were smaller firms and units, mostly in manufacturing, which the state held a partial or controlling interest . The state is bidding to take control of some of the country's largest firms .
 The sale of British Telecom in 1984 was followed by the sale of the telecommunications network, energy utilities, and air transportation .
 Between 1984 and 1991, one-third of all the world’s privatized assets were accounted for by UK sales alone . Between 1984-1991, UK sales accounted for a third of the world's privatization of assets .
 Conservative government had to pay unprecedented sums in unemployment benefit . This was because of the Conservative government paying unprecedented sums of unemployment benefits .
 The ‘scandalously’ high figure of 1.1 million jobless that had so damaged Callaghan’s government in 1977 had reached 3.25 million by 1985 . It remained one of the highest in Europe for the rest of Mrs. Callaghan's government .
 Many of those who lost jobs in inefficient industries like steel, coal-mining, textiles and shipbuilding would never find work again . They would become lifelong dependents of the state in all but name .
 Margaret Thatcher’s governments relieved them of high fixed labour costs, ‘socializing’ the expense of superfluous workers in the form of state-subsidized unemployment . If their former employers went on to become profitable private companies it was less through the miracle of private ownership
 There was something to be said for the privatization of certain public industries and services, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: There's something to say for privatization of some public services .
 For many years vital economic assets had been held in the public sector with little thought given to investment or modernization . The country's economic assets were held in public sector for many years .
 They had been starved of cash, their performance cushioned against pressure from competition and consumer alike . Their managers hamstrung by bureaucratic inertia and political meddling, they were hamstracked by bureaucracy .
 Thatcher there emerged in Britain a much-expanded market for goods, services and, eventually, labour . Thatcher's Thatcher administration was in charge of Britain's economic boom .
 There were more choice and (though this took longer and remained imperfect) more price competition . There was more choice, but it remained imperfect .
 As a society it suffered meltdown, with catastrophic long-term consequences . But as a society as well as society, the government suffered meltdown . It suffered meltdown in the wake of the collapse of the U.S.
 Margaret Thatcher did serious harm to the fabric of British public life . She disdained and dismantled all collectively-held resources, by . insisting upon an individualist ethic that discounted unquantifiable assets .
 Citizens were transmuted into shareholders, or ‘stakeholders’, their relationship to one another and to the collectivity measured in assets and claims rather than in services or obligations . Citizens' relationship to each other was measured in asset and claims, rather than services .
 With everything from bus companies to electric supply in the hands of competing private companies, the public space became a market place . The public space is now a public market place for private companies .
 Thatcher asserted—there is ‘no such thing as Society’, then in due course people must lose respect for socially-defined goods . Thatcher asserted: ‘There is no such thing . There is no 'society’ if there is no society, then people must
 Late-Thatcherite Britain began to take on some of the more unappealing characteristics of the U.S. model .
 In 1996 Britain’s nationalized railway network ‘boasted’ the lowest public subsidy for a railway in Europe in Europe . Services that re4 re4 were re4 services that were nationalized in 1996 .
 Petty crime and delinquency rose in line with the growing share of the population caught in permanent poverty . Petty crime rose along the lines with the rising number of people caught in poverty .
 The typical ‘Thatcherite’ voter is a thirty-something realtor in the eastern suburbs of London, under-educated but well-remunerated and well-paid . The typical Thatcherite voter might have entered the world of Thatcherite individualism, writes Andrew Keen
 Thatcher and her successor John Major so much as hinted that they might begin privatizing the National Health Service or charging fees for state education, public support evaporated . Among those newly-prosperous but highly vulnerable sectors of the population that had been attracted to Thatcherism in the first
 John Major succeeded in pushing through the privatization of the railway services . Thatcher’s departure, John Major did indeed succeed in pushing for the privatization .
 The Conservatives were encouraged by the prospect of further profit from the sale of public assets into private ownership; but their chief motive was Major’s need to be seen to be privatizing something — Mrs. Major .
 The incompetence and malfeasance of the procedure, and the disasters that followed, helped bring about the defeat of the Conservative government two years later . The end of a cycle of privatizations and the retrospective discrediting of Thatcherism itself .
 This seems a harsh judgment to make of a woman who led her party to three electoral victories in succession and governed virtually alone for nearly twelve years . This seems to be a harsh judgement, but it is not the first time I have seen her .
 In the words of Frederick the Great, ‘The people say what they like and then 5. And private poverty, too, too.’ The poverty of private poverty is still a problem in the world today .
 Thatcher broke the link between pensions and wages, sharply reducing retirement income . Thatcher sharply reduced the retirement income of most of her fellow citizens . Thatcher's break-up of the pension and wage link led to a sharp reduction in retirement income for many .
 'Any colleague who differed from her on any significant issue and who was thus not one of us’, was ‘cast into the outer darkness’ ‘,’ she said . Any colleague who disagreed with her on a significant issue was 'cast into outer darkness'
 Most of Mrs Thatcher’s Tory contemporaries were genuine conservatives . They were old enough in many cases to remember the bitter political divisions of the inter-war years .
 Thatcher was bent upon destruction and innovation; she scorned compromise . Thatcher was a radical , bent on destruction, bent upon . destruction, innovation and innovation . She scorned . compromise .
 For her, class warfare, suitably updated, was the very stuff of politics . For herself, she said: 'Class warfare was the most important issue of politics'
 Her policies, often dreamed up at very short notice, were secondary to her goals . These in turn were in large measure a function of her style . Her policies were often a result of a decision-making process .
 Her unfortunate Conservative successors, cast out upon the blasted landscape of post-Thatcherism, had no policies, no goals—and no style . Her unfortunate successors, she said, had . no policies . No style .
 In the short-run, of course, she crushed her Labour opponents . But she could not have wrought the changes she did but for their incompetence . In the long-term, the changes were made for her own good fortune .
 With Thatcher in power, the British Labour movement entered a decade of turmoil . Thatcher was in power at the beginning of the 1980s .
 Britain must choose between a protectionist, collectivist, egalitarian, regulatory state and open markets, untrammeled competition, privatized resources and a minimum of shared goods and services . Britain needs to choose between the protectionist and collectivist .
 Labour’s traditional moderates, like their Conservative counterparts, were in despair . Labour's traditional moderates like their Tory counterparts, are in despair. Labour's former moderates, who are in the middle of the road, are now in despair, say Labour leader David Miliband .
 Labour fought the 1983 general election on a program committed to undoing Thatcherism . The party fought the election on an anachronistic program to undo the compromises of Labour's own past governments .
 The Little Englanders of Britain’s Left would defiantly build, at last, the New Jerusalem so often traduced by their colleagues . Safe behind the protective walls of a closed economy, they would .
 The Falklands War was Mrs. Bush's first victory in the Falklands . She had established a party monopoly upon ‘patriotism’
 The party's share of the vote fell to 27. percent, the party’s worst performance since the First World War . The Labour Party's worst performance in Britain since the Second World War was in 2012 .
 Thatcher was selling remained uncertain . But they decidedly did not want the alternative on offer . Thatcher was sold to the public .
 Sociologically, it needed to come to terms with its failure to keep abreast with the concerns and aspirations of a new middle class . Without their support it could never again be elected to office, and which outnumbered the evaporating core of industrial proletarians and public sector employees on whom
 Labour’s leaders needed to identify a new set of policy objectives . Intellectually, Labour's leaders needed a new language in which to present them . Labour needs to identify new policy objectives and language, Labour leader says .
 The party changed its name to New Labour in 1996, a year after its incoming leader, Tony Blair, persuaded his colleagues finally to abandon Clause IV committing the party to nationalization .
 When Labour at last returned to power in 1997, there was no talk of unraveling the Thatcherite revolution . Labour defeated the exhausted Conservative party, defeating an exhausted Tory party .
 New Labour’s campaign aimed almost exclusively at marginal, ‘soft’ Conservative voters . Instead New Labour inveighed against high taxes, corruption and inefficiency—the very objects of Mrs. Miliband's campaign .
 If Tony Blair and his colleagues drew a discreet veil over the Thatcherite era, this was not by chance . Blair and colleagues drew the veil over Thatcherite period, but it was not a coincidence .
 Blair’s successes rested squarely upon a threefold inheritance from Mrs. Blair, says Mr. Blair . Blair's successes rested on a three-fold inheritance of his success .
 First, she 'normalized' the radical dismantling of the public sector in industry and services and its replacement with the ‘privatized’, entrepreneurial Britain whose praises Blair sang .
 Her asperity and her intolerance of dissent and disagreement had fractured her own party and rendered it unelectable . And third, as we have seen, as well, she had fractured the own party, rendering it unelectedable . Her intolerance and intolerance for dissent and dissent had fractured
 Tony Blair shared many of her prejudices, albeit in a less abrasive key . Riding on Thatcher’s coat-tails, Tony Blair also shared her prejudices . Tony Blair was the prime minister of the late 1980s and early 1990s .
 Blair showed very little tolerance for decentralized decision-making or internal dissent . Thatcher showed no tolerance for internal dissent in the 1980s . Blair showed little tolerance to decentralized decision making or dissent .
 Like her, he preferred to surround himself with private-sector businessmen . President Barack Obama prefers to surround him with business leaders .
 Blairite leadership group was as viscerally suspicious of the state as the most doctrinaire of Thatcherites . New Labour remained vaguely committed to ‘society’ but was as suspicious of ‘the state’ as the Thatcherites.
 'Not only did she destroy the post-war consensus but she forged a new one. Not only did . She destroyed the . post-WWII consensus but also created a new . one of the world's most powerful institutions .
 Before she rose to power the default position in British public policy was that the state is the natural fount of legitimacy and initiative . But before her rise to power she was the state was seen as a natural source of legitimacy . The state is now seen as an important part of British public
 For the first time in two generations the role of the state had been put up for discussion . Fewer and fewer voices were heard in its defense, at least within the political mainstream . The state's role in politics was put under the spotlight in the first two decades .
 Thatcherite revolution wrought havoc, and that a return to direct state management of services was still be desired . To be sure, there were those who continued to believe that Thatcherites wrought havoc on services .
 Thatcher's case was no longer guaranteed a sympathetic hearing in the U.S. It was a case that had to be made, but it was necessary to make it .
 It is the sheer scale of the transformation she wrought, for good and ill, that has to be acknowledged . It is not only the scale of her transformation that has been acknowledged, but it is also the scale .
 France, too, changed dramatically in the course of these years, and with some of the same consequences . France has changed dramatically since the beginning of this century .
 Communists and Gaullists faithfully incarnated and extended a peculiarly French tradition of political allegiance determined by region, occupation and religion . Together with their junior partners on Left and Right alike, they were joined by Gaullist and Communists .
 The rigidities of French political sociology, unbroken since the mid-nineteenth century, were already under siege, as we have seen, from the social and cultural shifts of the Sixties . These rigidities were unbroken by French political sociological rigidities .
 The Right was no longer bound together by the person and aura of De Gaulle, who had died in 1970 . The fundamental measure of political conservatism in France was being undermined by the decline in public religious observance . The churches of village and small-town France lost their parishioners
 In the 1970s and early 1980s, traditional French society and an older way of life seemed to be disappearing before their eyes . Traditional French society was called la France profonde, la douce France and la bonne vieille France .
 The migration of the sons and daughters of peasants to the cities, had been steadily depleting and depopulating the French countryside . The agricultural modernization of the 1950s and 1960s had been depleting the countryside .
 The revitalized national economy was effecting a transformation in the jobs, travel patterns, and leisure time of a new class of city-dwellers . The revitalization of the national economy is effecting an economic transformation .
 Roads and railways that had gathered weeds and grime for decades were rebuilt, re-landscaped, or replaced by a virtually new network of national communications . Roads and rail networks were rebuilt and re-laided in the 1990s .
 Towns and cities themselves, long preserved in the dowdy urban aspic of decay and underinvestment, are becoming crowded and energetic . Towns, cities, once preserved in an aspic, are now becoming crowded, energetic .
 Political movements emerged to protest at the acceleration and urbanization of social life, the growth of cities and depopulation of the countryside . Political movements were formed to protest against the acceleration of social and urban life .
 The renewed interest in local and regional languages and culture in France seemed to threaten the very territorial integrity and unity of France itself . One legacy of the Sixties was the renewed interest of local and . regional languages .
 To fearful contemporaries their country appeared to be modernizing and splitting apart all at once . To fearful . contemporaries their . country appeared . to be . modernizing . to fearful contemporaries .
 In Britain the relationship between an all-embracing state and an inefficient economy appeared self-evident to many . Margaret Thatcher placed such pejorative emphasis on the state's inefficient economy . The relationship between state and inefficient economy was evident to many in Britain .
 French state is key to the country's economic resurgence . But in France it was the state itself that seemed to hold the key to its success .
 Its managers were the country’s intellectual elite . Its planners saw themselves as a class of disinterested civil servants unaffected by the nation's ideological passions and social eruptions .
 Politics in France divided the nation bitterly over the question of who would gain power and to what social ends . But there was a remarkable practical consensus. cerning the question was how they would wield that power .
 From 1958 to 1969 the French state had been ruled by Charles De Gaulle . The French state was ruled by de Gaulle from 1958 until 1969 .
 The Presidents self-consciously traditional style, and his avowed unconcern for the minutiae of economic planning, had proved no impediment to change .
 De Gaulle’s opponents and critics made much play with the ‘undemocratic’ way in which the General had seized and exercised power . But the resources and trappings of virtually unrestricted presidential power proved no less appealing to his successors of all political stripes .
 The distinctive system of direct presidential election cast a shadow across the country’s quinquennial parliamentary elections, placing a premium upon the political skills and personality of individual candidates . Political parties had perforce to regroup.
 Mitterrand was himself to excel in this setting . It was in a setting that the redoubtable French politician excelled . The former French president was a natural natural talent .
 Francois Mitterrand, like Margaret Thatcher, was an implausible candidate for the role he was to play in his country’s affairs, writes Simon Tisdall .
 Born to a practicing Catholic family in conservative south-western France, he was a right-wing law student in the 1930s . He was an activist in some of the most extreme anti-democratic movements of the age .
 He spent most of World War Two as a junior servant of the collaborationist government in Vichy . He switched allegiance just in time to be able to claim postwar credentials as a resister .
 His parliamentary and ministerial career in the Fourth Republic was pursued in various minor parties of the center-Left, none of them bearing any allegiance to the Marxist mainstream . He was pursued by various parties, including those of the left .
 Mitterrand was in no sense their candidate and took care to keep his distance from them . He ran unsuccessfully for president in 1965 with the support of the parties of the official Left . Even when he ran unsuccessfully in 1965, he was not their candidate .
 The relationship binding Mitterrand and the remnants of French Socialism’s proud heritage was mutually instrumentalist . The relationship between the French Socialist Party and the French Communist Party was mutual instrumentalist.
 In much the same cynical vein he might have added that he was born a conservative and would die one, but managed to become a Socialist in the meantime .
 This marriage of convenience worked better than either party could have imagined, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The twin impediments to the re-emergence of a left majority in France had been De Gaulle’s personal appeal, and the fear of many voters that a government of the Left would be dominated by the Communists .
 By 1970, De Gaulle was dead; within ten years, so were the prospects of the Communists . Within 10 years, the prospect of the Communist Party was fading in France . In 1970, the prospects were fading, but within 10 years of that, they were fading .
 Mitterrand could take no direct credit, but the latter was unquestionably his achievement . For the former French president, the success of the French presidency was unquestionable .
 By the elections of 1977 the Communists were ten percentage points behind Mitterrand’s Socialists . The Communists, the dominant party of the Left since 1945, were ten per cent behind the Socialists.
 The Communists, meanwhile, were weak . The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 was an acute embarrassment, as were their own declining polls . The Communists were weak; the Soviet invasion was an embarrassment .
 Mitterrand secured the backing of Socialists, Communists, environmentalists and even the normally uncooperative Trotskyists . In the run-off he more than doubled his first-round share and defeated Giscard to become the first directly-elected Socialist head of state .
 He promptly dissolved parliament and called legislative elections at which his own party trounced Communists and Right alike . His party won for itself an absolute majority in the Assemble Nationale .
 The spontaneous celebrations that greeted the Socialists’ victories were unprecedented . The spontaneous celebration was unprecedented, and the spontaneous celebrations were unprecedented.
 For the tens of thousands of Mitterrand supporters who danced in the streets this was the ‘grand soir\ the revolutionary eve’ The threshold of a radical break with the past was the threshold of the past . For the thousands of supporters, the event was the 'grand
 On the basis of electoral data alone that would have been a curious claim, it was not a surprise .
 The French vote in 1981 was not radically re-distributed . As in past electoral upheavals, Mitterrand’s achievement was not immediately compared to that of 1936 .
 Mitterrand actually fared worse, in the initial voting, than in his earlier bids for the presidency in 1965 and 1974 . Indeed, he fared worse in his first bid for president than in previous attempts .
 Left voters coalesced behind Mitterrand at the second round rather than abstaining in sectarian obstinacy . What made the difference was the discipline showed by Left voters this time around .
 Had the Right not divided thus there would have been no President Mitterrand, no Socialist sweep in the ensuing legislative elections—and no grand soir of radical expectations . Had the right not divided, there would be no President .
 Much seemed to hang on the outcome of the 1981 election . It is worth emphasizing this because so much seemed to have been hung on .
 Mitterrand’s supporters in 1981 the picture looked very different . But to them in 1981, the picture was very different. But to Mitterrrand's supporters, it was a victory .
 Their goal was not to normalize the alternation of power in the future but to seize it and use it, here and now . Their goal is to seize the power, not normalize it, but seize it, to use it for the future, in the now .
 The French took for good coin their leader’s promises of radical transformation, his undertaking to sweep away not just the corruption and ennui of the Giscard years but also the very capitalist system itself .
 France's Socialist militants had remained free to dream a dream of revolution . Excluded from office for so long, France’s Socialist militants have remained free from office .
 Left had not exercised power in France for many decades . Left had never exercised power untrammeled by coalition partners, uncooperative bankers, foreign exchange crises, international emergencies and a litany of other excuses .
 In 1981, as it seemed, none of these applied and there would be no excuse for backsliding . But in 1981, it seemed that none of the rules would apply and there were no excuses .
 The association of control of the state with implementation of revolutionary change was so deeply embedded in radical political culture in France that the mere fact of winning the election was itself taken as signifying a coming social confrontation .
 The French Left identified all real change with political revolution in general and the great French Revolution in particular . Like Marx himself, the French Left has identified real change as political revolution . The revolution was the birth of the French Revolution .
 Nothing Mitterrand had said in the campaign had led the more committed of his followers to think otherwise . Nothing had led to the more dedicated of his supporters thinking otherwise .
 In order to ‘dish’ the Communists and the left wing of his own party, Mitterrand had stolen their revolutionary clothes, he had stolen them from the left .
 His election campaign aroused expectations that he now expected to fulfill . President Obama is expected to be expected to live up to expectations .
 The core element of the programme was an unprecedented schedule of nationalizations . But the core element was the fact that nationalizations were nationalised .
 Prime Minister Chirac, back in the mid-Seventies, had briefly entertained similarly demand-led projects for growth . The French Prime Minister's office in Paris has been in the spotlight for decades .
 The prime function of the nationalizations of 1981-82, like the exchange controls, was to symbolize the anti-capitalist intent of the new regime . The elections of 1981 had really changed something more than just the personnel of government, says the author .
 This pragmatic concession illustrates the broader impediment facing the Mitterrand ‘revolution’ The French president's 'revolution' is not going to be overthrown, it says .
 For a year, the new regime strove boldly to present a radical face to France and the world . For one year, French President Nicolas Sarkozy's government has been in power for a year .
 Mitterrand’s close adviser, Jacques Attali, recorded that U.S. officials claimed to see little difference between French economic policy and that of the Soviet Union .
 France to take a 'Socialist' path in 1982 would have meant imposing a whole gamut of regulations cutting the country off from its commercial partners and putting the economy on a virtually autarkic footing . France would have had to impose not just exchange controls but a wide range of regulations
 Such a move would have triggered France’s separation and perhaps even departure from the European Community . The agreements on tariffs, markets and currency alignments already severely restricted the options open to member states .
 Mitterrand's thinking was aided by mounting panic in business circles and signs that currency, valuables and people were moving abroad with increasing urgency, precipitating an economic crisis .
 The President’s Communist allies and some of his Socialist colleagues were deeply shocked . The President's Communist allies are deeply shocked by the decision .
 Mitterrand grasped readily enough that it was unthinkable for France even to contemplate choosing between remaining in the Western economic orbit and casting itself out into a doubtfully sustainable middle route between capitalism and Communism .
 France would build a better society through European unification rather than against it, says President Nicolas Sarkozy . France would not be against unification, he says, but would be against it . Sarkozy: Unification would be good for France, not against it.
 Rather than struggle against capitalism France would invent a superior version of it . France should invent a better version of capitalism, it would be a better idea .
 Whether they wanted him to ‘modernize’ with quite so much enthusiasm is less certain, but he did . Whether they want him to 'modernize' with more enthusiasm is not certain .
 The initial drive to privatize France’s huge public sector was undertaken by the conservative parliamentary majority that emerged victorious from the 1986 elections .
 Socialist governments of Mitterrand’s final years were by far the most energetic privatizes of all . But successive governments of all stripes pursued the same goal .
 The first assets to be sold into private hands, following the British model of public offerings, were the major banks and TFi .
 There followed public holding companies, insurance concerns, chemical and pharmaceutical corporations and the giant oil conglomerates Total and Elf .
 French were suspicious of unplanned growth. In markets as in gardens, they were suspicious . In France as in Britain, the French are suspicious of growth .
 They preferred to retain a certain capacity to intervene, typically by keeping a portion of even privatized firms in state hands . They prefer to retain the ability to intervene .
 Privatization itself, in France, was a distinctly regulated affair . Controlling shares were carefully directed towards enterprises and businesses on whom the state could rely . International investors remained for many years understandably suspicious .
 By French standards, the changes were momentous, bringing the country sharply back into line with European and international developments . Nevertheless, by French standards the changes are momentous .
 Former banker and one-time adviser to Gaullist Prime Minister Jacques Chaban-Delmas, Delors would go on to preside over the European Commission from 1985-1995 .
 British Petroleum had been progressively sold off, beginning in 1977 . West German government had dispensed with chemical combine Preussag by a public share issue as early as 1959 . Austrian state had sold 40 percent of its shares in two nationalized banks in the course of the 1950s .
 Governments pressed upon governments from two quite distinct directions . What happened in the nineteen-eighties was something quite different, says historian .
 In the first place, accelerating developments in technology—notably in telecommunications and the financial markets—were undermining the old natural’ monopolies . The new president of the United States has been elected to the White House .
 Governments could no longer harness the airwaves, or the movement of money, for their own exclusive use, it made little sense for them to own’ them .
 There remained a powerful political or social case for the state retaining part of a given sector, say, or the post office . But competition was now unavoidable .
 Governments are being driven to sell public assets out of short-term economic necessity . In the second place, governments are being forced to sell assets to save money . Governments were being driven by economic necessity, the government says .
 Finance ministers looked upon the sale of publicly-owned assets as doubly beneficial . Pressed by inflation, the oil crisis of 1979-80, large annual deficits and growing government indebtedness .
 The state would offload loss-making industries or services; and the monies thus raised would help balance the budget, albeit on a one-time basis . The state's budget would be reduced to $1.5 billion .
 The injection of cash from share sales could be applied to future investment . Even if an industry or service remained in partial public-ownership, the state typically kept unprofitable parts that private buyers didn't want .
 Public sector managers have long resented the diversion of their profits to help make good national budgetary shortfalls . For this reason even many public sector managers were enthusiastic partisans of such partial sales, having resented .
 There was considerable variation in the form and extent of European public ownership and control of the European continent .
 The public industrial sector was smallest in Holland, Denmark and Sweden . Most extensive in Italy, France, Spain and Austria, most extensive in France and Spain .
 Excluding health and social services, the share of the workforce in the early eighties directly employed by the state varied from 15 percent in West Germany to 28 percent in Italy and nearly one in three in Austria . In West Germany, 15 percent was 15 percent; in Italy, 28 percent
 In some countries, the public sector was organized into huge industrial holding companies, of which Italy’s IRI was the largest . In other countries, Austria, Spain and Italy, public sector is organized into large industrial companies .
 In 1982 IRI controlled, among much else, all of Italy’s castiron manufacturing, two-thirds of its special steel output, one quarter of its ice-cream production and 18 percent of its peeled tomatoes . Elsewhere the state's interest was filtered through a National Investment
 Given such national disparities, the forms of privatization in Europe naturally diverged significantly . The forms of privatisation in Europe have been diverging significantly .
 In every case, however, the liberalization of markets involved some element of deregulation . New financial instruments were introduced to facilitate the introduction of new financial instruments .
 In West Germany, the main export sectors (cars, mechanical engineering, chemical and electronics companies) were already in private hands . The impediment to efficiency and competition came not from state control but from high fixed costs and labour-market regulations .
 Privatization in Germany, when it came, was primarily the responsibility of the Treuhandgesellschaft . The public corporation was established in 1990 to dispose of former East German stateowned enterprises .
 In Italy, the chief stumbling block on the road to privatization was the vested interest not of the state but of political parties . Political parties in Italy have a vested interest in privatizing the country's largest transport system . The Italian government is seeking to privatize the state's biggest transport system
 The Christian Democrats and Socialists used the state sector and public holding companies to reward colleagues and bribe supporters, often favoring them with public contracts . The Christian Democrat and Socialist Party used the public sector to reward their supporters with state contracts .
 Italian private sector grew steadily in this period, especially among manufacturing firms employing fewer than one hundred persons . Manufacturing firms employ fewer than 100 persons in Italy than in Britain, France or Germany .
 In 1976 the Constitutional Court had ended the monopoly of RAI, the state-run radio and television networks . Already in 1976, the court had ended RAI's monopoly of state TV and radio .
 IRI, INA, ENI, ENi, and ENEL 14 converted to public joint-stock companies . Within six years the major holding companies had all been converted to joint joint-stocks companies .
 They were able to issue bonds that were convertible to shares in the companies under their control now scheduled for privatization . The bonds are convertible to share shares in companies under control now under privatization now .
 The situation in countries newly-emerged from authoritarian rule was rather different . The situation is similar to that in authoritarian countries such as China .
 The public sector in post-Franco Spain, for example, actually expanded . Public sector in Spain has actually expanded since the end of the war .
 Under political pressure it preferred to rehabilitate or consolidate many of the unprofitable concerns . Ironically, ironically thereby creating a new, semi-public sector subsidized from public funds .
 Nationalization was the preference of workers, owners, politicians and regional authorities alike . They could hardly do otherwise—for varying reasons, nationalization was preferred by many .
 One of the chief general arguments for cutting the public sector did not apply in Spain, Portugal or Greece . The welfare state it incarnated was too costly to maintain, the welfare state did not exist in those countries .
 Spain's public sector is overburdled with the abandoned and unprofitable refuse from capitalism’s accelerated and cosseted adolescence . Nevertheless, even in the absence of European-level social services and protections, the public sector was hopelessly overburden .
 Some measure of privatization and de-regulation was inevitable if Spain were ever to be solvent . Spain's financial crisis forced to be forced to rely heavily on the government .
 As in France, it was the Socialist government that initiated this process . Private pension funds were introduced in 1987 and the state television monopoly was abolished .
 In post-revolutionary Portugal, Article 85 of the Constitution forbade private enterprise in banking, insurance, transport, telecommunications, electricity production and distribution, petroleum refining and the arms industry . Article 85 and subsequent 1977 law explicitly banned private enterprise .
 The Socialist administration of Mario Soares sought in 1983 to introduce some flexibility by allowing the private sector to compete with the state in banking and insurance . Joint-stock companies to form in the steel, petroleum, chemical and arms industries .
 But it would be some time before the remaining protected sectors were opened even to limited competition .
 Mediterranean Europe would probably have been even slower to relinquish state controls but for the impact of the European Community/Union . Mediterranean Europe's post-Communist Central Europe would have been more cautious about relinquishing state controls .
 Brussels' chief means of leverage were the rules being drawn up for the operation of a single European market . Brussels’ chief leverage was to draw up the rules for a single EU market .
 The latter obliged all businesses, public and private alike, to conform to norms of open competition within and eventually between countries .
 There was to be no favoring of national ‘champions’, or hidden subsidies or other advantage for publicly-owned or controlled enterprises competing for contracts or custom . The rules were to be applied only to national champions .
 However much these regulations were circumvented in practice, their mere existence obliged state-owned firms to comport themselves in the marketplace no differently from private ones . At the point there was little reason to maintain the state’s involvement in their affairs .
 Despite the excited talk in Brussels of increased openness and ‘competitiveness’ the European privatization fever of these years probably wrought less change than its supporters promised or expected .
 Critics had warned that the result would not be more competition but simply a transfer of concentrated economic power from the public to the private sphere . This is what happened .
 Many large private firms in France, for example, mimicked the behaviour of the old public companies . Thanks to complicated cross-shareholding arrangements, many large private companies in France mimicked behaviour of old public firms .
 They monopolized whole sectors and were no more responsive to their small ‘stakeholders’ than they had been to taxpayers or consumers when administered under public management . They were not more responsive than they were to taxpayers, consumers, they said . They said .
 privatization and increased competition also had little immediate impact upon the size of the state sector itself . Ironically, privatization and competition also did not have any impact on state sector size .
 We have already seen that in Thatcher’s Britain the scope of the state actually expanded, says Simon Tisdall . ‘We have already . already seen this in Thatcher's Britain,’ he says .
 Economic liberalization did not signal the fall of the welfare state, nor even its terminal decline, notwithstanding the hopes of its theorists . The welfare state is not the end of its long-term decline, despite its hopes of it .
 It did, though, illustrate a seismic shift in the allocation of resources and initiative from the public to private sectors .
 This change went far beyond the technical question of who owned which factories, or how much regulation there was to be in any given industry . It's not just a matter of who owns what factories, but it's a big deal for the U.S. government .
 For nearly half a century Europeans had watched the state, and public authorities, play a steadily more prominent part in their affairs . For nearly 50 years, Europeans had seen the state of Europe play a larger role in its affairs .
 This process had become so commonplace that the premise behind it was largely taken for granted . The activist state was a necessary condition of economic growth and social amelioration, the author says .
 Thatcherism and the Mitterrand volte-face would have been possible without the unraveling of this assumption . Without the cumulative unraveling in the course of the waning decades of the century, neither Thatcherism nor Mitterand would have had been possible .
 Behind the long 'Social-Democratic moment' in Western Europe there had lain not just pragmatic faith in the public sector, or allegiance to Keynesian economic principles, but a sense of the shape of the age that influenced and for many decades stifled even its would-be critics .
 This widely-shared understanding of Europe’s recent past blended the memory of Depression, the struggle between Democracy and Fascism, and the moral legitimacy of the welfare state . For many on both sides of the Iron Curtain, the expectation of social progress was social progress . This widely
 It was the Master Narrative of the twentieth century; and when its core assumptions began to erode and crumble, they took with them not just a handful of public-sector companies but a whole political culture and much else besides .
 Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn’s The Gulag Archipelago was published in Paris on December 28th 1973 . It was the first Western publication of the book, published in 1973, and was a key moment for Europe's self-understanding .
 The Gulag Archipelago added hundreds of pages of detail and data to earlier testimonies . In its moral fervor and emotional impact it was not obviously a greater work of witness than Evgenia Ginzburg’s Journey into the Whirlwind, published in 1967 .
 Intellectual critics of Communism had never been lacking . However their impact had for many decades been blunted by a desire in Western Europe to find some silver lining, however dim, in the storm cloud of state socialism .
 Hayek and others had argued that market-restraining plans for the common good were not just economically inefficient but also and above all the first step on the road to serfdom, was to tear up the road map .
 Even opponents of Communist dictatorship like Arthur Koestler, Raymond Aron, Albert Camus or Isaiah Berlin, who tried to insist upon the distinction between social-democratic reforms for the common benefit and party dictatorships established in the name of a collectivist myth .
 Sixties generation fell foul of reluctance to abandon radical catechism, especially in the Sixties .
 It was one thing to sneer knowingly at Stalin, now long dead and anyway condemned by his own heirs . It's one thing that sneers knowingly at the dictator, but it's not one thing he did it .
 It was quite another to acknowledge that the fault lay not in the man but the system . It was also another to admit that the system was broken .
 To impute responsibility for the crimes and misdemeanors of Leninism to the project of radical utopianism itself was to mine the very buttresses of modern politics. And to go further, to impute . responsibility for . the crimes or misdemeanours of . Leninism was to
 Wolfgang Leonhard, Child of the Revolution, first published in Cologne in 1955 as Die Revolution entlasst ihre Kinder, Victor Serge, Boris Souvarine, Stalin . Victor Serge wrote a book about the Russian Revolution .
 By 1973, that faith was under serious assault not just from critics but from events themselves . In 1973, President Richard Nixon's administration was in full control of the country .
 Solzhenitsyn’s root and branch condemnation of the whole Communist project rang true—even and perhaps especially to erstwhile sympathizers . In the wake of the Soviet invasion of Prague and its repressive aftermath, reports filtering out of China about the Cultural Revolution rang true .
 Communism, it was becoming clear, had defiled and despoiled its radical heritage . Communism, the country's radical heritage, had been defiled . Communism was defiled, despoised, by the end of the Cold War .
 The genocide in Cambodia and the widelypublicized trauma of the Vietnamese ‘boat people’ would soon reveal . And it was continuing to do so, as the genocide in . Cambodia and . the . Vietnam 'boat people' would soon . reveal .
 Anti-Americanism was fuelled by the killing of Chile’s Salvador Allende just three months before the publication of The Gulag Archipelago . Western Europe was increasingly reluctant to conclude as they had once done that the Socialist camp had the moral upper hand .
 American imperialism was indeed bad—but the other side was worse, perhaps far worse . American imperialism is indeed bad, but it's not the only side of the story here .
 At this point the traditional ‘progressive’ insistence on treating attacks on Communism as implicit threats to all socially-ameliorative goals began to work against itself . The claim that Communism, Socialism, Social Democracy, nationalization, central planning and progressive social engineering were part of a
 If Lenin and his heirs poisoned the well of social justice, the argument ran, we were all damaged . Lenin and the heirs had poisoned the social justice well, we are all damaged, it was argued . Lenin's heirs said .
 In the light of twentieth-century history the state was beginning to look less like the solution than the problem . The state was looking less like a solution than a problem, and not only or even primarily for economic reasons, it was starting to look more like an economic solution .
 The impact of the retreat from the state was felt most immediately by intellectuals— appropriately enough, since intellectuals had been most zealous in promoting social improvement from above in the first place .
 Modern tyranny—as Ignazio Silone noted, requires the collaboration of intellectuals . By it very nature, modern tyranny requires intellectuals, Silone said .
 France in the Seventies and Eighties was no longer Arthur Koestler’s ‘burning lens of Western Civilization’ But French thinkers were still unusually predisposed to engage universal questions .
 Writers and commentators in Spain or West Germany or Italy in these years were much taken up with local challenges . The terrorist threat that preoccupied them carried implications of its own for the discrediting of radical utopianism .
 Intellectuals in the UK, never deeply touched by the appeal of Communism, were largely indifferent to its decline and thus kept their distance from the new Continental mood .
 In France, by contrast, there had been widespread and longstanding local sympathy for the Communist project . In Britain, the Communist Party was banned from entering the country .
 A new generation of French intellectuals transited with striking alacrity out of Marxism . They were driven by a sometimes unseemly haste to abjure their own previous engagement .
 In condemning the distortions of radical utopianism, the young Parisian ‘new philosophers’ of the mid-Seventies like Andre Glucksmann or Bernard-Henri Levy were in most respects unoriginal . In condemning Parisian 'new philosophers' of the . mid-
 Raymond Aron had not said better in his Opium des Intellectuels twenty two years earlier . Glucksmann’s Les Maitres Penseurs was published in March 1977 .
 There was nothing in Levy’s Barbarie a Visage Humain, which appeared two months after Glucksmann . Nothing was found in Albert Camus's VHomme revolte, which was published two months later .
 Levy and Glucksmann were influential bestsellers . Camus’s essay was cuttingly dismissed by Jean-Paul Sartre when it came out in 1951 . But whereas Camus's essay was cutly dismissed, Levy's was influential bestseller .
 The parricidal quality of this local intellectual earthquake is obvious, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Much of the fire was directed above all at those dominant figures of post-war intellectual life, in France and elsewhere, who had peered across the touchlines of History, cheering on the winners and politely averting their eyes .
 Sartre, by far the best known of these fellow-travelers, fell from favour in these years, even before his death in 1980 . His creative legacy sullied by his apologetics for Soviet Communism, later for Maoism .
 In 1963, long after he had lost interest in his own Communists, he could still be heard in Prague enthusing about Socialist Realism to a bemused audience of Czech writers and intellectuals .
 Historian Francois Furet systematically dismantled the ‘revolutionary catechism’ through which the French had for many decades been taught to understand their country and its past . In the same year the historian published his path-breaking Penser la Revolution Fran$aise .
 Furet: The story rested upon the twin pillars of earlynineteenth century liberal optimism and a Marxist vision of radical social transformation . The Soviet Communism, the revolutionary heir-presumptive in this morality tale, had retroactively polluted the whole inheritance, he says .
 The political implications of Furet’s thesis were momentous, as its author well understood, as well as his author . The political implication of Furedt‘s thesis was momentous .
 The failings of Marxism as a politics were one thing, which could always be excused under the category of misfortune or circumstance . But the failings of Marxist politics were not always the same thing, they were always the case of misfortune .
 If Marxism were discredited as a Grand Narrative, all the mistakes and failures of the twentieth century’s radical experiments in introducing Utopia by diktat ceased to be ‘dialectically’ explicable as false moves along a true path . But if Marxism were
 Furet and his younger contemporaries rejected the resort to History that had so coloured intellectual engagement in Europe since the beginning of the 1930s . The French Revolution was a major event in France in the 1920s and 1930s.
 There is, they insisted, no ‘Master Narrative’ governing the course of human actions . There is no way to justify public policies or actions that cause real suffering today in the name of speculative benefits tomorrow, they said .
 In retrospect this may appear a rather lame conclusion to decades of intense theoretical and political debate; but for just that reason it illustrates rather well the extent of the change . In retrospect, this may . appear rather well to . illustrate rather well that reason .
 In Ma Nuit Chez Maud, a Communist philosopher and his Catholic colleague argue at considerable length over the competing claims of Pascal’s wager on God and the Marxist bet on History . Eric Rohmer's 1969 conte moral .
 The seriousness with which the film was taken with which it was taken not just by the on-screen protagonists but by millions of viewers . What is striking in retrospect is not the conversation itself, but the seriousness of the film itself .
 The resort to History in defense of unpalatable political choices had begun to seem morally naive and even callous . It was beginning to seem moral and callous to resort to history to defend unpopular political choices .
 This is a little hard on Germans, who were hardly the only Europeans to abase themselves on the altar of historical necessity, though it is true that the idea had its roots in German romantic philosophy . This is true .
 Thatcherite radicals treated public policy as an extension of private interests . Thatcherites treated the marketplace as a necessary and sufficient adjudicator of values and outcomes .
 Europe’s traditional conservatives remained anchored in religious norms and social conventions, bruised but not yet altogether displaced by the cultural tsunami of the Sixties . Nor were the times unusually troubling for Europe .
 It was the progressive Left, still the dominant presence in European political and cultural exchanges, which was urgently in need of a different script . The progressive Left needs a new script, says David Cameron .
 A new political vernacular has been rediscovered in the U.S. in recent years . It's a very old, very old one, freshly rediscovered .
 The language of rights, or liberties, was firmly inscribed in every European constitution, not least those of the Peoples’ Democracies . The language was firmly established in Europe's constitution, the European Union .
 ‘rights talk’ had been altogether unfashionable in Europe for many years . But as a way of thinking about politics, 'rights talk' had been entirely unashionable . ‘ Rights talk” had been very unpopular in Europe, but now it has become fashionable
 These were collective rights -- the rights of nations, peoples, minorities, minorities . But these are collective rights, they were not only human rights, but collective rights .
 The record of collectively-asserted rights was an unhappy one. Moreover, the record of collective-asserting rights was also unhappy one, he says .
 Where rights of more than one ethnic or religious community had clashed, usually over a conflicting territorial claim, it had been depressingly obvious that force, not law, was the only effective way to establish precedence .
 Minority rights could not be protected within states, nor the rights of weak states secured against the claims of their more powerful neighbors . Minority rights were not protected in states, but in weak states, they could be secured against claims of powerful neighbors.
 Stateless persons would no longer be treated as a judicial anomaly in a world of states and nations, but as individual victims of persecution or injustice . As for stateless persons, they would not be seen as an anomaly in the world, but instead as victims of injustice or persecution .
 Even though men and women were persecuted in the name of their common identity they suffered as individuals . The new United Nations sought to protect them, the new UN sought to .
 The Gulag Archipelago was published in Paris the same year that it was published . What propelled this legal rhetoric of individual rights into the realm of real politics was the coincidence of the retreat of Marxism with the international Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe .
 As one Italian observer remarked in 1977, the idea and ideal of undivided’ freedom was being openly discussed on the Left without mystification or demagogy’ for the first time since the war . As one observer remarked, one . observer in . 1977, one Italian
 For much of the Eighties West European Labour and Socialist parties floundered quite helplessly, resorting in many cases to the illicit appropriation of their opponents’ programmes . This did not necessarily translate immediately into politics .
 Western European scholars and intellectuals had access to the changing language of political opposition in Eastern Europe . But their openness to the vocabulary of rights and liberties did give Western Europeans access to Eastern Europe's changing language .
 Czech reform communist Zdenek Mlynar wrote an ‘Open Letter to the Communists and Socialists of Europe’ in 1975 . The letter addressed above all to Eurocommunists and appealed for support against the repression of dissent in Czechoslovakia .
 Mlynar was already in a minority, his faith in both Socialism and its Western sympathizers was already regarded with bemusement by most of Communism’s domestic critics in the Soviet bloc .
 Critics had for the most part turned away from the ‘Socialist’ language it espoused . These critics were not yet called ‘dissidents’ (a term generally disfavoured by those it described)
 In the aftermath of 1968 that language, with its wooden embrace of ‘peace’ and ‘equality’ rang peculiarly false, especially to the Sixties activists who had taken it seriously . The language of 'peace' and 'fraternal goodwill' rang strange to the
 The Czech regime's opponents could hardly engage in a political debate with their oppressors . Many unemployed professors and writers found work as stokers and boilermen in the Czech Republic .
 Of these, thanks to the Helsinki Accords, ‘rights’ were by far the most accessible to the public . The 'rights' in the United States are by far more accessible than in other countries .
 All Soviet bloc constitutions paid formal attention to the rights and duties of the citizen . The package of additional and quite specific rights agreed to at Helsinki provided Communism’s domestic critics with a strategic opening .
 Taking seriously the letter of ‘Socialist’ law was more than just a tactic, a device for embarrassing Communism’s rulers . The letter of the law was taken seriously, and it was used to embarrass the Communist Party .
 In closed societies where everything was political, ‘rights’ offered a way forward, a first breach in the curtain of pessimism shrouding Eastern Europe in the ‘silent Seventies’, an end to the regime’s monopoly on language-as-power
 The constitutional rights of persons bear formal witness to the existence of persons as such, with claims upon one another and upon the community . The constitutional right of persons, by their very nature, bear witness to their existence .
 They describe a space between helpless individuals and the allpowerful state . They describe the space in which helpless individuals are helpless .
 The movement for rights was an acknowledgement that the necessary corrective to Communism’s defects was not a better Communism but the constitution—or reconstitution—of civil society . Miklds Haraszti conceded, as the young Hungarian theorist Mikldi conceded .
 The irony of inverting Marxism’s agenda and seeking to replace the Socialist state with bourgeois society was not lost on intellectuals in Prague or Budapest .
 Few seriously expected Husak in Prague, or Honecker in Berlin, to concede the logic of ‘rights-talk’ and take their own constitutions seriously .
 To speak of rights in theory was precisely to illustrate their absence in practice, to remind observers at home and abroad of just how un-ffee these societies actually were . The idea of human rights in practice was to illustrate the absence of them in practice .
 Instead of engaging the Communist authorities, the new opposition was deliberately talking past them . The new opposition has deliberately talked past them, says Mr Liu Chiao-Dao .
 For those who had never been remotely drawn to Marxist debates, like Vaclav Havel, the transition was much easier . For many, it was easier for those who were never drawn to the Marxist debates .
 The son of a wealthy Prague businessman whose family was dispossessed by the Communist government after 1948, Havel evinced none of the youthful revolutionary enthusiasm of his engaged contemporaries .
 Havel’s relationship with the Communist authorities was always antagonistic, thanks to large part to his bourgeois origins, but it had never been political . Havel's relationship with Communists was antagonistic but it was never political .
 In the course of the Seventies and Eighties, as he was harassed, arrested and ultimately imprisoned for his activities, Havel was to become a supremely political figure . In the 1970s and 1980s, he was to be known for his political activities .
 It was not even primarily to tell the truth, though in a regime based on lies this was important . "It was not just telling the truth," it was important to tell truth, but it was crucial to the regime .
 The objective of the opposition in Czechoslovakia should be to act with autonomy, whatever the regime tries to impose on you, Havel wrote . Havel: To live as if one were truly free, to live as as if you were truly freed .
 Ludvfk Vaculik, addressing the Fourth Congress of the Czechoslovak Writers’ Union in June 1967, had recommended a similar ‘as if’ strategy to his colleagues even then . Even then, he had suggested a similar 'as if' strategy .
 Vaculik and others could still hope for some accommodation and adaptation from those in power . But in the more optimistic atmosphere of the Sixties Vaculick and others may still hope to some accommodation .
 By the time Michnik or Havel were espousing similar arguments, circumstances had changed . Michnik and Havel's arguments had changed by the time they were made .
 The point was no longer to advise the government how to govern, but to suggest to the nation—by example—how it might live . The point of the point was to suggest how the nation might live by example .
 The idea that Eastern European intellectuals could ‘suggest to the nation’ how it should comport itself might appear more than a little ambitious . Most intellectuals were in no position to suggest much of anything even to one another, far less to their fellow citizens at large .
 The intelligentsia in Hungary and Poland especially was largely ignorant of conditions and opinion in the industrial centers, and even more cut off from the world of the peasantry . The intellectuals were largely unaware of conditions in industrial centers .
 Communism put ‘intellectuals on the road to class power’ in Communism . The old Central-European distinc568 THE POWER of THE POWER OF THE POWERLESS’ had resurfaced .
 In 1976, following a series of strikes protesting at sharp increases in the price of food, the regime struck back hard, beating and arresting workers in the industrial towns of Ursus and Radom .
 KOR was formed in 1976 in response to a wave of worker and intellectual protests . KOR is an acronym for the Committee for the Defense of Workers . It was founded in 1976 .
 The object of KOR was to publicize the assault on workers’ civil liberties, assist in their legal defense, and form a common front . KOR and a Committee for the Defense of Human and Civil Rights were founded a few months later .
 The creation of an autonomous civil sphere in Poland grew out of a social confrontation . The creation—or rather, rather, the assertion—of an autonomy in Poland thus grew from a social conflict, the author says .
 In Czechoslovakia, it was born of a legal opportunity . Across the border in even less promising political circumstances, the Czech Republic was also born of an opportunity .
 A group of Czechoslovak citizens signed a document criticizing their government for its failure to implement human rights provisions . The document was published as a manifesto in a West German newspaper in January 1977 .
 Charter 77 was not an organization, had no statutes or permanent organs, and ‘does not form the basis for any oppositional political activity,’ a stipulation intended to keep their act within the bounds of Czechoslovak law . Charter 77 did not form an organization or permanent
 Retaliation and intimidation were deployed against the signatories, including dismissal from work, denial of schooling for their children, suspension of drivers’ licenses, forced exile and loss of citizenship, detention, trial and imprisonment .
 Prague regime arrested six of the leading figures in VONS, including Havel, and tried them for subversion the following year . Prague regime tried to arrest Havel and tried him for subverting the next year .
 In October 1979 they were sentenced to prison terms of up to five years . They were sentenced in October 1979 to up to 5 years .
 In the wake of 1968 the Communist regimes had all (with the exception of Ceau^escu’s Romania) adopted in practice the approach of Kdddr's Hungary .
 They no longer even pretended to seek the genuine allegiance of their subjects, asking only that people proffer the outward symbols of public conformity . They asked only that they proffer an outward symbol of conformity .
 One goal of the Charter, like VONS, was to overcome the resulting cynical indifference to public affairs among their fellow citizens . The Charter was designed to overcome cynicism among citizens .
 Havel in particular laid stress on the need to deprive governments of the satisfaction of seeing people heedlessly abase themselves in order to pass unnoticed . Havel: Governments should not be satisfied with seeing people ignore themselves .
 Some of the concerns of the dissenting intelligentsia were better adapted than others to this effort to overcome public apathy and fear . Some of these concerns are better adapted to the efforts to overcome apathy, fear .
 The emerging environmental catastrophe, already mentioned in Chapter 15, was one of the emerging environmental catastrophes .
 45 percent of the 3,500 miles of rivers in Slovakia were ‘dangerously’ polluted in 1982 . In Slovakia, according to the regime’s own figures, 45 per cent of the rivers were 'dangerously' polluted .
 Four-fifths of the well water in the eastern part of the republic was unusable for human consumption . The well water was used to treat water in parts of the country .
 This was largely due to the over-use of fertilizer on the collective farms of the area, leading to soilpoisoning and crop failures like those experienced in the black soil areas .
 By the early Eighties northern Bohemia had the worst air pollution in Europe, thanks to the use of brown coal in industrial and energy production there .
 Of 73. billion kwh of power generated in the region, 64 billion came from plants burning this high-sulphur fuel . Of 73 billion kWh of power . generated in . the region , 64 billion of the power generated came from burning this fuel . of 73 billion
 By 1983 some 35 percent of all Czech forests were dead or dying, and one-third of all . Czech watercourses were too polluted for industrial use .
 In Prague itself the government was forced to set up a special hospital service dealing with the respiratory ailments of children . The government set up the hospital service in Prague itself .
 It was society that suffered, and pollution was thus a subject about which everyone cared . But it was society, and society suffered, as well .
 Only effective and consistently applied official sanctions could have enforced improvements . These would have had to come from the same authority which was encouraging wastage in the first place .
 Any factory or farm manager imprudent enough to risk his ‘quotas’ by applying pollution-control measures would have been in serious trouble .
 The Communist economic system was inherently prejudicial to its environment, as more and more people came to appreciate . The Communist system was born in the Soviet Union, but it is now a model for the future .
 Writers and scholars, reasonably enough, were preoccupied with censorship . The censors were preoccupying censors .
 The impediments to publication, or performance, varied considerably from one Communist country to another, according to the Communist Party .
 In Poland, by contrast, the Catholic Church provided a semi-protected space in which a degree of literary and intellectual freedom could be practiced, albeit cautiously . The Catholic Church and its institutions and newspapers provided a sort of semi-protective space in Poland .
 In order to secure access to an audience, intellectuals, artists or scholars were always tempted to adapt their work, to trim or hedge an argument in anticipation of likely official objections . Writers, artists and scholars were often tempted to trim, hedge or hedge their work to avoid an objection .
 The professional and even material benefits of such adjustment were not to be neglected, in societies where culture and the arts were taken very seriously . But the moral cost in self-respect could be considerable .
 As Heine had written a hundred and fifty years before, in terms many Eastern European intellectuals would immediately have recognized, ‘these executioners of thought make criminals of us.’ Heine wrote .
 Silence, the internal emigration of the ‘Ketman’ in Czeslaw Milosz’s Captive Mind, was another example . Silence was another. Silence was a key element in the novel, and silence was another .
 But those who did speak out against environmentalism had internal dissidents . Environmentalists had their own dissidents .
 Underground writing conferred on it an aura of romance and a sometimes overstated significance . The non-conformist, oppositional and frequently dangerous aspect of underground writing was often dangerous .
 Havel and Michnik are the best but by no means the only instances of this, the Fleurs du Mai of Communism . Original and radical ideas could indeed blossom and thrive in the decaying compost-heap .
 Just because the regime didn't like you doesn’t mean you were talented, he says . He adds: ‘Just because you didn't have a talent doesn‘t mean that you were talent.’
 Even some of the best known opposition intellectuals was to shrivel and shrink when exposed to a free market in ideas . Thus the reputation of even some of them shriveled and shrink .
 Hungary’s George Konrad was one of many who would drop from sight after 1989 .
 Many intellectuals in Communist societies preferred to forego the opportunity of emigration and exile . "Better to be persecuted and significant than to be free but irrelevant," he says .
 Fear of irrelevance lay behind another consideration in these years, the widespread insistence upon the urgency of ‘getting back’ to Europe . The fear of irrelevance lie behind the fear of 'getting back to Europe'
 Like censorship, this was a concern limited to intellectuals from the western provinces of the former Habsburg Empire . The backwardness and under-development imposed by Soviet writ had been especially painful for writers .
 Milan Kundera said the tragedy of Central Europe was its takeover by an alien, Asian dictatorship . The bestknown spokesman for this sentiment was the Czech novelist and screenwriter Milan Kuppa .
 Kundera was not much appreciated in his homeland, where both his exile and success were resented by those of his peers who had chosen to forego both . His exile and his success in his native country was resented .
 For Kundera, he was skeptical of citizens’ initiatives like Charter 77 . He said the Czech condition under Communism was an extension of the older problem of national identity and destiny .
 The point of intellectual opposition there and abroad, he felt, was to bring this concern to international attention, not waste time trying to change Moscow’s ‘Byzantine’ empire, he said .
 West German officials unintentionally foreclosed any chance of internal change, including reform of Eastern Germany’s polluted, antiquated industrial economy . Ostpolitik, as practiced by Brandt and his successors, was that by transferring large sums of hard currency into East Germany and showering the G
 Bonn’s statesmen afforded the leadership of the GDR a false sense of stability and security . By ‘building bridges’, twinning towns, and paying their respects, they distanced themselves from Western criticism of East bloc regimes . Bonn's statesmen gave
 West Germany deprived the East German opposition of some of its best known dissenters . The West Germany 'buied out' political opponents and prisoners .
 No other Communist society had a Western doppelganger, speaking the same language . No other . Communist society has a Western . doppelger, speaking same language, the Communist society did .
 Many 'internal' critics of the East German regime chose to abandon neither their country nor their old ideas . But many ‘internal’ critics chose not to abandon either their country or ideas .
 Its best known dissidents all attacked Communist authority from the Left . Their stance rendered them both inaudible and irrelevant elsewhere in Eastern Europe .
 Wolfgang Harich was a leading figure in GDR philosophy circles and a longtime critic of the regime’s ‘bureaucratic’ deviation . He was equally vociferous in his opposition to the ‘illusions of consumerism’ against which he saw it
 The new language of rights and liberties abutted that of the Christian faith, and was reinforced by association with the only surviving pre-Socialist institution . Here the new language was reinforced with association with a pre-socialist institution, the National Socialist Party .
 The influence of the churches also accounts for the prominence of the ‘peace’ question in East German dissident circles, according to the book .
 Western ‘peaceniks’ and activists for nuclear disarmament were regarded with considerable suspicion . Elsewhere in eastern Europe the Western 'peacenks' and 'peace activists' were seen with suspicion . The West was wary of the activists' right to disarmament .
 They were seen at best as naive innocents, more likely to be the mindless instruments of Soviet manipulation . The Soviets were seen as the mindless tools of Soviet manipulations .
 Peace and disarmament under prevailing conditions would leave western Europe free and independent, while maintaining eastern Europe under Soviet control . Western Europe would be free, while eastern Europe would remain Soviet-controlled .
 It was a mistake to separate the ‘peace’ question from the demand for rights and liberties . It was the 'peace' question that was separate from the 'rights and liberties' question .
 The GDR could with some shard of plausibility describe peace, or at least ‘peaceful coexistence’, as its true raison d’etre . GDR—an accidental state with neither history nor identity -- could describe peace .
 The tension generated by this glaring paradox found its outlet in the opposition movement . The opposition movement derived a large part of its support from its concentration on the issue of peace and disarmament .
 The GDR acknowledged the fact and the legitimacy of conscientious objection . Although membership of the latter could prove a handicap in later life, its mere existence meant the GDR acknowledges the fact .
 The British and West German peace movements of the time were thoroughly penetrated by Soviet and East German intelligence . As we have since learned, the peace movements were deeply penetrated by both sides .
 Lutheran pastors began in 1980 to offer support and protection to the early peace activists . They were able to do so to a considerable extent without incurring state disapproval .
 The nascent peace movement then spread from the churches to the universities, inevitably raising not only calls for disarmament, but also the demand for the right to articulate these calls without hindrance . The movement then raised the demands for a right to express these calls .
 Dissenting East Germans belatedly found a way to communicate (and catch up) with the opposition elsewhere in the bloc . In this indirect way dissenting East Germans found a new way of communicating (and catching up)
 The appearance of Charter 77 prompted a letter of support from the writer Paul Goma and seven other Romanian intellectuals, all of whom were promptly suppressed . The appearance prompted a courageous letter of supporting .
 Romania remained silent as it had been for three decades . But otherwise Romania remained as silent as the country had been .
 Even if a Romanian Charter 77 or a local version of Poland’s Solidarity had arisen, it would have received much Western support . For this the West bore a measure of responsibility .
 No U.S. President ever demanded that the dictator Nicolai Ceau§escu ‘let Romania be Romania.’ No United States President ever . demanded that . the dictator . ‘Let Romania’ be Romania,’ says the Romanian dictator .
 Even the Soviet Union allowed a tightly restricted liberty of action to certain intellectuals, such as prominent scientists, always a privileged category .
 The biologist Zhores Medvedev, whose exposure of Lysenko had long circulated in samizdat, was first harrassed and then deprived of his citizenship . Lysenko's exposure of the scientist's work was published in the 1960s .
 Andrei Sakharov, the country’s best-known nuclear physicist and a longstanding critic of the regime, remained at liberty until his public opposition to the 1979 invasion of Afghanistan rendered his presence intolerable . He was imprisoned in 1979, but his presence was intolerable until his opposition to
 Sakharov was too embarrassing to ignore but too important to send abroad . Sakharova was too embarrassed to ignore and sent abroad . He was too important for Russia to send him abroad, but he is still important to Russia .
 He and his wife Yelena Bonner were forced instead into exile in the closed city of Gorky . The couple were forced to live in exile in Gorky, Russia .
 Sakharov always insisted he was calling the Soviet Union to account for its shortcomings and its persecution of critics . He was somewhere between an older generation of reform Communists and the new Central European dissidents .
 Others, less prominent and avowedly anti-Soviet, were treated much more harshly . Others were treated less harshly. Others were not.
 Vladimir Bukovsky spent twelve years in Soviet prisons, labour camps and psychiatric wards . His exchange for Luis Corvalan, a Chilean Communist, in 1976 led to his release from prison .
 It was not until 1983 that the Soviet Union withdrew from the World Psychiatric Association, when the latter began to criticize its abuses . The Soviet Union pulled out of the association in 1983, when it began criticizing its abuses.
 The overwhelming majority of the Soviet intelligentsia was never going to follow the example being set, however tentatively, elsewhere in Eastern Europe . But with or without external prompting, the majority of Soviet intellectuals never went to follow .
 The fear inspired by Stalin’s repression hung like a pall across the moral landscape three decades after his death . All but the most outspoken and courageous critics took care to stay within the bounds of Soviet themes and language .
 They assumed, reasonably enough, that the Soviet Union was here to stay . They assumed that they would stay, but they didn't think it would stay .
 The Soviet Union by 1983 had been in place for longer than most of its citizens could remember and appeared fundamentally stable . In contrast to the puppet regimes it had installed at its boundaries, the Soviet Union had been stable .
 The intellectual opposition in Central Europe had little immediate impact on Central Europe . The opposition to the idea of an anti-Islamist movement in the region had little impact .
 Most people lived in a sort of moral ‘grey zone’ - a safe if stifling space in which enthusiasm was replaced by acceptance . Most people live in a kind of moral 'grey zone', a safe space in a safe, if stifled space .
 Active, risk-laden resistance to authority was hard to justify because—again, for most ordinary people, it appeared unnecessary . For most, it was difficult to justify for most people to resist authority because it seemed unnecessary .
 Education and privilege had passed efficiently down the generations, especially in Poland and Hungary . They were heirs of the ruling class of the first generation of Socialist power .
 As in the past, when they had spoken for the regimes they now opposed, they were a tiny minority of the population . They represented only themselves, they said .
 George Konrad wrote that ‘no thinking person should want to drive others from positions of political power in order to occupy them for himself’ Konrad acknowledged a simple truth—no ‘thinking person’ was in a position there and then to do any such thing .
 In the East as in the West, the Seventies and Eighties were a time of cynicism . In the 80s and 90s, the East was a time when cynicism was rife .
 The energies of the Sixties had dissipated, their political ideals had lost moral credibility, and engagement in the public interest had given way to calculations of private advantage . The energy of the '60s had been dissipated and political ideals were lost, the author says .
 By forging a conversation about rights, by focusing attention on the rather woolly concept of ‘civil society’, by insistently talking about the silences of Central Europe’s present and its past . Havel and others were building a sort of virtual’ public space
 One thing dissident intellectuals did not talk about very much was economics . "Economy" was the subject of discussion in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Ever since Stalin, economic growth had been both the goal of Socialism and the main measure of its success . Economic growth was the goal for socialism, but it was also a measure of success . The Soviet Union has been obsessed with economic growth since 1945 .
 Critical discussion couched in the form of recommendations for economic reform had been the nearest thing to a licensed opposition in the revisionist decade between 1956 and 1968 . Critical discussion was the closest thing to an opposition in that period .
 By the middle of the 1970s it was hard for any well-informed observer of the Soviet bloc to take seriously the prospect of economic reform from within . The language of Marxist economics had collapsed after decades of unseemly abuse .
 Eastern Europe was falling behind even Western Europe’s reduced growth rates in 1973 . Eastern Europe's economies were falling behind the West's reduced growth rate .
 The rise in energy prices, the inflation of the Seventies and the ‘globalizing’ of trade and services in the Eighties put the economies of the Soviet bloc at an insuperable disadvantage . Except for a brief blip in the finances of the oil-rich Soviet
 In 1963 the international trade of Comecon countries had been 12 percent of the world total . In 1963, Comecon trade of the Comecon nations was 12 percent .
 The countries of the Soviet bloc could not compete on quality with the industrial economies of the West . The USSR itself did not have a sustainable supply of raw materials to sell to the West, so they could not even compete with undeveloped countries .
 During the 1980s Poland and Czechoslovakia both slipped into negative economic growth . The closed Comecon system precluded participation in the new trading networks of Western Europe and GATT, and Com11 .
 The crippling defect of Communist economies by this time was endemic, ideologically-induced inefficiency . Communist economies were endemic, ideological inefficiency, according to the Communist Party .
 The Soviet bloc missed the switch from extensive to intensive, high-value production that transformed Western economies in the course of the Sixties and Seventies .
 Instead of relying on a much earlier model of economic activity, it relied on Detroit or the Ruhr in the 1920s, or late nineteenth-century Manchester .
 Czechoslovakia, a country with very limited resources in iron, was by 1981 the world’s third largest exporter of steel . By 1981 the country was the world's third largest export of steel.
 To the bitter end, the GDR was planning ever-expanded production of obsolete heavy industrial goods . The GDR planned to expand production of old industrial goods in the 1970s .
 In effect, Soviet-style economies were subtracting value from raw materials . The raw materials they imported or dug out of the ground were worth more than the finished goods they transformed .
 Even in areas of comparative advantage the Soviet economy took its toll . The Soviet economy suffered a sharp decline in the Soviet Union .
 GDR in the 1980s was assigned the task of manufacturing computers . The GDR was chosen by Comecon’s chosen manufacturer of trucks and buses, so the GDR had the job .
 East Germany was unable to produce enough machines to make enough of them . The machines were unreliable and outdated, and the centralized system couldn't make enough . East Germany's machines were made in East Germany in the 1950s .
 East Germany was turning out just one-fiftieth the number of computers manufactured in Austria in 1989 . East Germany had a population of 16 million, and Austria was a negligible competitor in the international market .
 Much of the responsibility for all this lay with the inherent defects of centralized planning . Much of this is due to the nature of central planning in the world .
 Gosplan, the Soviet central economic planning agency, had forty departments for different branches of the economy . Gosplan had twenty seven separate economic ministries and forty different departments .
 Administrators at every level were frightened of taking risks and innovating . Administrators feared taking risks would reduce aggregate output in the short term .
 Factory foremen and managers took great pains to hide reserves of material and labour from the authorities . Meanwhile, in order to make sure that they would meet targets set from above, they hid reserves from authorities .
 The predictable effect of such a system was to encourage not just stagnation and inefficiency, but a permanent cycle of corruption . Such a system is to encourage stagnation, inefficiency and corruption, he says .
 It is one of the paradoxes of the Socialist project that the absence of property tends to generate more corruption, not less . It is a paradox of the socialism project that it generates corruption, rather than less .
 Power, position and privilege cannot be directly bought, but depend instead upon mutually-reinforcing relationships of patronage and clientelism . Power is not directly bought but depends on mutually reinforcing relationships between clients and clients .
 Legal rights are replaced by sycophancy, which is duly rewarded with job security or advancement . Legal rights have been replaced by job security and advancement, says the author .
 To achieve even modest and legitimate objectives, people are required to bend the law in a variety of minor but corrupting ways . To achieve medical treatments, material necessities, educational opportunities, people must bend the laws, he says .
 This accounts in large measure for the marked increase in cynicism in these years, says the author of the book . This accounts for the rise in cynicism, he says .
 Tractor plants, or truck manufacturers, did not bother to make sufficient spare parts because they could more easily meet their ‘norms’ by building large machines . When these large machines broke down there were no replacement parts available .
 Official data published only the total number of machines produced in a given sector . They did not say how many were still in working order .
 Many workers, especially the less-skilled, had a stake in these arrangements, which—in return for political quiescence—offered social security and a low level of pressure at the workplace .
 The only parts of a typical Communist economy that worked relatively efficiently by 1980 were the high-tech defense industries and the so-called ‘second economy’—the black market in goods and services . By 1980, the only parts that worked fairly efficiently were the defense industries .
 The importance of this second economy was testimony to the sad state of the official one, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It was a second economy that could not be officially acknowledged .
 In Hungary, by the early eighties, it was estimated that a mere 84,000 artisans—operating exclusively in the private sector— were meeting nearly 60 percent of local demand for services, including plumbing .
 Economic stagnation was in itself a standing rebuke to Communism’s claims to superiority over capitalism. Economic stagnation is in itself itself a sign of capitalism, says the author of the book .
 If not a stimulus to opposition, it was certainly a source of disaffection . And if not an opposition leader, it would be a source for disaffections .
 For most people living under Communism in the Brezhnev era, from the late Sixties through the early Eighties, life was no longer shaped by terror or repression . For most of those living under communism in the 1970s and 1980s, there was no more repression or terror
 Adults had fewer children and fewer children; they drank more . The per capita annual consumption of alcoholic spirits in the Soviet Union quadrupled in these years . Adults drank more; they died young .
 Public architecture in Communist societies was not only aesthetically unappealing, it was shoddy and uncomfortable . It was a faithful mirror of the shabby authoritarianism of the system itself, says author .
 Apartments, like much else in the Soviet bloc, were cheap . Rent averaged 4 percent of a typical household budget in the USSR . The economy was regulated not by price but by scarcity .
 The arbitrary allocation of scarce commodities helped maintain loyalty . But it carried with it a serious risk, which most Communist leaders understood very well . This had its advantages for the authorities, but it also carried with a risk .
 Communist rulers had opted instead to treat their subjects as consumers and replace utopia tomorrow with material abundance today .
 Khrushchev’s famous 1959 ‘kitchen debate’ with Nixon, when he assured the American Vice-President that Communism would outperform capitalism in the foreseeable future . This was not the same as Khrushche's famous 1959 'Kitchen debate' with Nixon .
 He was content for Communism to be a pale imitation of capitalism, so long as the goods on offer kept consumers happy . The Communist leader was content to be content for capitalism to be an imitation of the consumer market .
 The standard of living in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland improved through the 1970s . It was measured by retail consumption, not income levels .
 By the end of the eighties there were four televisions for every ten people in Hungary . The figures for Czechoslovakia were similar .
 If buyers were willing to accept poor quality, indifferent styling and little choice, they could usually find what they wanted, in official shops or through the ‘private sector .
 In the Soviet Union, such ‘optional’ goods were harder to find—and relatively more expensive . The Soviet Union was hard to find and expensive to buy .
 A similar basket would ‘cost’ 21. work-hours in London, but 42. work hours in Moscow, despite high levels of subsidy . The basket would 'cost' 21.5 hours in London but 42 hours in Russia .
 Soviet or East European consumer had to spend many more hours finding and purchasing foods and other goods .
 Life under Communism under Communism was expensive as well as exhausting . Measured in time and effort, if not in rubles or crowns or forints, life was expensive .
 The problem with defining Communism by its success in satisfying private consumers was that the whole economy was geared, as noted above, to the high-volume manufacture of industrial machinery and raw materials . The problem is that the entire economy is geared towards manufacturing and production of industrial goods .
 The only way around this impediment was to import consumer goods from 14 1 am . Dr Paulina Bren for this reference .
 The European Community subsidized its farmers too, and in approximately the same proportions . European Community subsidised its farmers, and the European Community did .
 The only way to stock the shelves in the East was to borrow money from the West . In practice, the only way of stocking the shelves was to rely on borrowed money from West .
 In the 1970s alone Czechoslovakia’s hard currency debt rose twelve-fold . In the course of the 70s alone alone, the country's debt rose 12-fold in the same period . The Czech Republic is one of the largest economies in the world .
 Poland’s hard currency debt increased some 3,000 percent, as First Secretary Gierek and his colleagues sucked in subsidized Western goods . Poland introduced expensive new social insurance programs for peasants and froze food prices at 1965 levels .
 Communist economists in Prague recommended phasing out subsidies and introducing ‘real’ prices . But their political masters feared the social consequences of such a retreat and preferred to increase their debts instead .
 As in the inter-war years, the fragile little states of eastern Europe borrowed capital from the West to finance their autarkic economies and avoid hard choices . The fragile little countries borrowing capital from West to fund their economic growth .
 Miklos Nemeth, the last Communist prime minister of Hungary, was to acknowledge as much as a few years later . Miklos . Nemeth was the last Prime Minister of Hungary to acknowledge that .
 Hungary's official deficit on current account was $ 1. billion per annum in 1986 . By 1986 Hungary’s official deficit had reached $ 1 billion per year . Hungary had a deficit of $1.2 billion in 1986.
 Between 1971 and 1980 Poland’s hard currency debt had risen from $1 billion to $20. billion, with worse to come . Poland is one of the world's most indebted countries, with more debt coming .
 By its own reckoning the GDR in its last years was spending over 60 percent of its yearly export earnings just to cover the interest on its Western debts . The GDR spent 60 per cent of its annual export earnings on the interest payments to cover its Western debt .
 Yugoslavia received generous loans and stand-by arrangements on the basis of official data that bore not even a passing relationship to reality . Yugoslavia was always a favored client of the U.S. from 1950 through 1964 .
 Eastern Europe’s hard currency debt, which stood at $6.6 billion in 1971, grew to $66.7 billion in 1980 . Eastern Europe had $66 billion in debt in 1980, according to Eurostat .
 Hungary joined the IMF in May 1982, to mutual self-congratulation . Romania, where Ceau§escu had paid off his country’s for 16 years, did not include Romania .
 Only in 1989 did it emerge that its government had seriously understated its internal and external debt for the previous decade . Only in 1990 it emerged that the country had seriously underestimated its debt .
 "Sooner or later it would be necessary to make painful and socially disruptive economic adjustments," says President Obama . Obama would have to make socially disruptive changes to the economy, he says . He says the U.S. will have to accept the reality of the world's future .
 In years to come Markus Wolf, the East German spymaster, would claim that by the late 1970s he had already concluded that the GDR ‘wouldn’t work’ and he was certainly not alone .
 Economists like Hungary’s Tam&s Bauer and his Polish contemporary Leszek Balcerowicz knew perfectly well how fragile the Communist house of cards had become .
 So long as the capitalists would underwrite it, Communism could survive, it could survive . But so long as they would, Communism would survive, he says . Communism could still survive, but it's not guaranteed to do so .
 Leonid Brezhnev’s ‘era of stagnation’ (Mikhail Gorbachev) fostered many illusions, and not only at home . The Soviet Union was in a state of stagnation in the early 1980s .
 In 1978, a World Bank Report actually determined that the GDR had a higher standard of living than Great Britain . Prince Potemkin must surely have smiled in his far-off grave .
 Communists understood something that the bankers of the West had missed . Communists understood that bankers had missed something they had missed. Communists understood the bankers' mistakes .
 Economic reforms of even the most localized and micro-efficient kind would have immediate political ramifications . Reforms of even small-scale economic reforms would have instant political ramifications, the author says .
 The economic arrangements of socialism were not an autonomous zone; they were thoroughly integrated into the political regime itself . The economic arrangement of socialism was not an . autonomous zone .
 It was not by chance that the East European satellite states were all run by ageing, conservative time-servers . The East Eastern satellite states all had time-serving staff .
 In a new age of realism Edward Gierek in Warsaw, Gustav Husak in Prague and Erich Honecker in Berlin (born 1912), Janos Kadar in Budapest and Todor Zhivkov in Sofia (born 1911) were the most realistic of all . En
 Leonid Brezhnev, born 1906, was four-time Hero Of The Soviet Union . He was the leader of the Soviet Union, since 1977 . He had grown old in the old ways, like Leonid, who was born 1906 .
 The fact that ‘real existing Socialism’ was dysfunctional and discredited did not in itself seal its fate . ‘Real existing socialism’ is dysfunctional, discredited and discredited,’ says Julian Zelizer. ‘The fact that 'real existing socialism' was dysfunctional did not
 The nakedness of Soviet violence had long since been revealed—and would be ex-1717 . Moreover, like Brezhnev himself, they were among the leading consumers of the age .
 In a Soviet joke from the time, the Soviet leader is showing his mother his dacha, his cars and his hunting lodges . In the joke, he is shown his mother a dacha and his cars .
 The Communist system might corrode indefinitely at the periphery, but the initiative for its final collapse could only come from the centre . The initiative for the collapse of the Communist system will come from within the centre of the system .
 In the story of Communism’s demise, the flowering in Prague or Warsaw of a new kind of opposition was only the end of the beginning . The flowering of opposition in Prague and Warsaw is only the beginning of the process, writes David Perry .
 The emergence of a new kind of leadership in Moscow itself, however, was to be the beginning of the end . Moscow was ruled out of power in the 1980s and 1990s . The Kremlin was ruled by a new generation of Russian politicians .
 The conventional narrative of Communism’s final collapse begins with Poland . Vdclav Havel, Presidential Address, January 1st 1990 . Havel was the President of the Polish Republic .
 On October 16th 1978, Karol Wojtyla, Cardinal of Crakow, was elected to the Papacy as John Paul II, the first Pole to hold the office . Karol was the first Polish to hold a Papacy .
 The expectations aroused by his election were unprecedented in modern times . President Barack Obama's election victory was unprecedented for modern times, says Obama .
 Some in the Catholic Church regarded him as a likely radical . He was just fifty-eight when elected pope in 1978, aged just 48 .
 Energetic and charismatic, this was the man who would complete the work of Popes John XXIII and Paul VI . He would lead the Church into a new era, a pastor rather than a Curial bureaucrat .
 Conservative Catholics take comfort in WojtyZa’s reputation for unbending theological firmness . Conservative Catholics took comfort in his moral and political absolutism born of experience as a priest and prelate under communism .
 This was a man who, for all his reputation as a ‘pope of ideas’, would not compromise with the Church’s enemies . The Pope was a 'pope' open to intellectual exchange and scholarly debate, open to debate .
 By the time of his election he was already an administrative as well as a doctrinal conservative . He was an administrative and doctrinal Conservative .
 Karol Wojtyla’s Polish origins and his tragic early life help to explain the unusual strength of his convictions and the distinctive quality of his papacy .
 Following his mother’s death he was taken by his father to the Marian sanctuary at Kalwaria Zebrzydowska and made frequent pilgrimages there in following years . The sanctuary is important center of the cult of the Virgin Mary in modern Poland .
 The new Pope’s Christian vision was rooted in the peculiarly messianic style of Polish Catholicism . Pope Francis was born in a Polish Catholic family .
 In modern Poland he saw not only the embattled eastern frontier of the True Faith, but also a land and people chosen to serve as the example and sword of the Church in the struggle against Eastern atheism and Western materialism alike .
 His long service in Crakow, isolated from Western theological and political currents, probably explained his tendency to embrace a parochial and sometimes troubling Polish-Christian vision .
 It also explains the unprecedented enthusiasm for him in the country of his birth . But it also explains why there is also an unprecedented enthusiasm .
 From the outset, the pope broke with his predecessors’ cosmopolitan Roman acquiescence in modernity, secularism, and compromise . Pope Francis broke with predecessors' cosmopolitan . He broke with their cosmopolitan. acquiescence .
 His campaign of international appearances was not undertaken without design . His carefully staged performances in huge open arenas, accompanied by oversized crucifixes and crucifixes .
 John Paul II arrived in Warsaw on June 2nd 1979 for the first of three dramatic ‘pilgrimages’ to Communist Poland .
 The Pope was not interested in merely endorsing Christianity’s passive survival under Communism . His presence affirmed and reinforced the influence of the Catholic Church in Poland . The Pope's presence in Poland reinforced and reinforced his influence .
 'It is of course the business of the Catholic Church to inveigh against material idols and the sin of pride. To the occasional discomfort of his own bishops he began explicitly discouraging 'material idols'
 In 1975 Lenten Exercises at the Vatican, three years before becoming Pope, he explicitly announced that of the two threats to the Church, consumerism and persecution, the former was by far the greater danger .
 His thoughtless description of Poland under martial law as a ‘vast concentration camp’ reflects a similar limitation . His description of martial law in Poland as a ' concentration camp' reflects a limitation .
 Poles remained overwhelmingly and enthusiastically Catholic; in large measure it was because of the man himself . In part this was because Poles were overwhelmingly Catholic .
 To forbid the Pope to visit Poland or to speak there would only have strengthened his appeal and further alienated millions of his admirers . But there was very little they could do, says Pope .
 The Pope returned to Poland in June 1983 and spoke to his 'compatriots' in St John’s Cathedral in Warsaw of their ‘disappointment and humiliation, their suffering and loss of freedom’ Even after the imposition of martial law, the Communist leaders could only
 Workers’ revolts of 1970, and again in 1976, prompted by sharp increases in the price of food . First Secretary Edvard Gierek had tried hard to avert domestic discontent by borrowing heavily abroad .
 Thanks to the emergence of Jacek Kurori’s KOR, the intellectual opposition and workers’ leaders now cooperated far more than in the past . The KOR is a group of intellectuals and workers' leaders who have cooperated more than ever .
 Lech Walesa and 14 other employees at Elektromontaz in Gdansk, Poland, were arrested . The authorities sacked the workers, including the then-unknown electrician, in 2006 .
 Whether the semi-clandestine movement for workers’ rights would have continued to grow is not clear . Whether it would have been a success was not clear whether it would continue to grow .
 Its spokesmen were emboldened by the Pope’s recent visit and their sense that the regime would be reluctant to strike back violently for fear of international disapproval . The Pope's recent visit prompted the regime to be emboldened .
 In the next three weeks protest strikes will spread from Ursus tractor plant to every major industrial city in the country . Gdansk and its Lenin Shipyard on August 2nd. The strike began on August 1st .
 Walesa climbed over the shipyard wall and into the leadership of a national strike movement . There the shipbuilders occupied the yard and formed themselves into an unofficial trade union, Solidarnosc (‘Solidarity’)
 The authorities’ instinctive response—to arrest ‘ringleaders’ and isolate the strikers—failed, they opted instead to buy time and divide their opponents . They opted instead of buying time and dividing their opponents, the authorities said .
 Representatives of the Politburo were sent to Gdansk to negotiate with ‘reasonable’ workers’ leaders . Kurori, Adam Michnik and other KOR leaders were temporarily detained for questioning .
 On September 1st the police released all remaining detainees, and two weeks later the Polish Council of State officially conceded the right to form and register free labor unions . The police were forced to release the last remaining detainees .
 Walesa was elected president of Poland's first national Congress . Walesa became president of the Polish Communist Party in September 1918 .
 From November 1980 until December 1981 Poland lived in an excited, uneasy limbo . Poland was in a state of limbo until the end of 1981 .
 Walesa’s advisers—mindful of past mistakes and wary of provoking a backlash from the humiliated Communist leadership—urged caution . Walesa's advisers are wary of a return to the past mistakes .
 Seen from Warsaw, and especially from Moscow, the country was adrift and the regime was losing control . Seen from Poland, especially from Russia, the government is losing control of the country .
 Despite the best efforts of its cautious leaders, Solidarity was doomed to arouse the ghosts of Budapest and Prague . Solidarity is a failed attempt to move beyond the bounds of the spirit of the Czech Republic .
 General Wojciech Jaruzelski had risen from defense minister to prime minister in February 1981 . He replaced Gierek, the now-disgraced prime minister of Poland .
 Soviet leadership encouraged firm action to halt Poland’s drift out of control . Both sides knew the situation could not last indefinitely .
 Jaruzelski declared martial law in Poland in 1981, ostensibly to forestall Soviet intervention . Martial law was declared as US-Soviet nuclear disarmament talks were under way in Geneva .
 In post-’89 retrospect the rise of Solidarity appears as the opening fusillade in the final struggle against Communism . Solidarity was the beginning of the struggle to defeat Communism .
 They were not in themselves a harbinger of the downfall of Communist power, they say . They were in themselves not in itself harbinger to downfall of communist power .
 Communism might be progressively eroded from within and from below, but it could not be overthrown, says Michnik, Kurori and others . Communism might erode from within, from below but it would not be overturned, they say .
 Open confrontation would be catastrophic, as history has convincingly demonstrated . Open confrontation with the U.S. would be disastrous, he says .
 The developments in Poland were a stirring prologue to the narrative of Communisms collapse, but they remained a sideshow . Poland's developments in the 1950s were a stir in the story of the collapse of communism .
 The clamp-down in Poland further contributed to the steady cooling of East-West relations that began in the late 1970s . Poland's clamp down in Poland has contributed to a steady cooling in the West .
 With the conclusion of the Helsinki Accords it seemed to Washington and Moscow that the Cold War was ending to their own advantage . Moscow and Washington seemed to think it was ending their own Cold War with the U.S.
 The situation in Europe suited both great powers, with the U.S. comporting itself rather like czarist Russia in the decades following Napoleon’s defeat in 1815: i.e. as a sort of continental policeman whose presence guaranteed that there would be no further disruption of
 No-one, least of all the leaders of Western Europe, had any illusions about the value of nuclear missiles . Western Europe's countries would have been the first to suffer in a nuclear exchange .
 As instruments of war such weapons were uniquely unhelpful— as weapons . They really were only good for sitting on. They were only really good for sat on .
 As a deterrent device, a nuclear arsenal had its uses, but not necessarily as a weapon of choice . The U.S. had its own nuclear arsenal in the 1960s and '70s .
 By the early 1980s, the Warsaw Pact boasted more than fifty infantry and armored divisions, 16,000 tanks, 26,000 fighting vehicles and 4,000 combat aircraft . There was, in any case, no other way to defend Western Europe against Warsaw Pact .
 Reagan let slip in 1981 that a nuclear war in Europe need not lead to a strategic exchange . That is why British Prime Ministers (both Margaret Thatcher and before her 4th Prime Ministers) have been wary of the idea .
 Washington’s West European allies were at least as alarmed as Moscow . Both protested vociferously against the move . The U.S. and its European allies protested vehemently .
 The ‘new’ Cold War re-opened a prospect of terror out of all apparent proportion to the issues at stake—or the intentions of most of the participants . The 'new' Cold War was a Cold War of the Cold War, but it wasn't all apparent .
 In Western Europe the anti-nuclear peace movement underwent a revival, strengthened by a new generation of green activists . Anti-nuclear activists in Western Europe were inspired by green activists in the 1980s .
 In Britain an enthusiastic and decidedly English assortment of feminists, environmentalists and anarchists, mounted a prolonged siege of the cruise missile site at Greenham Common . The long-suffering American garrison of the site is bewildered .
 Social Democratic Chancellor Helmut Schmidt was forced to step down after the left wing of his own party voted against the new missiles . Helmut Kohl was then installed by his Christian Democratic successor Helmut Schumberger .
 The mirage of a de-nuclearized, neutral zone in central Europe was still dear to many Germans, and prominent West German Greens and Social Democrats added their voices to official East German appeals against nuclear weapons .
 The ‘Krefeld Appeal’ against the deployment of Cruise and Pershing missiles in the Federal Republic gathered 2. million signatures . The 'Krelf Appeal' was launched by a group of 2.2 million people .
 As for the ‘peaceniks, they were far less troubled by repression in Warsaw than by the bellicose rhetoric emanating from Washington . The 'peacenciks’ were more concerned with the repression in Poland than by Washington .
 NATO’s decision to deploy new missiles had been accompanied by the offer of negotiations to reduce such weapons . It seemed increasingly obvious that the U.S. under its new president had adopted a new and aggressive strategy .
 The same president, after all, was initiating talks on nuclear arms reduction . He offered to withdraw his own intermediate-range missiles if the Soviets dismantled theirs . The same President was in talks with the Soviets on the issue .
 The U.S. was embarking upon a major program of rearmament . But the United States was indeed embarking on a major rearmarmament program .
 In August 1981 Reagan announced that the U.S. would stockpile neutron bombs . Reagan announced in August 1981 that the United States would stockpile the bombs .
 The MX missile system, in breach of the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaties, was announced in November 1982 . It was followed by the Strategic Defense Initiative (‘Star Wars’), prompting a Soviet protest .
 Official military aid and clandestine support to Afghanistan and Central America was steadily augmented in the 1980s . Official military support was steadily increased in Afghanistan, Central America and Afghanistan .
 In 1985 United States defense spending rose by 6 percent, an unprecedented peacetime increase . In 1985, the U.S. defense budget was 6 percent higher than in 1985 .
 Reagan warned in 1981 that without a verifiable nuclear arms agreement there would be an arms race . Reagan had warned that without an agreement the United States would win it . Reagan said in 1981 the U.S. would win the arms race if it were to be a nuclear war .
 In retrospect, the American defense buildup would come to be seen as the cunningly crafted lever that bankrupted and ultimately broke the Soviet system . The U.S. defense buildup was seen as one of the most successful military operations in history .
 The Soviet Union could ill afford the armaments race upon which it had begun to embark as early as 1974 . It had begun in the arms race in 1974 .
 The Second Cold War, and America’s public belligerence, undoubtedly increased the strains on a creaking and dysfunctional system . U.S. public belligerentity, and the Cold War certainly increased the strain on the system .
 The Soviet Union had built a military machine that defeated Hitler, occupied half of Europe and matched the West weapon for weapon for forty years . But at a terrible price, the Soviet Union was destroyed at the hands of the West .
 It was already obvious to many Soviet experts that their country could not indefinitely maintain such a burden . The Soviet Union could not afford to carry on the burden of Soviet power .
 In the long run, the economic bill for this generations-long military build-up must come due, says President Obama . The economic bill must come to an end, he says .
 In the short run, foreign tensions probably helped shore up the regime . But in the short-term, it's unlikely that foreign tensions will help shore up regime .
 The Soviet Union might be a continent-size Potemkin village—‘Upper Volta with missiles’ in Helmut Schmidt’s pithy description . But it did, after all, have those missiles and they conferred a certain status and respect upon their owners
 KGB director Yuri Andropov took the American threat very seriously seriously . The ageing Soviet leaders took the threat seriously, he says .
 Like their counterparts in Washington they really believed the other side was contemplating pre-emptive nuclear war . The U.S. and South Korea are at odds over a nuclear arms deal .
 The real military dilemma facing the Soviet leaders was not in Europe nor in Washington, but in Kabul, Afghanistan . The real problem was not Europe nor Washington but in Afghanistan, it was Kabul .
 The 1979 invasion of Afghanistan did not open a new front in Communism’s strategic struggle with the free world . It was Jimmy Carter's late-found sensitivity to Soviet strategic ambitions .
 The 1979 Soviet census revealed an unprecedented increase in the population of Soviet Central Asia . The population of Central Asia increased dramatically in the Soviet Union .
 In Soviet Kazakhstan and republics abutting the Afghan frontier—Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan—the numbers were up by over 25 percent since 1970 . The numbers of people killed in Afghanistan increased by 25 percent between 1970 and 2001 .
 Over the course of the following decade, the Ukrainian population would grow by just 4 percent, that of Tajikistan increased by nearly half . Over the same period, the population of the country increased nearly half of the population .
 Had the occupation of Afghanistan succeeded in installing a secure, friendly regime in Kabul, the Soviet leaders could have chalked up a double success . The Soviet occupation could have been a success in Afghanistan, writes Andrew Hammond .
 They would have re-affirmed Moscow’s faltering presence in the Middle East . It would have sent a ‘clear message’ to a new generation of Soviet Muslims tempted by dreams of independence .
 Brezhnev, Gromyko and their generals ignored not just the lessons of Vietnam, repeating many of the Americans’ errors . They also forgot czarist Russia’s own failures in the same region eighty years earlier .
 USSR’s disastrous attempt to sustain a puppet regime in unfamiliar, hostile territory aroused an intransigent opposition of guerrillas and zealots, armed and financed from abroad . Instead, the USSR's disastrous attempt . to sustain an . illegitimate regime aroused an . intranigent opposition
 Its traumatic impact upon a generation of conscripted soldiers would emerge only later . The traumatic impact on a generation will only emerge later .
 By the early 1990s it was estimated that one in five veterans of the Afghan wars were confirmed alcoholics . Many of the others, unable to find regular work, drifted into far-right nationalist organizations .
 Soviet leaders themselves could see the scale of their mis-step . But long before then even the Soviet leaders had already been aware of the error .
 The decade-long war of attrition in the Afghan mountains constituted an extended international humiliation . In addition to the cost in men and materiel, the cost was the cost of the Afghan war .
 The cost of the accelerating arms race of the early ‘80s would not in itself have induced the collapse of the system . But the disaster in Afghanistan, like the cost of an arms race, would not have induced collapse of system .
 Brezhnev’s ‘era of stagnation’ might have lasted indefinitely . Sustained by, fear, inertia and the self-interest of the old men who ran it, Brezhnnev's 'era of stagnating' might have last indefinitely .
 There was no countervailing authority, no dissident movement, that could have brought it low . Certainly there were no counter-vailing authorities that could bring it low, he says .
 The guiding premise of the Communist project was its faith in the laws of history and the interests of the collectivity . The collectivity would always trump the motives and actions of individuals, the Communist Party said .
 It was ironically appropriate that its destiny should in the end have been determined by the fate of men . It was ironic that it should be decided by its destiny .
 On November 10th 1982, at the age of 76, Leonid Brezhnev finally gave up the ghost, having long since come to resemble it . On that date, he died at age 76 .
 In just over a year, before he could implement any of the reforms that he planned, Andropov died and was replaced as General Secretary by Konstantin Chernenko, himself aged 72 and in such poor health that he could hardly complete his speech at his funeral .
 Born in a village of the southern Stavropol region in 1931, he had been elected to the Central Committee at the age of 41 . Born in the southern region of the south, he was elected to a Central Committee in 1931 .
 His rapid rise had been encouraged and facilitated by Andropov and he was widely seen as a likely reformer . He was widely thought to be a reformer but his rapid rise was seen as an embarrassment to the public .
 Gorbachev was first a Communist and only then a reformer . But like all the reform Communists of his generation, he was a first-time Communist . He was also a reformist .
 Communism of Lenin remained for him a fine and unsullied ideal, he said . As he explained to the French Communist newspaper L’Humanite in a February 1986 interview, he explained in a . 1986 interview .
 Gorbachev's reforms were quite consciously Leninist—or ‘Socialist-in-intent’ in intent . But he certainly believed it, and the reforms he initiated were conscious Leninist .
 To the extent that hopes were vested in Gorbachev, this reflected the absence of any domestic opposition in the Soviet Union . This reflected more than anything, it reflected the lack of domestic opposition .
 The new leader intended from the outset to devote his main efforts to overhaul the Soviet Union’s moribund economy and the intertwined inefficiencies and corruption of its top-heavy institutional apparatus .
 The starting point for ‘reform’ in such a system, as Hungarian and other Communist economists had long appreciated, was decentralization of pricing and decision-making . ‘Reforms’ would be the start point for 'reform' in such an economic system,
 Even after a 1986 law on Individual Labour Activity authorized limited private enterprise, there were surprisingly few takers . Even after the 1986 Law on Individual . Labour Activity was authorized, there was surprisingly little takers.
 In the short-run there would be more shortages and bottlenecks, not fewer, as everyone retreated to regional self-sufficiency and even to a local barter economy . In the long-term, there would also be shortages, not less .
 The idea that authorities could create efficient businesses by administrative fiat was foredoomed . But such an approach was foreroomed by its operating premise, it was forealloomed, he says .
 Farm managers and local directors hedged their bets against the return of planned norms and stockpiled anything they could lay their hands on . Meanwhile, local directors and local farm managers are uncertain of the way the wind was blowing, hedging their bets .
 Every Soviet reform program since 1921 began the same way and ran out of steam for the same reasons, starting with Lenin’s New Economic Policy . The Soviet Union has been in the midst of a series of reform programs since 1921 .
 Serious economic reforms implied the relaxation or abandonment of controls . Serious economic reform requires the relaxation of controls on the market .
 It soon became obvious to Gorbachev that to land on his feet as he wrestled with the Soviet economy he must accept that the Soviet economic conundrum could not be addressed in isolation . Everything else was dialectics, and dialectics .
 The Soviet Union was run by men who had a vested interest in the political and institutional levers of a command economy . Its endemic minor absurdities and quotidian corruption were the very source of their authority and power, says historian John Avlon .
 The periodic purges under Lenin and his successors had typically proclaimed similar objectives . This, too, was hardly a new idea, but it was hardly new to the purges .
 The Soviet Union, however repressive and backward, was no longer a murderous totalitarian tyranny . "The Soviet Union," however repressive, was not longer a totalitarian tyranny. It was a dictatorship, but it was a democracy."
 Khrushchev’s monumental housing projects most Soviet families now lived in their own apartments . The Soviet state of the housing system was created in the early 1950s .
 The age of terror was over for most people in the Soviet Union . For Gorbachev’s generation, a return to mass arrests and party purges was unthinkable . The age was over in Russia for most of the time .
 By making people more aware of impending changes and heightening public expectation, Gorbachev would forge a lever with which he and his supporters might pry loose official opposition to his plans . By raising public expectations, he would heighten public expectation .
 The urgency of the need for official openness was brought home to him by the catastrophic events of April 26th 1986 . Gorbachev was in a state of crisis in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 The plume of atomic fallout was carried north-west into Western Europe and Scandinavia . It reached as far as Wales and Sweden and exposed five million people to its effects .
 The reactor at Cheliabinsk was from the first generation of Soviet atomic constructions . It was built by slave labour in 1948-51 and had been built by slaves .
 These and other ecological disasters were all the direct result of indifference, bad management and the Soviet ‘slash and burn’ approach to natural resources . The Soviet 'slash' and burn' approach was the result of bad management .
 The Cheliabinsk-40 explosion was not officially acknowledged for many decades, even though it occurred within a few kilometers of a large city . In 1979, in 1979, several hundred people died of anthrax from a biological weapons plant in the town centre .
 Moscow’s first acknowledgement that anything untoward had happened came fully four days after the event . Moscow acknowledged the incident only in a two-sentence official communique .
 Gorbachev forced to acknowledge the extent of his country’s problems, so did his fellow citizens . He was made aware of the scale of official incompetence and indifference .
 The bungling, the mendacity and the cynicism of the men responsible both for the disaster and the attempt to cover it up could not be ""This was the subject of a book by Zhores Medvedev, Nuclear Disaster in the Urals, published in exile in 1979 .
 Andrei Sakharov, the world’s best-known dissident, was liberated from house arrest in Gorky, a harbinger of the large-scale release of Soviet political prisoners that began the following year . In December of that year he was released from prison .
 In the course of 1987-88 the General Secretary was forging a national constituency for change . He was forging himself, almost despite himself, forging himself .
 Initially taken aback at their own existence, the Soviet Union was still a one-party dictatorship . But they soon flourished and multiplied .
 In October 1988 he demoted some of his leading opponents and had himself elected President of the Supreme Soviet (i.e. head of state), displacing Andrei Gromyko, last of the dinosaurs .
 The elections of May/June 1989 were the first more or less free vote in the Soviet Union since 1918 . The elections were held in the USSR in the spring and summer of 1989 .
 From the outset Gorbachev made clear his determination to unburden the USSR at the very least of its more onerous military encumbrances . From the start of the Soviet Union, he made clear he wanted to unbload the USSR .
 Within a month of coming to power he had halted Soviet missile deployments and gone on to offer unconditional negotiations on nuclear forces . He also offered to halve their strategic arsenals .
 Gorbachev agreed to allow U.S. ‘forward-based systems’ to be excluded from strategic arms talks, if that would help get these under way . By May 1986, after a surprisingly successful ‘summit’ meeting with Reagan in Geneva, Gorb
 There followed a second, Reykjavik, summit in October 1986 where Reagan and Gorbachev failed to reach agreement on nuclear disarmament . The summit laid the basis for future success .
 By late 1987 Shevardnadze and U.S. Secretary of State George Schultz had drafted an Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty . The treaty was signed and ratified the following year .
 This Treaty, by endorsing Reagan’s earlier ‘zero option’ proposal, constituted Soviet acceptance that a nuclear war in Europe was un-winnable . It served as the prologue to an even more important treaty, signed in 1990, strictly limiting the presence and operation
 Gorbachev himself switched off Sakharov’s microphone, but too late . Sakharova's microphone was switched off, but it was too late to save his life . The incident occurred in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Gorbachev's priorities were domestic, but securing a more stable international environment was itself a victory in itself . The Soviet-era leader's priority was securing a stable international climate .
 Soviet foreign affairs expert says USSR could exercise more control over its foreign relations by well-calculated concessions than by fruitless confrontation . These views reflected the advice he was beginning to get from a new generation of Soviet experts .
 Foreign policy was an arena in which Gorbachev exercised direct control and could thus hope to effect immediate improvements . In contrast to the intractable problems he faced at home, foreign policy was a place in which he could hope to improve .
 His focus upon ending the arms race and the stockpiling of nuclear weapons was closely tied to a new approach to the Soviet Union’s role as a distinctively European power .
 It is time for the two military alliances to amend their strategic concepts to gear them more to the aims of defense . It's time for NATO to amend its strategic concepts .
 The withdrawal of 6,000 Soviet troops was completed in November of the same year . Five months later he announced the withdrawal of some 6,00 Soviet troops .
 To secure their fiefdom these men were drawn to identify with their ‘own’ people, particularly once fissures began to appear in the central apparatus . The men were understandably drawn to identifying with their 'own' people .
 In a continental empire of over one hundred ethnic groups from the Baltic to the Sea of Okhotsk, most of whom had longstanding grievances that glasnost now encouraged them to air, this was to prove a serious miscalculation . Most of the country's ethnic groups had longstanding
 Gorbachev's response to demands for autonomy at the Soviet empire's far-flung margins should not come as a surprise . The inadequacy of Gorbachachev’s response should not be a surprise, he says .
 The idea that it was the Leninist project itself that might be at fault remained alien to the Soviet leader until very late in 1990 . Only in 1990 did he permit publication of overtly anti-Leninist writers such as Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn .
 As late as 1988 the government was still clamping down firmly on independent publishing houses and printers . Necessary reforms would be undertaken and appropriate freedoms granted, but there was to be no unregulated licence .
 But partial reform or reform of one sector in isolation from others was inherently contradictory, he said . "Partial reform or . reform of  sectors in isolation was inherently . contradictory," he said.
 In an authoritarian system power is indivisible, relinquish it in part and you must eventually lose it all . In the authoritarian system you relinquish power to relinquish part of it and all of it . In this case, relinquishing power is not only a part of your power
 Gorbachev and his controlled revolution were swept aside by the scale of the contradictions they aroused, writes David Frum . The former Soviet leader's controlled revolution was in the end swept aside, he writes .
 Gorbachev did not achieve his objective, a reformed and efficient Communism, shorn of its dysfunctions, showing off its dysfunction, he says . He says .
 Gorbachev progressively eroded the very system through which he had risen . By introducing first one element of change and then another, he eroded the system he'd risen in .
 No-one could have predicted Chernenko's death in 1984, when Chernenko died, and no-one did . "No-one would have predicted it in 1984," says Vladimir Chernenko .
 He surely had no idea what he was doing and would have been horrified had he known . But he surely had been horrified by his actions and would've been horrified .
 Gorbachev never had the unconditional support of radical reformers . Radical reformers grew increasingly frustrated with his apparent indecisiveness . On the other hand, he had the support of some of the world's most powerful politicians .
 Gorbachev’s seeming reluctance to press the logic of his initiatives, and his insistence on not going too far or too fast left many of his early admirers feeling let down .
 He was forced to forge alliances and trim between the extreme positions of others . He was thus obliged to forge tactical alliances . He forged alliances with others .
 This is a familiar if uncomfortable necessity for democratic politicians . But in the eyes of a nation accustomed to seventy years of dictatorship such maneuverings simply made Gorbachev appear weak . This is in contrast to the 70-year-old regime .
 From the early months of 1989 onwards the Soviet President fell steadily in opinion polls . The Soviet President's popularity in the Soviet Union fell steadily from 1989 onwards .
 By the autumn of 1990 Gorbachev would have the support of just 21 percent of the public . By the fall of 1990 the public would support the former Soviet leader .
 Long before his fall from power, then, Gorbachev had decidedly fallen from grace . Long before he fell from grace, he had fallen from power .
 On his increasingly frequent visits abroad Gorbachev was feted by west European politicians and cheered by enthusiastic crowds . The former Soviet Union leader visited Europe on frequent occasions .
 Seen from Eastern Europe this might have been thought a little premature; but there too Mikhail Gorbachev was wildly popular . The former Soviet Union leader was widely popular in Eastern Europe .
 Soviet leader’s domestic travails, though duly noted, counted for less than his foreign pronouncements, notably a widely reported speech to the United Nations on December 7th 1988 .
 Gorbachev announced unilateral cuts in Soviet conventional forces in Europe . 'Freedom of choice is a universal principle,' he told his audience .
 Moscow would not use force to impose its version of ‘Socialism’ upon fraternal states . This was more than just a renunciation of the ‘Brezhnev Doctrine’, it was an acknowledgement that Moscow would no longer use force against Russia .
 Gorbachev conceded that the citizens of the satellite states were now at liberty to go their own way, Socialist or not . The citizens of satellite states are now free to choose their way .
 Under Mikhail Gorbachev’s leadership, the Soviet Union since 1985 had progressively removed itself from direct oversight of its client states . The U.S. has since stepped out of control of its clients in the past .
 Their police and intelligence services remained closely bound and beholden to the Soviet Unions own security apparatus . They continued to operate semi-independently of local authorities . Police and security services were closely tied to the unions' own security .
 Prague, Warsaw and East Berlin were starting to appreciate that they could no longer count on Moscow’s unconditional support . But neither they nor their subjects had a clear sense of what this meant .
 The suppression of Solidarity and the silencing of its leaders did nothing to ease the country’s underlying problems . On the other hand, the suppression of . Solidarity did not help ease the . country's underlying problems, he says .
 Poland was still in debt, but now—thanks to international condemnation of the repression, its rulers could no longer extricate themselves from difficulty by further borrowing abroad . Poland's rulers were no longer able to borrow abroad again .
 Poland's rulers were facing the same dilemma they had tried to address in the 1970s, but with even fewer options . In effect, Poland’s rulers were faced with the same dilemmas they had faced in the 70s . Poland's ruler was faced with a similar dilemma
 Opposition might have been criminalized but it had not evaporated . Meanwhile, the opposition might have had to be criminalized, but it hasn't evaporated. Meanwhile, opposition might not have evaporated as a result .
 Clandestine publishing continued, as did lectures, discussions, theatrical performances and much else . Clandestine publications continued, with lectures, lectures and discussions .
 Jaruzelski and most of his colleagues already understood that such provocations and confrontations would no longer work . But Jaruzelki and others already knew that . Such provocations were no longer working, he said .
 Popieluszko’s funeral drew a crowd of 350,000; and far from frightening off opposition the incident merely publicized the scale of popular support for the Church and for Solidarity, legal or no.
 By the mid-‘8os Poland was fast approaching a stand-off between a recalcitrant society and an increasingly desperate state . Poland's state of Poland was in a state of crisis at the time of the last decade .
 In 1986 Jaruzelski, now state President, released Adam Michnik and other Solidarity leaders from prison and through a newly installed ‘Ministry of Economic Reform’ offered a modest raft of economic changes to attract renewed foreign funding of Poland’s national debt .
 The public’s response was, in essence, ‘none of the above’ The question—and the decision to pose it—nicely illustrated the political as well as the economic bankruptcy of Poland's Communist rulers . Unsurprisingly, the public's response to the question was
 Poland’s membership of the IMF was made possible in part by the consent of Solidarity itself . Solidarity is Poland's only country to join the IMF . Poland's membership of IMF is made possible by Solidarity's consent to join in .
 Solidarity’s Brussels office advised the IMF Managing Director in September 1985 to admit Poland . Despite being banned, the union had managed to maintain its organization abroad . Solidarity's Brussels office said Jaruzelski's partial improvements were foredoomed .
 The ‘counter-society’ theorized by Michnik and others a decade earlier was emerging as a de facto source of authority and initiative . The 'counter society' theorized in Michnik's work emerged as an authority source of initiative and authority .
 After 1986, debate within the Polish opposition turned not so much on teaching society to be free as on how much the opposition should agree to engage with the regime, and to what end . After 1986 the opposition turned to debating how much of a deal should be made with the government .
 A group of young economists at Warsaw’s School of Planning and Statistics, led by Leszek Balcerowicz, was already drawing up plans for an autonomous private business sector freed from central planning . These and other proposals were intensely debated among 'unofficial' Poles .
 In 1987 consumer prices were raised by some 25 percent; in 1988 by a further 60 percent . Consumer prices were also raised by 60 percent in 1988 . In 1988 consumer prices rose by some 60 percent, according to experts .
 In the past, lacking any leverage over the workforce, the Communist authorities had either abandoned efforts to raise prices or else resorted to force—or both . The Communist authorities in the past have either abandoned prices or used force .
 Workers had a third option -- appealing to the workers’ own leaders for help . Workers’s own leaders had the option of appealing to them for help, but it was not enough .
 General Czeslaw Kiszczak, the Interior Minister, urged Lech Walesa to meet him and negotiate an end to the country’s labor protests . Walesa was the unacknowledged leader of an unrecognized organization . He was a member of an unack
 On December 18th 1988, 1988, a Solidarity ‘Citizens Committee’ was formed in Warsaw to plan for full-scale negotiations with the government . It was one week after Gorbachev’s seminal UN speech .
 Jaruzelski, his options seemingly exhausted, at last conceded the obvious and forced the Central Committee to agree to talks . Jaruzelki was forced to concede the obvious .
 Communists officially recognized Solidarity as a negotiating partner in 1989 . They opened ‘round table’ negotiations with Solidarity representatives . Solidarity was officially recognized as a partner by the Communists .
 All sides agreed to the legalization of independent trade unions, far-reaching economic legislation and, above all, a new elected Assembly . On that day (once again a week after major Soviet developments, this time the open elections to the Congress of Peoples’ Deputies were held .
 In hindsight, the outcome of the round-table talks was a negotiated termination of Communism in Poland . In hindsight the outcome was already clear, and to some of the participants this much was already .
 By scheduling the elections so soon, the government hoped to capitalize on the disorganization and inexperience of its opponents . And by scheduling the election so soon it hoped to capitalize on the opposition's inexperience, it could capitalize on its opponents' inexperience .
 Solidarity won 99/100 seats for the Senate and all the seats it was allowed to contest for the Sejm. Solidarity also won all seats it could contest for all the other seats . Backed by Adam Michnik’s impromptu new daily ‘Election
 Only two of the Communist candidates standing for ‘reserved’ seats secured the 50 percent of the vote required to take up their places . Only two Communist candidates stood for 'reserved' seats .
 Faced with a complete rout and unprecedented public humiliation, the Communist rulers of Poland had the option of ignoring the vote; declaring martial law once again; or else accepting defeat and relinquishing power . The Polish Communist rulers faced the choice: ignore the vote, declare martial law again, or
 Gorbachev told Jaruzelski in a private phone conversation, the election must stand . The choice was clear, as Gorbache made it clear, in a phone call to Jaruzelki .
 Jaruzelski’s first thought was to secure a face-saving compromise by inviting Solidarity to join him in a coalition government, but this was rebuffed . The first thought of a compromise was to invite Solidarity into coalition government .
 The Solidarity parliamentary group simultaneously voted to make Jaruzelski Head of State, effectively co-opting the Communist ‘moderates’ into the ensuing transition and easing their embarrassment . Meanwhile, in a shrewd political move, the Solidarity group also voted for Jar
 The following month Mazowiecki’s government announced plans to institute a ‘market economy’, presented in a stabilization program . The so-called ‘Balcerowicz Plan’ was approved by the Sejm .
 The helter-skelter quality of the last months of Communist Poland should not blind us to the long and quite slow build-up that went before . Poland has a long and slow build up to the end of Communism .
 Most of the actors in the drama of 1989—Jaruzelski, Kiszczak, Walesa, Michnik, Mazowiecki—had already been on the stage for many years .
 The country had passed from a brief flourish of relative liberty in 1981 into martial law, followed by a lengthy, uncertain purgatory of repressive semi-tolerance that unraveled in a re-run of the previous decade’s economic crises .
 Solidarity's final fall came as something of a surprise for the Polish nation . Solidarity clung to power for so long that it came as a surprise . Poland's Catholic Church and Polish nation's abiding loathing of its Communist rulers .
 In Hungary, a similar caution was born of very different experience. In Hungary it was not the first time the country has seen a change in direction .
 Two decades of ambiguous tolerance had obscured the precise limits of officially condoned dissent . Two decades ago, the U.S. government had been tolerant of dissent .
 Hilton opened its first hotel in Hungary behind the Iron Curtain in December 1976 . Billy Graham undertook not one but three public tours in the course of the Eighties . Two United States secretaries of State and Vice-President George Bush visited Hungary in that same decade .
 Life in Janos Kadar's Hungary was tolerable, if drab . Dissimulation and maneuver seemed the better part of the valor, especially to anyone who remembered 1956 .
 ‘Black’ economy enabled many people to get by on a standard of living somewhat higher than that of Hungary’s neighbors . To be sure, the ‘black’ or parallel economy enabled . many people . get by . getting by on an average of living .
 In May 1988, at a special Communist Conference called for the purpose, they at last succeeded in removing the 76-year-old Kadar from the leadership and replacing him with Karoly Grdsz, the Prime Minister .
 Janos Kddar ruled Hungary ever since the revolution of 1956, in whose suppression he played a major part . Janos had ruled Hungary since 1956, and was a key figure in the suppression of the revolution .
 K&dar was also the living embodiment of the conspiracy of silence surrounding Imre Nagy ever since his kidnapping, secret trial and even more secret execution and burial three decades before . K&Dar was also a living embodiment .
 The removal of Kadar seemed to suggest that something fundamental had shifted in Hungarian public life . His successors allowed a group of dissident young Communists and others to form Fidesz . In November 1988, they officially condoned the appearance of independent political parties .
 Imre Nagy and four of his colleagues were ceremoniously reburied as national heroes . On June 16th 1989—the thirty-first anniversary of Nagy's death, the remains of the four men were ceremonially . Nagy was the first member of the Soviet Union to
 An estimated 300,000 Hungarians lined the streets, with millions more watching the proceedings live on television . Millions more people watched the proceedings in Hungary on television live .
 Among the speakers at the graveside was Viktor Orban, the young leader of the Young Democrats, who could not help noting that some of the Communists present at Nagy’s reburial were the same who, just a few years before, had so strenuously falsified
 Only in June were round-table talks convened with opposition parties, in conscious imitation of the Polish precedent . It was a curiosity that the Hungarian exit from Communism was conducted by Communists themselves .
 Nagy will be reburied at the end of this week . Nagy's burial will be a symbolic moment for the country .
 When Janos Kadar died just three weeks later, the Hungarian Supreme Court pronounced Nagy’s full rehabilitation . The day that the court ruled Nagy was rehabilitated, he died with him .
 The only passage from a Communist regime to a genuine multi-party system effected entirely from within . The first, as we have seen, is that it was the only passage . The second, as well as the first, is the only .
 The Hungarian transition played a vital role in the unraveling of another Communist regime, that of East Germany . The second point of note is that whereas in Poland, as later in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere, the events of 1989 were .
 To outside observers, the German Democratic Republic appeared among the least vulnerable of Communist regimes . It was universally assumed that no Soviet leader would ever allow it to fall . The West assumed it was impossible to believe that it would fall .
 East German economy was widely believed to be in better shape than that of its socialist neighbors . East Germany's economy was thought to be better than its socialist neighbours .
 The GDR’s most enthusiastic admirers were to be found in the Federal Republic . The Federal Republic was founded in 1961 .
 Ostpolitik helped defuse tensions and facilitate human and economic communications between the two halves of Germany . The apparent success had led virtually the entire political class to invest their hopes in its indefinite prolongation .
 West German public figures encouraged illusions among the nomenklatura of the GDR, they deluded themselves, they said . West German politicians were deluded by their own illusions, they added .
 Ostpolitik was having the effect of easing tensions to the east, they came to believe it, they say . Simply by repeating that Ostpolitika had the effect on easing tensions, the Russians came to think it .
 West Germans were preoccupied with ‘peace,’ ‘stability, and ‘order’ in order . Many West Germans ended up sharing the point of view of the Eastern politicians with whom they were doing business .
 In later years it would emerge that on more than one occasion national leaders of the SPD made confidential and decidedly compromising statements to highranking East Germans visiting the West . SPD leaders made confidential statements to top East German officials .
 In 1987 Bjorn Engholm praised the domestic policies of the GDR as ‘historic’ The following year Oskar Lafontaine promised to do everything in his power to make sure that West German support for East German dissidents remained muted .
 Many Christian Democrats have shared the same fervor as many Christian Democrats too . But they were shared with almost equal fervor by many Christians too .
 At the Moscow funeral of Yuri Andropov in February 1984 he met and spoke with Erich Honecker . At the burial of Chernenko the following year he spoke to Erich and Erich at the burial .
 Agreements were reached between the two sides over cultural exchange and the removal of mines on the interGerman border . Agreements also reached between Germany and Germany over cultural exchanges .
 In September 1987 Honecker became the first East German leader to visit the Federal Republic . He was the first president of the East German Federal Republic to visit .
 The East German regime might have survived indefinitely if it had been able to export dissidents to the West . The West would have been more interested in East Germany's more troublesome dissidents . The regime was able to use Moscow's backing to back its dissidents in exchange for support .
 In September 1988 Honecker publicly praised Gorbachev’s perestroika —only to make a point of studiously avoiding its implementation upon his return home . In September . 1988 .
 East German Communists were still rigging votes in a manner familiar from the 1950s . Despite unprecedented developments then unfolding in Moscow, Warsaw and Budapest, the Communist Party still rigged votes . The East German Communist Party was still rigging voters in a way familiar from 1950s.
 In May 1989 the official outcome of the GDR municipal elections was so egregiously fabricated that it aroused nationwide protests from priests, environmental groups and even critics within the ruling party . The official outcome was so egregious that it arouses nationwide protests .
 They no longer had to accept the status quo, risk arrest or else essay a hazardous escape to the West . They had to submit to arrest or risk arrest, or else risk arrest .
 Hungary removed the electrified fence along the country’s western frontier, although the border itself remained formally closed . On May 2nd 1989, in the course of relaxing the control of movement and expression within Hungary itself, the authorities in Budapest removed the .
 By July 1st 1989 some 25,000 of them had made their way to ‘vacation’ there . By that time, 25,00 had already been made to the island .
 Thousands more followed, many seeking temporary refuge in West German embassies in Prague and Budapest . Thousands of more followed .
 A few made their way across the still-closed Austro-Hungarian frontier without being stopped by border guards . Most stayed in Hungary, but most stayed in the country .
 Honecker had calculated, reasonably enough, that Gorbachev would not last and could safely be ignored . Asked on a Hungarian television news program on September 10th what his government’s response would be if some of these people started walking west, the Hungarian Foreign 2I said
 The East German authorities protested furiously . The Hungarian move implied a breach of the longstanding agreement between Communist governments not to allow their countries to be used as escape routes from fraternal neighbors .
 Budapest authorities insist they are bound by their signature to the Helsinki Final Act . But authorities in Budapest merely insisted that they were bound by the Helsinki Act . Authorities in Budapest insisted that the law was signed by the city's government .
 GDR authorities confronted a public-relations disaster as tens of thousands of citizens tried to get out through the new exit route . The GDR was confronted by a public relations disaster .
 East German refugees in Prague and Warsaw offered safe passage back through their own country and on to West Germany in a sealed train . GDR rulers offered them safe passage in the embassies in Prague, Warsaw and Warsaw safe passage .
 An estimated five thousand people tried to clamber aboard when the refugee train stopped briefly in Dresden . When the police beat them back a riot ensued, all under the eyes of the world’s media .
 A crowd of 10,000 demonstrated in Leipzig in frustration at the Honecker regime’s refusal to reform itself . It was the largest public gathering in East Germany since the ill-fated Berlin uprising of 1953 .
 Demonstrators in Leipzig and other cities began holding regular demonstrations and 'vigils' for change .
 The following week the numbers had grown again; the following week Honecker was now proposing to use force to put down any further show of opposition .
 On October 18th some of his colleagues, led by Egon Krenze, staged a coup and removed the old man from power . The coup took place after 18 years .
 Krenze’s first act was to fly to Moscow, endorse (and seek the endorsement of) Mikhail Gorbachev . He returned to Berlin to prepare a cautious East German perestroika . The East German government was cautious and cautious .
 At the most recent Leipzig demonstration, an estimated 300,000 people had come together to press for change . On November 4th half a million East Germans gathered in Berlin to demand immediate reforms .
 Czechoslovakia opened its border; in the next fortyeight hours 30,000 people left through it . Meanwhile, on that same day, Czechs opened its borders . Czechs also opened their borders to the world .
 On November 5th, the GDR government hesitantly proposed a mildly liberalized travel law, only to have it dismissed by critics as pitifully inadequate . Critics say the law is inadequate .
 The East German cabinet then dramatically resigned, followed by the Politburo . East Germany's cabinet then resigned . East German government then dramatically stepped down, following the resignation .
 The following evening, November 9th, anniversary of both Kaiser’s abdication and Kristallnacht, Krenze and his colleagues proposed yet another travel law to head off the stampede .
 New provisions authorized foreign travel without advance notice and permitted transit through border crossings into West Germany . Gunter Schabowski explained the new provisions in a news conference carried live on German television and radio .
 Before the broadcast was even finished people were in the streets of East Berlin and heading for the border . The broadcast was broadcast in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 As anyone can see, the Wall had been breached for good and there could be no return . As anyone could see, it was clear that there was no return to the Wall .
 Brandenburg Gate, straddling the East-West border, was reopened in 1989 . Over the Christmas holidays of 1989, 2. million East Germans visited the West .
 It seems likely that he was at least contemplating a German re-play of the Tiananmen Square massacre . He was ousted by his colleagues .
 In 1961 this desperate ploy had succeeded; in 1989, too, it worked after a fashion . Few East Germans remained permanently in West Berlin or emigrated to West Germany once they were reassured that if they returned they would not be imprisoned again .
 The price of that reassurance was the fall of more than just the regime . But the price of the fall was the end of the regime, not just just its regime .
 The old Communist leadership (including both Honecker and Krenze) was expelled from the party . Round table discussions were begun with representatives of Neues Forum (by general consent) and free elections were scheduled .
 East Germans, after all, had an option that was not available to other subject-peoples . There was no 'West Czechoslovakia' or ‘West Poland’—and they were not about to forego it .
 It is not clear in retrospect how to interpret the hopes of the crowds who brought down the GDR in the autumn of 1989 . By January 1990 the point had become not just to get out of Socialism but to get into West Germany .
 On November 28th Stefan Heym, Christa Wolf and other East German intellectuals issued an appeal ‘For Our Land’, to save socialism and the GDR and stand firm against what Heym described as the ‘glittering rubbish’ of the West .
 Erich Honecker’s fantasy of a return to neo-Stalinist obedience was unrealistic . As events were to show, this was at least as unrealistic as Erich's fantasy .
 Neues Forum condemned itself to political irrelevance, its leaders reduced to carping resentfully at the improvidence of the masses . Neueues Forum thus condemns itself to irreleviation, it says .
 Communist rule rested uneasily upon the silent memory of a stolen past . As in Hungary, so in Czechoslovakia, so did the Czechoslovak government .
 Hungarian leader Kadar had semisuccessfully distanced himself and his party from their Stalinist inheritance . But the leaders of Czechoslovakia had managed no such transition .
 The Warsaw Pact invasion of 1968 and the subsequent ‘normalization’ lived on in Gustav Husak, in power since 1969 . Husak has been in power in the Warsaw Pact since 1969. Husak is a former Warsaw Pact leader .
 Czechoslovak Communists were actually rather successful at maintaining total control to the very end . Czechoslovakia was ruled by the Communists until the end of the communist era .
 Neither the Catholic Church (always a minor player in Czech, if not Slovak affairs) nor the intellectual opposition gained significant support in society at large .
 Most of the country’s intelligentsia, from playwrights to historians to Sixties-era reform Communists, had been expunged not just from their jobs put from public visibility . The purges were brutally efficient management .
 Until 1989 some of Czechoslovakia’s most outspoken domestic critics of Communism were better known abroad than in their own country . Vaclav Havel himself, beginning with Vaclav himself, was better known outside than in his country .
 As we saw in the last chapter, Havel’s own civic organization, Charter 77, managed fewer than two thousand signatories in a population of 15 million . Charter 77 was founded by Havel in 1989, with fewer than 2,000 signatories .
 The East German dissidents misread the courage of the crowds in November 1989 as the basis for a renewed socialist republic . Of course, people were afraid to take the risk of openly criticizing the regime; 23
 The source of that misreading was their blind failure to understand what ‘socialism’ had come to mean—and their own investment in its survival . On the other hand, the source of their misreading is that they .
 Czechoslovak economy, like most other Eastern European economies, had been geared to supplying basic consumer goods since the early Seventies . In the Czech case something more was needed to be built up . Czechoslovakia's economy had been deliberately geared towards supplying basic goods .
 Communist Czechoslovakia consciously mimicked aspects of Western consumer society . Czechsoslovakia mimicked Western consumer culture, but in a mediocre key . Czech TV programming and popular leisure pursuits were a key part of the communist regime .
 Life in Czechoslovakia was dull, the environment was deteriorating and younger people especially chafed at the omnipresent and censorious authorities . Life in Prague was dull and the environment in the country was deteriorating .
 In return for avoiding confrontation with the regime and paying lip service to its turgid rhetoric, people were left to their own devices .
 Demonstrators in Prague and elsewhere who came out to mark the twentieth anniversary of the invasion in August 1988 were arrested . Unofficial efforts to hold an ‘East-West’ seminar in Prague were quashed .
 None of these tiny and easilycontained bubbles of civic initiative posed any threat to the police or the regime . None of the tiny bubble bubbles of citizen initiative posed a threat to police or regime .
 Protesters filled the streets of the Czech capital to commemorate, once again, the overthrow of the Prague Spring . But in August, just as Mazowiecki was finalizing plans for his government in Warsaw and shortly before the Hungarian borders were flung open, demonstrators filled streets .
 Czech police were decidedly more restrained in the Czech Republic . The Czech police are known to be more restrained than in the past .
 The Jakes regime had decided to trim a little, offering at least the appearance of acknowledging the change of mood in Moscow, while altering nothing of substance in its rule .
 The announcement on November 15th that exit visas would no longer be required for travel to the West was less a concession to demand than a strategic imitation of changes elsewhere . There was still no great public pressure upon the Communist leadership .
 On November 17th the Prague police approved a student march through the inner-city to commemorate yet another gloomy date, the 50th anniversary of the Nazi murder of a Czech student, Jan Opletal . The march will be held in the city's inner city .
 When students began to chant antiCommunist slogans the police attacked, scattering the crowd and beating up isolated victims . The police attacked when the students began chanting anti-communist slogans . The crowd was scattered and isolated victims were attacked .
 The police encouraged the rumour that—in a replay of Opletal’s own murder—one of the students had been killed . The police themselves then encouraged the rumours that . One of the police officers was killed .
 This was later acknowledged to be a false report; but meanwhile it had the predictable effect of provoking anger among the students themselves . The students themselves were angered by the report .
 In the course of the next forty eight hours tens of thousands of students were mobilized, the universities were occupied and huge crowds began to gather in the streets to protest . Thousands of students mobilized .
 Their successors had absolutely no popular credibility and were in any case immediately submerged by the speed of events . But their successors had . No popular credibility, they said .
 Vaclav Havel had been consigned to virtual house arrest in rural northern Bohemia . Havel returned to a capital city in turmoil, where the Communists were rapidly losing power .
 Havel and his friends from Charter 77 formed Obcanske Forum, an informal and fluid network that metamorphosed within days from a debating society to a civic initiative and then a shadow government .
 Civic Forum was driven partly by longstanding goals of some of its best-known participants, but mostly by the course of events in the streets outside . The discussion in Civic Forum is driven by the ongoing events outside the city .
 The Forum demanded the resignation of the men responsible for the invasion of ’68 and its aftermath . The first thing the Forum did was to demand the resignations .
 That same night Havel was granted an unprecedented interview on Czech television . Havel received unprecedented interview with Czech television that same night .
 The following day he addressed a crowd of 250,000 in Wenceslas Square, sharing a platform with the Communist Prime Minister Ladislav Adamec and Alexander Dubcek .
 By now it had become clear to the emerging leadership of Civic Forum that they were, despite themselves, running a revolution . The Civic Forum is now in the midst of a political revolution .
 These contained a brief summary of the general objectives of the Forum . These are an instructive guide to the mood and priorities of the men and women of 1989 .
 State of law.: Free elections.: Social justice.: A clean environment.: Clean environment.: An educated people.: Prosperity: Prosperity.: Return to Europe . A state of law: Free elections . Free elections: Social justice. Social justice: Clean environment . Prosperity. Clean environment:
 The mixture of boilerplate political demands, cultural and environmental ideals, and the invocation of Europe is characteristically Czech . It owed much to various Charter 77 pronouncements over the previous decade .
 Civic Forum and Public Against Violence had been legalized and were negotiating with the government . Civic Forum was legalized one week later and negotiated with government . One week later Civic Forum had legalized and had been negotiating with government.
 Adamec government proposed a new governing coalition as a compromise but Civic Forum rejected it out of hand . Civic Forum is now in permanent occupation of the streets .
 The Husak group of Czech and Slovak Communists, including Prime Minister Adamec, resigned . Discredited and disqualified by their own paymasters, the remaining members of the Husak resigned .
 Jir i Dienstbier of Charter 77 was to be foreign minister . Jan £arnogursky of PAV was Deputy Prime Minister . Vladimir Kusy of Civic Forum was information minister . Vaclav Klaus of Finance was to direct the Ministry of Finance .
 As soon as he began to make public speeches it became embarrassingly clear that poor Dubdek was an anachronism . But soon after he began making public speeches, it became embarrassingly clear that he was an 'anachronistic'
 His vocabulary, style, even his gestures were those of the reform Communists of the Sixties . His style, his style, and his gestures, was those of reform Communists, he says .
 He had learned nothing, it seemed, from his bitter experiences, but spoke still of resurrecting a kinder, gentler, Czechoslovak path to Socialism . He had never learned nothing from bitter experiences . But he spoke still, he seemed, to resurrecting an old path to
 To tens of thousands of young people in the streets of Prague, or Brno, he was at first a historical curiosity; soon he became an irritating irrelevance . To the tens of young . people in . Prague, Brno and Bratislava he was . at first
 By way of compromise Dubcek was elected chairman of the Federal Assembly . Dubceks was elected by way of a compromise to become chairman .
 Havel was elected President of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic on December 28th 1989 . He accepted the post in order to facilitate the country’s exit from Communism .
 On New Year’s Day 1990 the new President amnestied 16,000 political prisoners . The following day the political police itself was disbanded .
 Czechoslovakia’s remarkably expeditious and peaceful exit from Communism was made possible by a confluence of circumstances . The so-called ‘velvet revolution’ was made available by a number of factors .
 No one individual of comparable public standing emerged in any other Communist country . But the role of Havel was equally crucial . Havel caught and channeled the public mood, moving his colleagues forward while keeping expectations of crowds .
 A paunchy middle-aged man in an undershirt stares with distaste into his shaving mirror at a blowsy woman in the doorway . A dirty nightgown draped over her shoulders, her hair in rollers, a cigarette dangling from her lips, is a cigarette .
 Havel was now widely regarded by many as something akin to a national saviour . Like Tomas Masaryk, with whom he came increasingly to be compared, Havel came to be regarded as a national hero .
 It was not in spite of his theatrical preoccupations that his fellow-citizens turned to Havel, it was because of them . It was because they turned to him because they were interested in politics, he says .
 Dissident writers like Ludvik Vacullk questioned the likelihood of great changes in the immediate future . The enduring presence of this sizeable core of Communist supporters led to the question of great change in the future, Vacullks writes .
 The ensuing velvet revolution appeared almost too good to be true in 1989 . The people themselves seized the initiative in November 1989 .
 Czechoslovak society had so little self confidence that even the initiative to destroy Communism must have come from the Communists themselves . Hence the talk of police plots and manufactured crises, as though Czechoslovakia had little confidence .
 Czech security police may have gone too far on the night of November 17th . The evidence suggests that the police went too far in the Czech Republic . The Czech Republic has been accused of going too far .
 In 1989 the people of Czechoslovakia really did take charge of their destiny . In 1989, the Czech Republic took charge of its own destiny . The Czech Republic was ruled by the West in 1989 .
 Communism had degenerated from national Leninism to a sort of neo-Stalinist satrapy . Byzantine levels of nepotism and inefficiency were propped in place by a tentacular secret police .
 Ceau§escu’s regime got by with relatively little overt brutality; but the rare hints of public protest were violently and effectively suppressed .
 Romania abstained from the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia . Ceau§escu bought himself freedom of maneuver and even foreign acclaim . By taking his distance from Moscow, he bought himself foreign acclaim and freedom .
 The Romanian leader was happy to criticize the Russians . Americans and others kept quiet about his domestic crimes .
 Romanians paid a terrible price for Ceau§escu’s privileged status . Romanians, however, paid a huge price for his privileged status, says historian .
 Doctors in districts with a declining birth rate had their salaries cut . Doctors had to cut their salaries to cope with the drop in birth rates .
 Over the ensuing twenty-three years the 1966 law resulted in the death of at least ten thousand women . The 1966 law led to the deaths of more than 10,000 women in 23 years .
 At least until the rise of Mikhail Gorbachev, after which the West had no further use for an anti-Soviet maverick . The real infant mortality rate was so high that it was actually so high it was a huge death toll .
 By the time Ceau§escu was overthrown the death rate of new-born babies was twenty-five per thousand and there were upward of 100,000 institutionalized children . The death rate was 25 per thousand .
 The setting for this national tragedy was the economy that was deliberately turned backward, from subsistence into destitution . The setting was the nation's economy that turned backward from subsistence to destitution, the author says .
 In the early Eighties, Ceau§escu decided to pay down Romania’s huge foreign debts . In the 1980s, he paid down Romania's huge foreign debt to boost its international standing .
 The agencies of international capitalism, starting with the International Monetary Fund, were delighted and could not praise the Romanian dictator enough . The IMF, the European Union and the European Economic Development Agency are among the agencies that praised the dictator .
 To pay off his Western creditors, Ceau§escu applied unrelenting pressure upon domestic consumption . Ceau��řu applied pressure on domestic consumption to pay off Western creditors .
 The Romanian Conducator set about exporting every available domestically-produced commodity . In contrast to Communist rulers elsewhere, unrestrainedly borrowing abroad .
 Romanians forced to use 40-watt bulbs at home so that energy could be exported to Italy and Germany . Romanians were forced to stay at home to save energy in Romania .
 Meat, sugar, flour, butter, eggs, and much more were strictly rationed . Meat and sugar were rationed out of food rationed during WWII .
 Horse-drawn carts became the main means of transport . The harvest was brought in by scythe and sickle . Horse drawn carts were used to transport the harvest .
 Romania did indeed pay off its international creditors, albeit at the cost of reducing its population to penury . Romania paid off its creditors, but it did not pay off all of its population .
 Ceau§escu’s rule, in his last years, was more than just crazy economics . But there was more to Ceau�şescu's rule, including crazy economics, than just economics .
 The regime inaugurated a proposed ‘systematization’ of the Romanian countryside . The better to control the country’s rural population, the regime will increase pressure on peasants to produce food for export .
 Had Ceauiescu been granted the time to carry through this project it would utterly have destroyed what little remained of the country’s social fabric .
 The rural ‘systemization’ project was driven forward by the Romanian dictator’s mounting megalomania .
 Under Ceau§escu the Leninist impulse to control, centralize and plan every detail of daily life graduated into an obsession with homogeneity and grandeur surpassing even the ambitions of Stalin himself .
 This project for the ‘renovation’ of Bucharest was to be aborted by the coup of December 1989 . Ceau§escu’s ambition to be indelibly etched into the fabric of the contemporary city .
 Historic Bucharest district the size of Venice was completely flattened . A historic district of central Bucharest was flattened by the earthquake .
 Behind gleaming white frontages of the boulevard were run up the familiar dirty, grim, pre-cast concrete blocks . Behind the gleaming . frontages, the . streets of the . boulevard was run up by the . familiar dirty and grim concrete blocks. Behind the .
 The facade itself was aggressively, humiliatingly, unrelentingly uniform, a visual encapsulation of totalitarian rule . But the facade itself is aggressively and humiliatingly uniform, it was aggressively .
 The House of the People was designed by a twenty-year-old architect as Ceau§escu’s personal palace . It was indescribably and uniquely ugly even by the standards of its genre .
 Ceau§escu’s palace was a monstrous lapidary metaphor for unconstrained tyranny . Fronted by a vast hemicycle space that can hold half a million people, its reception area is the size of a football pitch .
 Romanian Communism in its last years sat uneasily athwart the intersection of brutality and parody . The film is based on the life of Romanian Communism .
 The Architect; The Creed-shaper; The Wise Helmsman; The Tallest Mast; The Nimbus of Victory; The Visionary; The Titan; The Son of the Sun; A Danube of Thought; and The Genius of the Carpathians .
 What Ceau§escu’s sycophantic colleagues really thought of all this they were not saying . Ceau��řu's sycrophantic colleagues weren’t saying .
 So long as he had the backing of the secret police, the Securitate, Ceau§escu appeared untouchable . But so long as there were no enemies, he appeared to have the backing to him .
 The Securitate tried to remove a popular Hungarian Protestant pastor, Lazslo Tokes, in December 1989, in the western city of Timisoara . The regime's fall precipitated the fall of the communist regime in 1989 .
 The Hungarian minority, a special object of prejudice and repression under Ceau§escu’s rule, had been encouraged by developments just across the border in Hungary . They were all the more resentful at the continuing abuses at home .
 The following day, as the vigil turned unexpectedly into a demonstration against the regime, the police and the army were brought out to shoot into the crowd . The police and army were also brought out .
 Exaggerated reports of the ‘massacre’ were carried on Voice of America and Radio Free Europe and spread around the country . The reports were carried out by the American broadcaster and radio stations .
 To quell the unprecedented protests, Ceau§escu returned from an official visit to Iran . The protests had now spread from Timisoara to Bucharest itself . The Romanian Prime Minister returned from a trip to Iran to quell protests .
 At first the army had appeared to back the dictator, occupying the streets of the capital and firing on demonstrators who tried to seize the national television studios . At first, the army appeared to be backing the dictator's government .
 From December 22nd the soldiers, now directed by a ‘National Salvation Front, switched sides . They found themselves pitted against heavily armed Securitate troops .
 Found guilty of ‘crimes against the state’ they were hastily executed on Christmas Day, 1989 . They were found guilty of 'crimes against the state’ and executed on the day of Christmas .
 Iliescu, like his colleagues in the Front, was a former Communist who had broken with Ceau§escu some years before . He could claim some slight credibility as a ‘reformer’ if only by virtue of his student acquaintance with the young Mikhail Gorbachev
 Iliescu’s real qualification to lead a post-Ceauescu Romania was his ability to control the armed forces, especially the Securitate, whose last hold-outs abandoned their struggle on December 27th .
 The new President did very little to dismantle the institutions of the old regime . Indeed, beyond authorizing on January 3rd 1990 the re-establishment of political parties, the new President .
 The apparatus that had ruled under Ceau§escu remained remarkably intact, shedding only the family itself and their more incrimiously incriminated associates . As later events would show, the apparatus was remarkably intact . The family was the only one of the more incriminating associates .
 Rumours of thousands killed during the protests and battles of December proved exaggerated . It became clear that for all the courage and enthusiasm of the huge crowds in Timisoara, Bucharest and other cities the real struggle had been between the ‘realists’ around Iliescu and
 The victory of the former ensured for Romania a smooth—suspiciously smooth— exit out of Communism . Romania's exit from Communism was suspiciously smooth .
 Iliescu did nothing to prevent riots in Tirgu Mures on March 19th, where eight people were killed and some three hundred wounded in orchestrated attacks on the local Hungarian minority . Eight people died and three hundred were wounded .
 In 1984 it was officially announced that the Turks of Bulgaria were not ‘Turks’ at all but forcibly-converted Bulgarians who would now be restored to their true identity . In 1984, it was announced that Turks of the Bulgarians were not 'Turks' at
 Muslim rites were restricted and criminalized; the use of the Turkish language in broadcasting, publications and education was proscribed . In a particularly offensive move, all Bulgarian citizens with Turkish names were instructed henceforth to assume properly ‘Bulgarian’ ones .
 There was considerable Turkish resistance—which aroused some opposition among Bulgarian intellectuals . There was also considerable opposition among Turkish intellectuals .
 Bulgaria was condemned at the UN and in the European Court of Justice . The international community protested loudly . Bulgaria's move was condemned by the international community and condemned by many .
 An estimated 300,000 ethnic Turks fled to Turkey in the summer of 1989 . The exodus was a public relations disaster for the regime, and an economic one too .
 Police over-reacted on October 26th to a small gathering of environmentalists in a Sofia park . Party reformers led by foreign minister Petar Mladenov decided to act after police beat activists for circulating a petition .
 In Bulgaria the political ‘opposition’ had emerged largely after the fact . As in Romania there were suggestions that it was fabricated for their own purposes by dissident Communist factions .
 By 1991, a mainly Turkish party, the Movement for Rights and Freedom, had enough electoral backing to hold the balance of seats in the country’s national Assembly .
 We should not indulge the sirens of retrospective determinism, however seductive, however . We should be wary of the 'sirens of retro-determinism', however .
 Few predicted the timing and the manner of its going . Even if Communism was doomed by its inherent absurdities, few predicted its demise .
 To be sure, the ease with which the illusion of Communist power was punctured revealed that these regimes were even weaker than anyone supposed, and this casts their earlier history in a new light . This casts them in new light.
 Once Communist leaders started falling in one place their legitimacy elsewhere was fatally impaired . "Once Communist leaders start falling they will be fatally impaired," he said .
 The credibility of Communism rested in part upon its claim to embody necessity, to be the logical product of historical progress, a fact of political life, an inevitable presence on the modern landscape . Communism's credibility was built on its claim that it was necessary to be a product of history .
 We have already seen that the example of others clearly weighed in the balance . We are already seeing that the case is being taken seriously seriously .
 The striking aspect of Communism’s collapse in Europe was not contagion per se. all revolutions spread in this way, corroding the legitimacy of established authorities by cumulative example . Nevertheless, the striking part of the collapse was that it did not spread contagion, but rather that it
 As late as October 1989 Imre Pozsgay in Hungary, or Egon Krenze in East Germany, fondly supposed that they could control and manage their version of perestroika .
 Most of their opponents tended to agree and continued to look for some interim compromise . Most of the opponents of the bill were looking for a compromise . The bill was passed by a narrow majority of the House of Representatives on Tuesday .
 Adam Michnik had written that a hybrid society is conceivable, one where totalitarian organization of the state will co-exist with democratic institutions of society’
 Hungarians, Czechs and Germans in particular were able to see their own revolution on the television news each evening . Hungarians and Czechs saw the revolution on their own television news .
 Communism’s crucial asset, its control and monopoly of information, was lost . As a consequence, Communism's control and control of information was lost, he says . Communism's crucial asset was lost.
 The fear of being alone, the impossibility of knowing whether your own feelings were shared by others, was dissipated for ever . It was the first time a person could see their own feelings shared by other people .
 Even in Romania the take-over of the national television studios was the determining moment in the uprising . Even in the country, the uprising was the deciding moment .
 The gruesome fate of the Ceau§escus was filmed for broadcast to a national audience . Not for nothing was the gruesome fate was filmed .
 Radio stations and post offices were the first objectives of revolutionary crowds, from Dublin to Barcelona . This was not a new pattern, of course— throughout the twentieth century radio stations were first objectives .
 The second marked characteristic of the revolutions of 1989 was their pacific quality . The revolutions were pacific, the revolution was pacific .
 Romania was the exception, of course, but given the nature of Ceau§escu’s regime this was to be expected . Romania is the exception .
 The real surprise was that even in Timisoara and Bucharest, the scale of bloodshed was far less than everyone feared . The violence was less than the feared it was feared, says Romania's president .
 With the whole population watching their every move, the Communist regimes were stymied . With the population watching them, the regimes were able to get around the world, they could not .
 To be observed in this way was itself a loss of authority and severely restricted their range of options . To be seen in such a way, it would have severely restricted the options of the police, it is claimed .
 China shot down hundreds of peaceful demonstrators in Tiananmen Square on June 4th of that same year . Hundreds of peaceful protesters were shot down by Communist authorities .
 Nicolae Ceau§escu would not have hesitated to em3, such considerations did not always apply in remote rural communities and small provincial towns . Police continued to operate unhindered by television cameras or public disapproval .
 We have seen that Erich Honecker at least contemplated something similar. And we have also seen that he contemplated a similar thing. And it's not the first time he has contemplated such a thing .
 At some crucial moment all dying authoritarian regimes vacillate between repression and compromise . "At some crucial point all dying regimes vacilliare between repression, compromise," says Julian Zelizer .
 In the case of the Communists, confidence in their own capacity to rule was evaporating so rapidly that the chances of clinging to power by force alone began to seem slim . The benefits of doing so by no means clear .
 In the calculus of self-interest the balance of advantage to most Communist bureaucrats and party apparatchiks was rapidly swinging the other way . "Better to swim with the current than be washed away in a tidal wave of change," says Maoist leader .
 That calculation might have looked different if the crowds were angry or their leaders were determined to wreak revenge upon the old order . But it might have been different had the crowds been angry .
 The men and women of 1989 consciously eschewed violence, but for many reasons . Tiananmen unfolded on television the very day of the Polish elections .
 Communist regimes taught their own subjects the impropriety and imprudence of resorting to force . With decades of violence to their discredit, and all the guns and bullets on their side, the Communist regimes had very effectively taught them to use force, the author says .
 Distaste for violence was all that many of the revolutionaries of 1989 had in common . The revolution was inspired by a desire for freedom of expression .
 They were an unusually motley group, even by the standards of most previous insurrections . "They were an unusual group of people," says historian John Sutter .
 The balance varied from place to place but typically ‘the people’ included a mix of reform Communists, social democrats, free-market economists, Catholic activists, trade unionists, pacifists, and some unreconstructed Trotskyists .
 At least one significant fault line could already be detected, distinguishing Mazowiecki from Walesa, Walesa or Hungary’s left-leaning Free Democrats from old-line nationalists in the Democratic Forum . Mazowiewiecki is Poland's first Polish prime minister .
 Fidesz in Hungary was originally designated as a political party exclusively for people under 30 . In the image of its 26-year-old leader Viktor Orban, Orban was 26 . Orban is the party's youngest ever leader .
 The new generation was less concerned with engaging its rulers in debate, or offering radical alternatives to their rule, than in simply getting out of under it . New generation is less interested in engaging in debate with their rulers than engaging in radical alternatives .
 This contributed to the carnival-like aspect of 1989 remarked upon by some observers in Poland and Czechoslovakia . It also contributed to an unconcern with violent retribution . The lack of violence in 1989 was also noted in some observers .
 This can be seen best in the language in which the objectives of 1989 were commonly expressed . This is best shown by the language of 1989's objectives . The objectives of the 1989 campaign were to be achieved in a democracy .
 Long before Communism, the continent’s eastern half had been the Europe that sought recognition and acknowledgement . Western Europe was the Europe ‘knew’ itself and from whom the acknowledgement was so longingly sought .
 With the coming of the Soviet bloc, the sense that their part of Europe was severed from its roots had become a leitmotif of intellectual dissent and opposition across the region . The feeling that their place in Europe had been severed from it was a key point of dissent .
 Talk of ‘Europe’ became less abstract and therefore, among other things, more interesting to young people . Talk of Europe’s future was less abstract, and therefore more interesting, than abstract .
 No longer just a lament for the lost culture of old Prague or Budapest, it now represents a concrete and attainable set of political goals . It is now a set of goals for the future of Hungary .
 The old Communist cadres could convincingly point to the depredations of an abstraction called ‘capitalism’ But they had nothing to offer in place of Europe’ — because it represented not an ideological alternative but simply the political norm . The Communist Party had nothing in place
 'Europe' stood—squarely and simply—for normalcy and the modern way of life . Sometimes the thought was inflected as ‘the market economy’ or ‘civil society’; but in either case ‘Europe’ stood for normalcy .
 Communism was now no longer the future, its insistent trump card for six decades, but the past . Communism no longer no longer a trump card, it's the past, it was now the future . Communism is now the past. Communism is no longer an insistent, insistent
 Some of them were less interested in freedom and individual rights than others . And some were perhaps less interested than others, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 It may be appropriate here to offer an observation concerning the place of the United States in this story .
 Eastern Europeans, especially East Berliners, were aware of the US’s role in containing the Soviet Union . Eastern Europeans knew of the role of the U.S. in containing Russia .
 Solidarity was financed largely from the United States . It was the U.S. that gave the most insistent official encouragement to protesters .
 American encouragement or support that precipitated or facilitated the liberation of the U.S. is not that it was American; much less that it is American . American .
 The United States played a remarkably small part in the dramas of 1989, at least until after the fact . The U.S. played a surprisingly small part .
 The 'free market' was only occasionally posited as an object of admiration or emulation by the crowds or their spokesmen . And the American social model itself—the ‘free market’—was only occasionally . posited . by the . crowds, or their . spokesmen
 For most people who had lived under Communism, liberation by no means implied a yearning for untrammeled economic competition, much less the loss of free social services, guaranteed employment, cheap rents or any of Communism’s other attendant benefits .
 'Europe' held out the prospect of affluence and security, liberty and protection . It was, after all, one of the attractions of ‘Europe’, as imagined from the East, that it held out .
 In the marketplace of alternative models, the American way of life was still a minority taste . America, for all its global clout, was a long way away from the global marketplace .
 The satellite states of eastern Europe were all colonies of the Communist empire based in Moscow . They were colonies of Soviet-controlled states based in the Soviet Union .
 There is only so much about the changes of 1989 that can be attributed to indigenous social or political forces . The changes were largely due to underground Catholic organizations in Slovakia, rock-music groups in Poland or free-thinking intellectuals everywhere .
 The Soviet leader affirmed each socialist state’s right to follow its own trajectory without external interference . At a conference of eastern bloc leaders in Bucharest on July 7th 1989, he affirmed each country's right .
 President Bush said force would not be used to keep Eastern Europe’s Communist regimes in power . Five months later, in a stateroom on the SS Maxim Gorky off Malta, he assured President Bush that force wouldn't be used in Eastern Europe .
 Once an imperial metropole had so publicly acknowledged that it would not, could not hang on to its colonial periphery, its colonies were lost . With them, with them the empire’s indigenous collaborators, the empire was lost .
 All that remained to be determined was the manner and direction in which they fell . "They fell. They fell, and that they fell. All that remains to be decided is the direction and direction they fell," the author says .
 Kadar died July 7th 1989, the day after his death, by which date it was already clear that their cause was lost . Their colleague Rezso Nyers also spoke with him in Bucharest, Romania, on July 7 .
 In 1849 Russian intervention had sealed the fate of the Hungarian and other revolutions of that year . In 1989 Russian abstention helped assure their success in Hungary .
 As this last example suggests, Gorbachev was letting Communism fall in east632 THE END OF THE OLD ORDER ern Europe in order to save it in Russia itself . Stalin built the satellite regimes not for their own sake but as a security for his western frontier .
 The lessons of Eastern Europe would be used against the region’s liberator on his home territory . Tactically Gorbachev miscalculated badly . Within two years the lessons of eastern Europe would have been used against Russia .
 No other territorial empire in recorded history ever abandoned its dominions so rapidly, with such good grace and so little bloodshed . No other history record shows how little bloodshed was caused by the British Empire .
 Gorbachev did not take direct credit for what happened in 1989 . He did not plan it and only hazily grasped its long-term import . He didn't plan it, but only grasped it long-lasting import .
 Eastern Europe underwent a second and even more striking transformation . Milan Kundera was born in Prague, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Czech Republic, Poland and Czech Republic . He was the architect of the Prague Spring .
 Four established states disappeared from the map of the continent in the 1990s . 14 countries were born—or resuscitated in the same period .
 The six westernmost republics of the Soviet Union became independent states, together with Russia itself . Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Lithuania and Belarus, Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova were among the countries to become independent .
 Czechoslovakia became two separate countries—Slovakia and the Czech Republic . The Czech Republic was formed from Slovakia in 1964 .
 Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serbia-Montenegro and Montenegro are all part of the group . Croatia, Slovenia and Croatia are part of Croatia, Croatia and Slovenia . Serbia-Macedonia is part of a group of six countries in the group
 This making and breaking of nations was comparable in scale to the impact of the Versailles treaties that followed World War One . The making of nations is comparable to that of the impact that followed WWI . This was more dramatic than the Versasilles treaty that followed .
 The emergence of nation-states at Versailles was the culmination of a long drawn-out process with its roots in the mid-nineteenth century or before . It came as no surprise. The emergence came as a result of a process that began in the early 19th century .
 The prospect of something similar occurring in the late twentieth century was anticipated by almost no-one . But the prospect of such a thing happening in the next century was not anticipated .
 Three states that were to disappear in the course of the 1990s were themselves of post-1918 vintage . Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and the USSR were among those to disappear from the Soviet Union in 1990s .
 The territorial fission of the Nineties accompanied the extinction of the last of Europe’s four continental empires—that of Russia . Russia was one of Europe's last continental empires .
 The logic of imperial break-up would not in itself have triggered the institutional re-arrangement of Eastern Europe . But the logic would not have led to a re-arrival of the continent's institutions, he says .
 As so often in the past, the fate of the region was determined by events in Germany . The fate of this region is determined by the outcome of the war in Germany, says CNN.com .
 Credit for German re-unification must go in the first instance to Helmut Kohl, the former president of the West German state .
 The West German Chancellor was initially as hesitant as everyone else . On November 28th 1989 he presented to the Bundestag a five-year program of German unity .
 Kohl calculated that a unified Germany was now not merely possible but perhaps urgent . But after listening to the East German crowds, Kohl said it was now possible and urgent .
 2,000 people a day a day were forced to leave West Germany east . The only way to staunch the flow west (2,000 a day) was to bring the flow east .
 West German leader set about abolishing it in order to keep East Germans from leaving their country . East Germans were forced to leave their country to escape from the West .
 As in the 19th century, German unification was in the first instance to be achieved by a currency union . But political union inevitably followed, and the union was achieved by political union .
 Talk of a ‘confederation’ was precipitately dropped and in the hastily called East German elections of March 1990 Christian Democrat candidates ran on a unification ticket . Hans Modrow’s GDR cabinet had eagerly pursued a 'confederation'
 First act of the new majority in the GDR Volkskammer was to commit their country to German unity . CDU-SPD-Liberal coalition led by Lothar de Maiziere committed Germany to unity . The new majority was represented by CDU's SPD-
 On May 18th 1990 a ‘monetary, economic and social union’ was signed between the two Germanies . On July 1st its crucial clause—the extension of the Deutschmark to East Germany—came into force .
 East Germans could now exchange their virtually useless East German marks for DM 40,000 at 1:1 . East Germans now able to exchange their nearly useless marks at a hugely advantageous rate of 1.1 . The rate is up to the equivalent of DM40,000 - up to DM
 SPD did much better in the elections of 1990, winning 35 percent of the vote in Berlin . However in Berlin the SPD did not win the majority of Berlin's vote .
 On August 23rd, by pre-agreement with Bonn, the Volkskammer voted to accede to the Federal Republic . The Federal Republic is now officially a member of the German Republic .
 A week later a Treaty of Unification was signed, by which the GDR was absorbed into the FRG . GDR's voters approved by its voters in the March elections and permitted under Article 23 of the 1949 Basic Law . The FRG was approved by voters in its March elections
 The division of Germany had been the work of the victors of World War Two . Germany's reunification would never have come about without their encouragement or consent .
 East Germany was a Soviet satellite state, with 360,000 Soviet troops still stationed there in 1989 . East Germany is still a member of the West German Communist Party .
 West Germany, for all its independence, was not free to act autonomously on this matter . West Germany was not able to act independently of its own, says historian .
 Until a final peace settlement was reached it remained a city whose fate formally depended upon the original occupying powers . As for Berlin, until a . final peace settled was reached, Berlin's fate depended upon . France, Britain, the United States and the Soviet Union were occupying Berlin .
 Neither the British nor the French were in any particular hurry to see Germany reunite . Neither the French nor the British were in a particular hurry .
 West Europeans assumed a unified Germany would come at the end of a long process of change in Eastern Europe, not right at the outset . West Europeans even thought about a unification of Germany they assumed it would come after a long period of change .
 It seemed to be that although we had not discovered the means, at least we both had the will to check the German juggernaut . It seemed that although . we had . not discovered a means, though . to . find the means of stopping the juggernaut, I said .
 The British had nothing to offer by way of an alternative to the course of events then unfolding in Germany and they duly acquiesced . But the British, for all their anxieties, had no alternative to an alternative .
 More than anyone else, the French were disturbed by the collapse of the stable and familiar arrangements in Germany and the Communist bloc as a whole . The French were truly disturbed by Germany's collapse in the 1960s and 1970s .
 He declined to attend a ceremony to mark the re-opening of the Brandenburg Gate . He tried to convince Soviet leaders that France and Russia had a common interest in blocking German ambitions .
 French were banking on Gorbachev to veto German unity . Mitterrand explained to his advisers on November 28th 1989, 'T don’t have to do anything to stop it, the Soviets will do it'
 The French President adopted a different tack after Kohl’s decisive victory in the East German elections . But once it became clear that this was not so, he adopted a . different tack .
 There must be no question of an enhanced Germany taking an independent path, much less reverting to its old middle-European priorities . Germany must be independent, even if it is in the middle of Europe, it is said .
 The Germans agreed readily enough to all the French conditions, though the maladroit character of France’s diplomatic maneuvers chilled relations for a while . Bonn agreed after 1955 to confine ‘Europe’ to the original six countries in order to assuage French anxiety over
 Kohl even concurred in the coming months over a range of minor concessions designed to reward Paris for its forbearance . Kohl also concurred over a number of other concessions to Paris .
 Unification was well worth some appeasement of Germany’s nervous European neighbours . Unification of Germany's nervous neighbours is well worth a deal with the EU . Germany is now one of the world's most populous countries .
 Kohl was born in Ludwigshafen and like his fellow Rhinelander Adenauer instinctively disposed to look west . He was not unduly troubled at the idea of tying Germany ever more closely to the European Community . In any case Kohl, like Adenauer, wasn't und
 Bush administration thought unification could only come at the end of series of unpredictable changes unfolding in the USSR and Eastern Europe, and then only with Soviet consent . Like everyone else, the administration of President George Bush initially supposed along with its allies that German unification would only come after the series of unexpected
 Mitterrand’s successors are now having to grapple with the budgetary constraints and social consequences of that same treaty . Washington was quicker to catch the prevailing mood, especially after a February 1990 poll 5 .
 Attali spent millions refurbishing a prestigious building for himself, but very little on the bank’s putative beneficiaries . Attali was ignominiously removed from the bank after spending millions on himself .
 "The experience did no discernible damage to his considerable self-esteem," he says .
 The U.S. committed itself wholeheartedly to support for Kohl’s objectives, to ensure that Germans were never required to choose between unity and the Western alliance . The United States committed itself to support Kohl's objectives .
 The French and British agreed to sit down with the Soviet Union and representatives of the two Germanies to thrash out the terms of the emergence of a new Germany . Under pressure from Washington, Washington agreed to the sit down .
 '4+2' talks were conducted by foreign ministers from February to September 1990 . Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany was signed in Moscow on September 12th .
 With this treaty, the four-power status of Berlin was brought to an end, expiring at midnight on October 2nd 1990 . The treaty formally recognized the borders of a future Germany as those of the two present German states .
 Moscow had long since abandoned Stalin’s post-war goal of extricating Bonn from the Western alliance . Moscow, like London, Paris and Washington, had become comfortable with a divided Germany and had long ago abandoned post-WWII goal .
 Unlike the French and the British, the Soviet leadership was still in a position to block the process of unification, at least in principle . Unlike the British and the French, unlike the Soviet leaders, they could block the idea of unification .
 No-one, in East or West, had a plan telling them what to do if the GDR disintegrated . And there were no blueprints for Germap unification . No blueprints were given to the West or East .
 The Soviet leader, unlike western counterparts, had no good options . But the Soviet leader was forced to choose his own fate .
 He could not realistically hope to prevent German unity except by reversing his benign public announcements of recent years and seriously damaging his own credibility . The German leader's credibility is seriously damaged by his own actions .
 Gorbachev was helpless to intervene when promise was later broken . He was unable to intervene after promise was broken by the Soviets .
 "What he was able to do was extract, quite literally, a price for his concessions," he said . What he said was "a price for concessions"
 Gorbachev tried at first to hold the unification negotiations hostage for a ransom of $20 billion . He eventually settled for approximately $8 billion, together with some $2 billion more in interest-free credits .
 Helmut Kohl also agreed to alleviate Soviet fears of German irredentism by pledging to accept as permanent his country’s eastern boundaries, a commitment enshrined the following year in a Treaty with Poland .
 The Soviet Union relinquished its diminutive, resentful East German sidekick with the requisite protestation but few real regrets . Playing Sidney Greenstreet to Washington’s Bogart, the Soviet Union made the best of a bad hand .
 It made more sense to build a strategic relationship with a friendly and appreciative new Germany than to make an enemy of it . From the Soviet perspective a united Germany, firmly grasped— and contained—in the Western embrace, was not such a bad outcome . A united Germany would be not
 East Germans who had known no other homeland had mixed feelings when 'their' Germany was swept away from under them . West German intellectuals feared for the soul of a reunited ‘greater’ Germany 8 .
 They might not have believed its more egregiously absurd self-descriptions, but they could not be entirely deaf to official propaganda . They may not have thought its more egregiously absurd .
 Children in eastern German secondary schools continued to believe East German troops had fought alongside the Red Army to liberate their country from Hitler .
 This inculcated misperception was part of the GDR’s core identity and did nothing to ease its disoriented former citizens’ transition ‘back’ into Germany, particularly as ‘their’ Germany was systematically excised from the official record .
 The names of towns, streets, buildings and counties were changed, often reverting to pre-1933 usage . The names were changed in the aftermath of the Great Depression .
 This was not the recovery of history, however, but rather its erasure . It was as though the GDR had never been. This is not a recovery, but the erasure of history . The GDR was never recovered .
 Erich Mielke was prosecuted and sentenced for murder not for crimes he authorized as head of the Stasi but for political assassination committed in the 1930s . The evidence provided by Nazi interrogation records was provided by the Nazi interrogation files .
 It was not just its institutions that were falling apart, much of its material infrastructure was decrepit . Much of the country's material infrastructure is decrepit, including its infrastructure, is falling apart .
 Two dwellings in five were built before 1914 (in West Germany in 1989 the figure was less than one in five) A quarter of all houses lacked a bath, one third had only an outdoor toilet, and more than 60 percent lacked any form of central heating .
 Bonn's response was to throw very large sums of money at the problem . Bonn’s response to the problem is to throw huge sums at it . As in its dealings with Moscow, Bonn.
 Total transfers from Western into Eastern Germany amounted to the equivalent of 1,200 billion euros . By the end of 2003 the cost of absorbing the former GDR had reached 1. trillion euros .
 East Germans’ faith not so much in the free market as in the unplumbed resources of the West German exchequer . In the short run this worked, it confirmed East Germans' faith in West Germany’s free market .
 Many ‘Ossies’ were put off by the patronizing triumphalism of their Western cousins . The former Communists would trade with some success in future elections . But after the first flush of reunion, many 'Ossy' were actually put off .
 To avoid upsetting West German voters, Kohl chose not to raise taxes . Kohl: "To avoid upsetting voters, I chose to avoid upsetting them"
 The Federal Republic had hitherto run substantial current account surpluses . Instead, it had no choice but to go into deficit . The German government now faces a deficit of $1.2 billion .
 The Bundesbank, aghast at the inflationary impact of such a policy, began steadily to raise interest rates in 1991 . At precisely the moment when the Deutschmark was being locked for ever into a planned European currency, the Bundesbank raised rates .
 The knock-on effect of these interest rates would be felt not just in Germany but throughout the European Monetary System . Unemployment and slower economic growth would also be felt in Germany and Europe, says David Frum .
 In effect, Helmut Kohl exported the cost of his country’s unification . Germany‘s European partners were made to share the burden of unification . In effect it was a burden burden for Germany and the EU .
 Mikhail Gorbachev’s concessions on Germany contributed to the decline in his domestic standing . He had warned James Baker that a united Germany inside NATO might ‘be the end of perestroika.’
 To lose the other east European satellite states could be attributed to misfortune, but to relinquish Germany as well looked like carelessness . To lose east Europe's other satellite states, it looked like a mistake .
 The Soviet Defense Minister, Marshall Sergei Akhromeyev, was convinced Gorbachev could have got better terms from the West had he paid attention to the problem in time . He was not alone .
 The Russian empire had grown by conquest and accretion over the centuries . Much of what had once been foreign territory was now intimately associated with the homeland .
 The Baltic republics of the Union were distinctive in three significant respects . Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were distinct from each other in three ways .
 In the first place they were more exposed to the West than any other region of the Soviet Union proper . The West was exposed more to the Soviets than the rest of the USSR proper .
 Estonians especially were in touch with the Scandinavian countries, watching Finnish television since the 1970s . Estonians were ever-conscious of the contrast between their own condition and that of their prosperous neighbours .
 Lithuanians, whose primary historical and geographical affinity was with neighbouring Poland, could hardly fail to fail to notice that even under Communism Poles were decidedly freer and better off than them . Lithuanians' primary historical affinity was to neighbouring neighbouring Poland .
 Despite the unflattering comparison with foreign neighbours, the Baltic states were nonetheless prosperous by Soviet standards . The Baltic states had a relatively high per capita economy by comparison .
 They were the major Soviet producers of a large number of industrial products . The Soviets were a leading source of fish, dairy produce and cotton .
 Estonians, Latvians and Lithuanians had at least a passing acquaintance with a way of life and a standard of living of which most of the rest of the Soviet Union could but dream . Between the commodities that they produced and those that passed through their docks Estonians and Latv
 The Baltic republics alone had a history of genuine independence . The Baltic Republics were the only ones with a recent history of real independence .
 After initially winning their freedom in 1919 following the collapse of the Czarist Empire they had been forcibly re-absorbed twenty years later by the Romanovs’ Soviet heirs, in the secret clauses of the August 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact .
 In the Baltics, Gorbachev’s glasnost —which elsewhere in the Soviet Union prompted demands for greater civil or economic rights—inevitably re-opened the question of independence .
 Samizdat in this region was always and necessarily nationalist in tone . Samisdat in the region was necessarily nationalist . It was the first of its kind .
 In 1945 the population of all three Baltic republics was quite homogenous, with most residents belonging to the dominant national group and speaking the local language . In 1945 most residents of the three republics were quite homogeneous .
 Forced expulsions during and after the war and a steady inflow of Russian soldiers, administrators and workers, the population was far more mixed, especially in the northern republics . By the early 1980s, Russia's population was more mixed than ever before .
 There were simultaneous demonstrations in Vilnius, Riga and Tallinn to mark the anniversary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact . Three months later in Riga alone there was a public meeting to commemorate the 1918 declaration of Latvian independence .
 Independent groups and gatherings started to emerge across the region . Emboldened by their success, the authorities’ unprecedented tolerance of such public expressions of implied dissent began to emerge .
 Hundreds gathered to commemorate the Latvian deportations of 1949 and 1940 . Hundreds gathered in Riga in March 1988 to mark the expulsions of 1940 . Demonstrators gathered in June to mark expulsion of 1940.
 The Latvian National Independence Movement was born . A few weeks later, under the auspices of the ostensibly a-political ‘Environmental Protection Club’ , the Latvians were born. A few days later, they were born .
 The most dramatic aspect of these nascent political movements in Estonia and Latvia was their mere existence, and their unusually subversive nomenclature . Estonia and Latvia's political movements were their existence and their nomenlature .
 The challenge to Soviet power was made explicit in Lithuania . But it was in Lithuania, where the Russian presence was far less obtrusive, that the challenge was made .
 By February 1989 Sajudis had been transformed into a nationwide political party . By that time it had become a nationwide party .
 Lithuania won 36 of Lithuania's 42 seats in Soviet Congress of People’s Deputies . The following month, in the elections to the Soviet Congress, it won 36 seats in Lithuania .
 The elections in all three republics were a marked victory for independent candidates . The elections triggered a growing awareness of a common Baltic trajectory .
 Estonian and Latvian independence movements now echoing their Lithuanian counterpart and openly proclaiming national independence as their goal . Estonia and Latvia are now openly proclaiming their goal as their national independence .
 Baltic independence movements spent 1989 pressing against the frontiers of the permissible . The Baltic independence movement spent the 1990s pressing against frontiers .
 Moscow tried to imitate an Estonian law of November 1988 authorizing the privatization of local state enterprises . But otherwise the government refrained from any involvement . Moscow voided the decrees, as it had earlier voided an initiative by the Estonian .
 The Latvian Popular Front proclaimed its intention to move towards full independence on October 8th 1989 . Gorbachev’s public warning in East Berlin that ‘life punishes those who delay’ was ignored .
 His own example was working against him. However, not for the first time, his own example worked against him . "I'm not going to be surprised," he said .
 Even the boycott itself was abandoned in June, in return for a Lithuanian agreement to ‘suspend’ the full implementation of its declaration of independence .
 After a hectic six months during which virtually every other major Soviet republic asserted its ‘sovereignty’ if not yet its full independence, Gorbachev’s position was becoming untenable . After six months, the Soviet Union had asserted its 'sovereign'
 His efforts to rein in the Baltic initiatives had substantially weakened his image as a ‘reformer’ His failure to suppress talk of autonomy, sovereignty and independence was stirring up resentment among his colleagues and in the army and security forces .
 Just eight weeks earlier Gorbachev had adamantly refused to consider any such change . On December 9, 1988, the Soviet Union had agreed to negotiate a deal with the West .
 A week later troops from the same units stormed the Latvian Ministry of the Interior in Riga . Four people were killed in the attack, killing four people . The Latvians are known for their anti-government violence .
 The bloodshed in the Baltics signaled the opening of the endgame in the Soviet Union . The bloodshed signaled the end of the Soviets' rule .
 Within a week over 150,000 people had gathered in Moscow to demonstrate against the shootings . The protests were held in response to the shootings in Moscow .
 Boris Yeltsin, erstwhile First Secretary of the Moscow City Committee, traveled to Tallinn to sign a mutual recognition of‘sovereignty’ between Russia and the Baltic Republics . The move bypasses altogether the Soviet authorities .
 In March 1991 referenda in Latvia and Estonia confirmed that electors there too overwhelmingly favored full independence . Estonia and Latvia voted overwhelmingly for full independence in 1991 .
 Gorbachev had half-heartedly started to repress the recalcitrant republics . He now reverted to his earlier stance and vainly sought a modus vivendi with them .
 Yeltsin in March 1991 publicly denounced Gorbachev’s ‘lies and deceptions’ and called for his resignation, defying official pressure to remain silent or face impeachment . Yeltsins called for resignation from the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 So long as the overarching structures of Soviet power remained secure, Communist rulers from Ukraine to Kazakhstan had confined their ‘reforms’ to cautious mimicry of Gorbachev himself .
 Following the debacle in the Baltics the same well-honed antennae that attuned them to perestroika now signaled that the Union itself might well be doomed . In any case they could see for themselves that in certain ruling circles the Soviet President was a marked man .
 The new politics of the Baltic republics reflected a genuine and widespread national renaissance . But moves towards ‘sovereignty’ in many of the other republics were typically a more variable mixture of national feeling and nomenklatura self-preservation .
 By far the most important of the would-be ‘sovereign’ republics now asserting their distinctive claims was Ukraine . Ukraine. Ukraine.
 Like the Baltic republics, Ukraine had a history of independence . It was last asserted and promptly lost in the aftermath of World War One . Ukraine is one of the last Baltic nations to assert independence .
 Of more immediate and practical consideration were material resources of the region . But of more immediate consideration were the material resources . The region is in the midst of a crisis in the Middle East .
 Ukraine was a mainstay of the Soviet economy . Sitting squarely athwart Russia’s access routes to the Black Sea (and the Mediterranean) as well as central Europe .
 With just 2. percent of the land area of the USSR it was home to 18 percent of its population . It generated nearly 17 percent of Russia’s Gross National Product, second only to Russia .
 Ukraine contained 60 percent of the country’s coal reserves and a majority share of its titanium . Its unusually rich soil was responsible for over 40 percent of Soviet agricultural output by value .
 The disproportionate importance of Ukraine in Russian and Soviet history was reflected in the Soviet leadership itself . Ukraine's disproportionate importance in Soviet history reflected in Soviet leadership, he says .
 Konstantin Chernenko was the son of Ukrainian ‘kulaks’ deported to Siberia . Yuri Andropov had risen to the top as a consequence of occupying the strategically central post of KGB head in Ukraine .
 The close association between the Ukrainian republic and the Soviet leadership did not imply any special regard for its inhabitants . But this close association with the Soviet leaders did not mean special regard was given to the Ukrainian people . The Ukrainian republic is now one of Russia's most populous countries .
 Ukrainian products were shipped to the rest of the Union at heavily subsidized prices . The practice continued almost to the end of the Soviet Union .
 Most of the rest of the population were Russians . The rest were small numbers of Moldovans, Poles, Magyars, Bulgarians and the country's surviving Jews .
 The only significant minority of Russians was concentrated in the industrial east of the country and the capital Kiev .
 Central and Western Ukraine, notably around Lviv, the second city, was predominantly Ukrainian in language and Eastern Orthodox or Uniate (Greekrite Catholic) in religion .
 Ukrainians in Galicia had been allowed to preserve their native tongue . Thanks to the relative tolerance of the Habsburgs, Ukrainians in the region were allowed to speak .
 In 1994, anything from 78 percent to 91 percent of the local inhabitants used it as their first language in 1994 . In the territories once ruled by the Czar even those who identified themselves as Ukrainians often spoke Russian .
 The Soviet constitution ascribed national identities to the residents of its separate republics . It defined all its citizens by ethnic-national categories . The constitution, as we have seen, also defined national identities .
 As elsewhere in Ukraine, so in Ukraine—particularly the recently-annexed Western Ukraine—this had self-fulfilling consequences . As elsewhere, so . in Ukraine --particularly . Ukraine—especially the recently . annexed Western Ukraine --this had . self-defining consequences,
 In earlier times, when the local language was mostly confined to the remote countryside, and the cities were Russian-speaking and Soviet-dominated . The theoretically decentralized and federal character of this union of national republics was of interest only to scholars and Soviet apologists .
 It gathered considerable support, notably in the major cities and from ‘6os-era reform Communists . But in marked contrast to independence movements in the Baltic it could not automatically count on mass backing and did not reflect any groundswell .
 In elections to the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet in March 1990 the Communists secured a clear majority . RUKH won less than a quarter of the seats .
 Ukrainian nationalists were to seize the initiative but rather the Communists themselves . Thus it was not Ukrainian nationalists who were to seized the initiative .
 The Communists in the Ukrainian Soviet voted, on ""But mostly unpredicted" The Communists voted on the issue of 'Unpredictable'
 This pattern was repeated in the smaller western Soviet republics as well, varying according to local circumstances . The pattern of events in the Soviet Union was repeated .
 Byelorussia, to the north of Ukraine, had no comparable national identity or traditions . Ukraine's northern neighbor, Ukraine, was the country's largest city .
 The ephemeral independent ‘Belarusan National Republic’ of 1918 never secured external recognition . Many of its own citizens felt closer allegiance to Russia or Poland or Lithuania .
 Belorussian Soviet Socialist Republic contained a significant minority of Russians, Poles and Ukrainians . After World War Two, with the annexation of parts of eastern Poland, it was the only country to have a minority of Russian, Polish and Ukrainian .
 Belarussians showed no sign of wanting or expecting sovereignty of any kind, nor could their country, heavily dependent on Russia, hope to sustain genuine independence . The Belarussian republic is heavily dependent upon Russia .
 Belarus is a poor, marshy region better suited to livestock-rearing than large scale agriculture . Belarus had been devastated by the war . The region is now largely populated by livestock farmers .
 Its most significant contribution to the post-war Soviet economy was in chemicals and flax . Its strategic position was in its strategic position athwart major gas lines and communication links .
 In Belarus as in Ukraine, the Soviet elections of 1990 saw the Communists returned in a clear majority . When the Ukrainian Soviet declared itself ‘sovereign’ in July 1990 its northern neighbour duly followed suit .
 In Minsk as in Kiev, the local nomenklatura was moving prudently, waiting upon events in Moscow . Minsk is a city in the heart of Minsk, Ukraine .
 Soviet Moldavia, squeezed between Ukraine and Romania, was a different and rather more interesting case . The Moldavia was a Soviet state of Soviet Moldia .
 'Bessarabia' see-sawed back and forth between Russia and Romania over the course of the century and the fortunes of war .
 Moldavia should not be confused with historical Moldavia just across the Prut river in Romania . Its four and a half million residents were predominantly Moldavian, but with large Russian and 12 Russian .
 The Romanian connection provided a bridge to Europe and a basis for burgeoning demands for increased autonomy . On the one hand many of its people, especially in the capital Chisinau, spoke Russian well .
 'Popular Front' movement emerged in 1989 its primary objective was the demand that Romanian become the official language of the republic . The local Communist authorities granted that same year . Romanian is now the only Romanian language spoken in Romania .
 There was also some incendiary talk, mostly speculative and discouraged, of Moldova 'rejoining' Romania .
 The Popular Front won a majority in the 1990 elections in Moldova . Moldova declared itself sovereign in June 1990 .
 These largely symbolic moves caused rising anxiety and talk of pre-emptive separatism among Russian-speakers as well as the tiny Gagauz community .
 Following a referendum on autonomy in 1990 the Communist leadership in Tiraspol, across the Dniester river, declared a Transnistrian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic, echoing a similarly 'autonomous' Gagauz .
 The Gagauz republic never got beyond proclaiming its existence . The future Moldovan state would re-incorporate it peacefully, against a right to secede should Moldova ever ‘rejoin’ Romania . Transnistrian ‘independence’ was under
 Moldova is seen as a flashpoint in the region of the Caucasus . Moldova has been hit hard by a wave of violence in recent years . The region has been rocked by a series of violent clashes in recent months .
 Armenians and Azeris have long-standing antagonisms between each other and Soviet troops in the region of Nagorno-Karabakh . The presence of a substantial Armenian minority in Azerbaijan has led to violent clashes between the two sides .
 In the Azerbaijan capital of Baku there were further clashes in January of the following year . The Azerbaijan capital, Baku, was the scene of clashes between Azerbaijan and Azerbaijan .
 In neighbouring Georgia, twenty demonstrators were shot during clashes in the capital Tbilisi between nationalists and soldiers in April 1989 .
 Soviet Georgia was too geographically vulnerable and ethnically complex to contemplate with equanimity the insecurity that must accompany Soviet collapse . But Soviet Georgia, like the neighbouring Soviet republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan, was too vulnerable to contemplate the insecurity .
 By the spring of 1991, everyone at the peripheries was waiting to see what would happen at the centre . Everyone at the periphery was waiting for the end of the war .
 Russia is by far the dominant republic of the Union, with half of the country’s population, three-fifths of its Gross National Product and three-quarters of its land mass . The key, of course, was Russia itself, as well as Russia .
 'Russia' has always been too big to be reduced to a single identity or common sense of purpose . Spread across eleven time zones and encompassing dozens of different peoples, ‘Russia’ had always been . spread across eleven . time zones . The country's population is spread across
 Russian people had never been assigned 'nationhood' in the way Kazakhs or Ukrainians or Armenians were officially ‘nations’ in So13 . The Azeris being of Turkic origin, part of the background to these tensions can be traced to the Armenian massacres of
 The boundaries between ‘Russia’ and ‘the Soviet Union’ were kept blurred . ‘The boundaries between Russia and the Soviet Union were thus kept blurred.’
 By the time of Gorbachev there was a marked increase in the emphasis on ‘Russianness’ for some of the same reasons . East German state had begun to take a very public pride in Frederick the Great .
 In declining years of the peoples’ republics, patriotism re-emerged as a serviceable substitute for socialism . In the declining years, patriotism again emerged as an alternative to socialism . patriotism is a good substitute to socialism, says the historian .
 For just this reason it was also the easiest and least threatening form of political opposition . It was the easiest form of opposition to the government in the world .
 In Russia or the GDR, as in Hungary, intellectual critics might suffer persecution . But muted expressions of nationalism were not necessarily repressed or even discouraged . They could be channeled to the authorities’ advantage, writes David Frum .
 The revival of ‘Great Russian chauvinism’ in Soviet publications and the media should be understood in this light . The revival should be seen as a sign of progress in Russia .
 It was also, of course, an additional source of anxiety for vulnerable national minorities . It was a source of concern for vulnerable minorities, especially those of minorities .
 The Soviet leader’s failings were becoming ever more painfully evident . His popularity was sinking fast, as Yeltsin could not fail to fail to observe . The Soviet president's failings became more painfully obvious .
 Gorbachev’s major tactical mistake in domestic affairs had been to encourage the emergence of a national legislature with national visibility, real powers and real powers . That is one reason why the end of the Soviet Union was and is a source of genuine regret among many Russians .
 Yeltsin and his Russian supporters were quicker than Gorbachev himself to appreciate that this new, openly-elected Soviet would be a natural forum for the expression of discontents of all sorts . Yeltsins became particularly adept at aligning Russia’s own interests with those of
 Yeltsin was passionately and very publicly defending the struggles for Baltic independence . Gorbachev was still ‘triangulating’ between the desirable and the possible, arguing for a ‘controlled federalism .
 In April 1991 Gorbachev reluctantly conceded to republics the right of secession in a new Union constitution . This bow to reality merely weakened him further, convincing his conservative foes that he would have to be removed if order was to be restored .
 On June 12th 1991, Yeltsin was elected President of the Russian Soviet Republic . He was the first democratically chosen leader of Russia . Gorbachev had long since overtaken him in national popularity polls .
 The popular election of the now openly antiCommunist Yeltsin, this finally tipped the scales . Together with the popular election, this helped push Russia to the top spot .
 As early as June 20th the U.S. ambassador had actually warned Gorbachev of a conspiracy, to no avail . That something of the sort was brewing was by now an open secret in Moscow .
 The 1991 plotters were unabashedly reverting to earlier Soviet practices . The plotters' actions were seen as an example of Soviet-era practices .
 Emergency Committee announced on August 19th that the President was unable to exercise his authority‘for health reasons’ and that the Committee would thus assume full powers . When he refused, the Emergency Committee decided to take over the powers .
 The Soviet Vice-President Gennady Yanaev signed a decree stripping Gorbachev of his authority . A six-month ‘state of emergency’ was declared in the Soviet Union .
 Yeltsin received 57 percent of the vote in a turnout of 74 percent . Gorbachev was helpless, for all practical purposes a prisoner in his Black Sea villa at the southern promontory of Crimea .
 In the first place, the mere fact that they had had to declare an emergency and announce virtual martial law merely in order to replace one Communist leader with another demonstrated how far the traditional structures of the Soviet Union had unraveled .
 The plotters did not have the unanimous support of their own agencies . A majority of senior KGB officers refused to back Kryuchkov .
 There was no doubt about what the plotters were against . But they were never able to offer any clear indication of what it was they were for .
 In times past when such men as these schemed in the Kremlin they were hidden from public view, their only appearances confined to distant viewing stands at public ceremonies .
 The public was given ample opportunity to observe close-up the physiognomy of official Socialism in its dotage . Now, however, they were constrained to appear on television and to the press to explain and defend their actions .
 His standing had been further elevated by a personal meeting with George Bush, during the American President’s visit to the USSR just three weeks before .
 Putin denounced the Kremlin takeover as an illegal coup d’etat and placed himself at the head of the resistance to it . He directed operations from his headquarters in the Russian Parliament and mobilizing crowds surrounding it .
 Yeltsin engaged in lengthy conversations and negotiations with world leaders . He studiously withheld any recognition from the increasingly isolated conspirators . At the same time, in the full glare of the assembled international media, he engaged in long-awaited negotiations .
 The leaders of the coup, having lost the public initiative, now began to lose their nerve . But the leaders of this coup, they are now losing their nerve, he says .
 Boris Pugo committed suicide on August 21st; at Yeltsin’s behest his colleagues were arrested . Pugo was one of the coup leaders who committed suicide; at the behest of Yeltsins, his co-coup leader .
 An exhausted and anxious Gorbachev was flown back to Moscow that day . That same day an exhausted Gorbama was flown home to Moscow .
 Gorbachev, who seemed dazed and uncertain when seen in public, was understandably slow to grasp the import of these developments . The former Soviet leader was slow to understand the impact of the Soviet Union .
 It was widely assumed (and hoped) that after the abortive coup things would carry on much as before . This approach still played well in the West, where it was hoped things would be normal . But it was not until the coup took place, and the West was shocked .
 Gorbachev’s anachronistic reiterations of failed goals, and his apparent ingratitude to his rescuers, were a revelation . The Soviet Union itself was a revelation, but in the Soviet Union it was never a success .
 By the time a chastened Gorbachev got the point, suspended the CPSU and (on August 24th) resigned as its General Secretary, it was too late . The CPSU was a Soviet state of the Soviet Union .
 The former General Secretary was still President of the Soviet Union . Of course, of course, he was still .
 Between August 24th and September 21st Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Georgia, Tajikistan and Armenia declared themselves independent of the Soviet Union .
 90. percent voted to leave the Soviet Union in a referendum on December 1st, 1990 .
 Boris Yeltsin and the Russian parliament were establishing an independent Russia . Meanwhile, a few hundred yards away, the parliament was establishing a new Russia .
 By November Yeltsin had taken under Russian control virtually all financial and economic activity on Russian territory . The Russian government was in control of virtually all of the country's financial, economic activity .
 The Soviet Union was now a shell state, emptied of power and resources . The country was now an empty shell state .
 When Gorbachev proposed a new ‘Treaty on the Economic Community of Sovereign States’ most of the independent republics simply refused to sign . Most of those republics were not willing to sign the treaty .
 At the October sessions of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR the western republics were absent . The western nations were absent from the October session of the Soviet Union .
 On December 8th, the presidents and prime ministers of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus denounced the Union Treaty of 1922, in effect abolishing the Soviet Union . The treaty was signed in 1922, ending the Soviet empire .
 Twenty-four hours later Gorbachev announced his intention to resign as Soviet President . Twenty-eight hours later he announced his resignation as President .
 Mikhail Gorbachev ceded his prerogatives as Commander-in-Chief to President Yeltsin of Russia . Mikhail Mikhail Mikhail ceded the post to Yeltsins of Russia and stepped down from his post . Mikhail's post was taken over by President Boris Yeltsini of
 Within fortyeight hours Gorbachev had vacated his office and Yeltsin moved in . Within forty eight hours the Soviet government was overthrown . The next day Yeltsins moved in and the Soviet Union was overthrowing the government .
 At midnight on December 31st 1991, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ceased to exist . At midnight December 31, 1991 the Soviet Union of Socialist Republic was abolished .
 The disappearance of the Soviet Union was a remarkable affair, unparalleled in modern history . It was unparalleled in the history of Soviet Union's disappearance .
 There was no foreign war, no bloody revolution, no natural catastrophe. There were no natural catastrophes or foreign wars. There was a natural catastrophe, but there was no natural war .
 The unraveling of the USSR was not altogether free of violence, as we have seen in Lithuania and the Caucasus . There would be more fighting in some of the independent republics in the coming years .
 The world's largest country departed the stage almost without protest . But for the most part the world’s largest country left the stage without protest.
 To describe this as a bloodless retreat from Empire is surely accurate, but it hardly begins to capture the unanticipated ease of the whole process . To describe it as 'bloodless' is not accurate, it's 'unanticipated ease' of the process .
 If this accounts for the futility of Communist authority in the satellite states, it does not quite suffice to explain what happened in the imperial homeland itself . It does not explain why the collapse of the Soviet Union has occurred .
 Even if the society that Communism claimed to have built was essentially fraudulent, the Leninist state, after all, was decidedly real . Even though the society was fraudulent, it was still real, the state of Communism was real .
 The Soviet state did not in fact disappear . But the Soviet state didn't disappear . The Soviet government did not disappear .
 The USSR shattered, rather, into a multiplicity of little successor states, most of them ruled by experienced Communist autocrats . Most of the successor states were ruled by experienced Communist autocrats .
 There was no ‘transition to democracy’ in most of the successor republics; that transition came—if it came —somewhat later . The transition to democracy was not a 'transition'
 Autocratic state power was not so much dethroned as downsized . Autocratic power was the only kind that most denizens of the domestic Soviet empire had ever known . But it was downsized.
 From the outside this was a dramatic change; but experienced from within its implications were decidedly less radical . From the inside it was a change from the outside but from within it was not a radical change .
 The local Communist secretaries who metamorphosed into national state presidents had every reason to act decisively to secure their fiefdom . The Soviet authorities at the center had no territorial fiefdoms of their own to protect .
 All they could offer was a return to the decrepit structures that Gorbachev had so enthusiastically cut down . They lacked the will to battle on .
 The efflorescence of successor states should not be interpreted as evidence that the Soviet Union collapsed under the weight of a newly reawakened nationalism in its constituent republics .
 With the exception of the Baltic countries, their trajectory more closely resembled that of their western neigh neigh19 The will, but not the means, is the will of the West .
 Had Gorbachev used the army to crush all opposition, it is by no means sure that they would have failed . August plotters would have used the military to crush opposition, but would not have succeeded .
 Even in the newlyindependent states there were many vulnerable minorities (especially the omnipresent Russians) with good reason to regret the loss of ‘imperial’ protection and who would prove distinctly ambivalent .
 President George Bush made a point of publicly recommending to Ukrainians that they remain in the Soviet Union . George Bush visited Kiev on August ist 1991 and recommended Ukrainians stay in the USSR .
 This rather hamfisted attempt to shore up the increasingly vulnerable Soviet President was not quite tantamount to an endorsement of the Soviet Union . . But it came perilously close .
 The American President’s publicly-aired caution is a further salutary reminder of the limited part played by the USA in these developments . The U.S. has a limited part in the development of the world's most advanced technologies .
 Washington did not ‘bring down’ Communism—Communism imploded of its own accord . The U.S. didn't bring down Communism, but it did .
 Ukrainian audience ignored Bush’s advice and voted overwhelmingly to quit the Union for good . It was not out of a sudden access of patriotic enthusiasm, it was out of patriotism .
 Independence in Ukraine, Moldova, or even Georgia, was not so much about self-determination as self-preservation . Independence was a sound basis for state-making, as it turned out, but a poor foundation .
 Czechoslovakia was the 'velvet divorce' between Slovaks and Czechs that was peaceably and amicably consummated on January 1st 1993 . Much the same was true of the break-up of the Czech-Slovakian split .
 Many of the local protagonists of this week's events were advertised by many of the locals . And that, of course, is how it was advertised .
 The division of Czechoslovakia into two separate states—Slovakia and the Czech Republic—illustrates once again, on a provincial scale and at the heart of Europe, the limitations of such an interpretation .
 Czechs and Slovaks, however indistinguishable they might appear to perplexed outsiders, had markedly different pasts . Czechs, Slovaks were born in the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Czechoslovakia, Czech Republic and Slovakia .
 Bohemia and Moravia could boast a remarkable medieval and Renaissance past at the heart of the Holy Roman Empire . Moravia and Bohemia also had a pre-eminent share in the industrialization of central Europe . Bohemia is one of the most important cities in the history of the
 Prague was by 1914 a significant center of modernism in the visual arts and literature . Prague was one of the aesthetic glories of the continent .
 Within the Hungarian half of the Empire they were regarded not as ‘Slovaks’ but as slav-language-speaking peasants of rural northern Hungary . Ruled for centuries from Budapest they lacked any distinctive national story .
 Only with the independence of Czechoslovakia in 1918, Bratislava became the second city of the new state under the name Bratisava . The city was incorporated by the Slovaks as a result of their reluctant incorporation by the Czechoslovaks .
 Czechoslovakia was democratic and liberal by prevailing regional standards, but its centralized institutions strongly favored the Czechs . Czechs occupied almost all positions of power and influence in the interwar .
 Slovakia was a mere province and a poor and rather disfavored one at that . It was a poor province, and it was a province of Slovakia . Slovakia is now a nation in the world's most populous region . Slovakia was once a province, but it was not a province .
 The same impulse that led many of Czechoslovakia’s three million German-speaking citizens to listen to proNazi separatists also drove a certain number of Slovaks to look with sympathy upon Slovak populists demanding autonomy and even independence .
 In March 1939, Hitler absorbed the Czech regions into the ‘Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia’, an authoritarian, clericalist Slovak puppet state was established under Father Jozef Tiso . Father Tiso was the only Slavic Orthodox leader in the
 The first ever independent state of Slovakia emerged at Hitler’s behest and over the corpse of the Czechoslovak Republic . Slovakia thus emerged at the behest of the dictator, Hitler .
 Just how popular Slovakia’s wartime ‘independence’ ever was is hard to know after the fact . Slovakia's wartime 'independence' never was a popular success .
 In the post-war years it was discredited both by its own record (Slovakia deported to death camps virtually all of its 140,000 pre-war Jewish population) and by its dependence upon its Nazi patron .
 After its liberation, Czechoslovakia was re-established as a single state and expressions of Slovak nationalism were frowned upon . Czechoslovak nationalism was frowned upon during the time of the Czech-Sludgyan uprising .
 ‘Slovak bourgeois nationalism’ was one of the accusations levied at putative defendants in the show trials then being prepared . Gustav Husak spent six years in prison on the charge in the early Stalinist years of the charge .
 Communists in Czechoslovakia saw the advantage of encouraging a moderate degree of national feeling . But in time the Communists came to see the advantages of encouraging moderate national feeling.
 Slovaks appeared less vulnerable to foreign influence than Prague-based radicals and dissidents . With fewer cars or televisions and worse communications, Slovaks appear less vulnerable than westerners .
 They suffered far less in the repression and purges of the seventies. Accordingly they suffered less than in the repressive and purging of the 1970s .
 Czech-Slovak state was favored by a majority of Czechs and Slovaks . Public opinion poll showed that some form of common Czecho-Szechoslovak state favored by majority of Slovaks and Czechs .
 Vaclav Havel was a firm believer in maintaining Czechs and Slovaks in the same country . The new President of the Czech Republic was a strong supporter of Czech-Slovans .
 The initial unimportance of the ‘national’ question can be seen from the results of the first free elections, in June 1990 . The first free election was held in 1990, and the first national elections were held in 1991 .
 Havel’s Civic Forum secured half of the vote, with most of the remainder divided between Communists and Christian Democrats . Most of the rest of Bohemia and Moravia's vote was won by Communists .
 Civic Forum’s sister party Public Against Violence emerged as the largest group . A sizeable share of the vote was split between Christian Democrats, Communists, Hungarian Christian Democrats and Greens .
 Less than one Slovak voter in seven opted for the only party which favored dividing the country into its separate ethnic constituencies . Less than a third of Slovak voters chose to vote for the party in a referendum .
 Havel was the President of the Republic, ostensibly above the political fray . Communism was gone and Havel is now a figure of power in the Soviet Union .
 Political differences between erstwhile colleagues now came to the fore, with doctrinal free-marketeers led by Finance Minister Vaclav Klaus .
 The author was regaled by liberal Czechs with accounts of the privileges accorded by the regime to the Slovak minority . On a visit to Prague in 1985 the present author was .
 Schoolteachers from Slovakia were deemed by parents to be hopelessly provincial and inadequate to the task . Slovakian schoolteachers were a particular target of resentment .
 Slovakia has a real constituency in the Czech lands for such an objective this was not the case in Slovakia . But whereas there was a . real constituency for such a . objective this . was not . case in Czech lands . Slovakia's prime minister has been in charge of the Slovakian
 Most Slovaks depend more on state-owned factories, mines and mills than Czechs . Privatization, the free market and a reduced state sector held little appeal for most Slovaks .
 Slovakia was a burdensome inheritance in the eyes of certain business and political circles in Prague, Czech Republic . Slovakia has been accused of being a burden on the Czech Republic in recent years .
 Public Against Violence also broke apart, for analogous reasons . Public Out Against Violence broke up for similar reasons .
 Vladimir Meciar, an ex-boxer who played a relatively minor role in the events of 1989, has since proved far more adept than his colleagues at maneuvering through the shoals of democratic politics . He is now the most effective public figure in the country's democracy .
 Meciar was replaced by Catholic politician Jan £arnogursky . Following the June election he formed a government in the Slovak National Council .
 Meciar left PAV to form his own Movement for a Democratic Slovakia . He left the political party to form a new political party . The Slovak Republic is one of Slovakia's most populous countries .
 From the Fall of 1991 into the summer of 1992 representatives from the Czech and Slovak administrations conducted lengthy negotiations, seeking an agreed basis for a decentralized, federal constitution . From the fall of 1991 to the summer 1992 negotiations were held in the Czech, Slovak and Czech governments .
 Me&ar, in order to establish a constituency for himself and his party, now took up the cause of Slovak nationalism . He had not previously evinced great interest in the subject of nationalism .
 Meciar led his new party to a clear victory at the Federal elections of June 1992 with nearly 40 percent of the vote in Slovakia .
 With Klaus now prime minister of the Czech region, both autonomous halves of the federal republic are in the hands of men who—for different but complementary reasons—would not be sorry to see the country fall apart . Klaus now sits in both parts of the country, both of which would not
 Only the Federal President himself now stood, in constitutional form and in his own person, for the ideal of a united, federal Czechoslovakia . Only the federal President now stands for the ideals of a unified, federal state . Only Czech President now stood for the idea of a federal Czech
 Vaclav Havel was no longer as popular—and therefore as influential—as he had been less than two years before . Havel died in 1989 at the age of 60 . He was one of the world's most influential men .
 Zantovsky’s assertion was not altogether mistaken, but in context it would prove more than a little self-fulfilling . In context, it would be self-defending, he said .
 Like other former Czech dissidents, Havel and his colleagues were not always inclined to think well of Slovaks . Like other ex-cadivists, they were often inclined to not think well well of the Slovaks.
 Klaus Klaus did not share such liberal prejudices, nor did he care one way or the other about Slovakia’s past . Ironically, Klaus didn’t share similar liberal prejudices . Klaus was not interested in Slovakia's past, and did not care about its past .
 The two men, now the most powerful politicians in their respective regions, spent the next few weeks ostensibly negotiating the terms of a state treaty for a federal Czechoslovakia . The treaty was signed in 1961 .
 Meciar demanded currency-issuing and borrowing rights for a virtually sovereign Slovak republic; a moratorium on privatization; the restoration of Communist-era subsidies; and a raft of other measures all of which were anathema to Klaus . Klaus is doggedly pursuing his plan for a
 Klaus purported to be surprised and upset by Meciar’s demands, but these were hardly a secret in view of his many speeches on the subject . Klaus said he was upset by the demands . Klaus was not surprised by his demands .
 In practice it was Klaus who was maneuvering the Slovak leader towards a break, rather than the other way around . Klaus is maneuvering Slovakia's prime minister towards a split .
 Slovak deputies in Slovak National Council and in the Slovak Federal Assembly would have been content to approve a state treaty affording each half of the country full autonomy and equal status in a federal state . But they found themselves instead facing a fait accompli .
 "Since we appear to be unable to reach a deal, we might as well abandon these fruitless efforts and go our separate ways," says President Obama .
 Slovaks, faced with the apparent fulfillment of their own wishes, were trapped into assent . The Slovaks were trapped in assent—in many cases against their own better judgment . Slovaks are faced with an apparent fulfillment .
 Klaus and Meciar agreed to divide their country with effect from January 1st 1993 . A week later they agreed to split .
 Czechoslovakia disappeared and its two republics re-emerged as separate states . Klaus Klaus and Meciar were Prime Ministers of the two Czechoslovaks .
 Vaclav Havel, whose efforts to bind the country together had been increasingly forlorn, died in 1991 . ‘Quoted in Mlada Fronta dnes 12th March 1991’
 Neither Czech Republic nor Slovakia flourished in the initial postCommunist decade . The Czech Republic and Slovakia did not thrive in the post-Communist era .
 Klaus’s ‘shock therapy’ and national-Communism both failed, albeit in different ways . Klaus and Meciar’�s national-communism failed, however, in a different way, in different circumstances .
 Klaus Klaus's star waned in Prague, but nostalgia for Czechoslovakia was never much in evidence . But although Slovaks came to regret their dalliance with Vladimir Meciar, it was never in evidence.
 Czechoslovak divorce was a manipulated process in which the Czech Right brought about what it claimed not to seek . Czech Populists achieved rather more than they had intended . Not many people were overjoyed at the result, but nor was there lasting regret . Czechs right brought about
 The division of Czechoslovakia was a product of chance and circumstances . The division was a result of chance, circumstances and circumstances, the Czech Republic was divided .
 With other people in control, the story would not have been the same . With different outcomes at the elections of 1990 and 1992, the election would have been different, he says . The story would be different if other people had been in control .
 Had a federal state treaty been agreed upon by 1992—had Czechoslovakia endured for a few years longer, it is highly unlikely that anyone in Prague or Bratislava would have seen much point in pursuing their quarrels . The prospect of admission to the European Union absorbed their attention
 The peaceful fragmentation of Czechoslovakia contrasts dramatically with the catastrophe that befell Yugoslavia in the same years . G W. Hegel: "Peaceful fragmentation of Yugoslavia contrasts dramatically"
 Between 1991 and 1999 hundreds of thousands of Bosnians, Croats, Serbs and Albanians were killed, raped or tortured by their fellow citizens . Millions more were forced out of their homes and into exile .
 Foreign commentators have typically proposed two contrasting explanations for massacres and civil war on a scale not seen since 1945 . The country has been long regarded by Western radicals as a model socialist society .
 One view, widely circulated in Western media, presents the Balkans as a hopeless case . The Balkans is a cauldron of mysterious squabbles and ancient hatreds, it is said .
 Six republics, five nations, four languages, three religions and two alphabets, all held together by a single party . It consisted, in the words of a much-cited bon mot, of six republics and five nations .
 The Marquis de Salaberry had described in 1791 as ‘the unpolished extremities’ of Europe . According to this account, ‘age-old’ conflicts had bubbled over much as they had done in centuries past . ‘Age-old
 The territory of former Yugoslavia had over the course of the past two centuries been occupied, divided and exploited to the advantage of others . Turkey, Britain, France, Russia, Austria, Italy and Germany have exploited the territory of the former Yugoslavia .
 If there was bad blood between the peoples of the region it should be traced to imperial manipulation rather than to ethnic hostility . If there is bad blood, it should not be to blame for the region's history .
 Whatever one thinks of these two readings of Balkan history, it is striking to note that despite their apparent incompatibility they have one important feature in common . Despite their differences, the two readings have one of the most important features in common, they have a common point in common.
 Both diminish or ignore the role of the Yugoslavs themselves, dismissed as victims of fate or the manipulations and mistakes of others . The Yugoslavs are seen as victims either of fate, or of manipulations or mistakes by others .
 To be sure, there was a lot of history buried in the mountains of the former Yugoslavia, and many bad memories too .
 outsiders contributed crucially to the country’s tragedy, though mostly through irresponsible acquiescence in local crimes . And outsiders did indeed contribute crucially, though, they did not help the country .
 The break up of Yugoslavia was the work of men, not fate, says Simon Tisdall . The break-up of Yugoslavia is similar to that of other former Communist states, he says .
 The overwhelming responsibility for Yugoslavia’s tragedy lay not in Bonn or any other foreign capital, but with the politicians in Belgrade . The responsibility for the tragedy was not in Germany or the United States, says the historian .
 Josip Broz Tito died in 1980, aged 87, at the age of 87 . Yugoslavia he had reassembled in 1945 had a real existence when he died . Tito's Yugoslavia was re-united in 1980 .
 Serbia's constituent republics were separate units within a federal state . Serbia's presidency comprised representatives from all six republics, as well as two autonomous regions within Serbia .
 Slovenia and Croatia in the north were primarily Catholic and had once been part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire as too for a shorter time, had Bosnia . Slovenia, Croatia and Croatia are primarily Catholic . Bosnia and Slovenia were once part of Austria-Hungary as too, albeit for
 The southern part of the country was for centuries under Ottoman Turkish rule, which accounts for the large number of Muslims in addition to the predominantly Orthodox Serbs . Serbs are predominantly Muslim, Serbs, and Muslims .
 Historical differences had been exacerbated by the experience of World War Two, but had been attenuated in subsequent decades . But these historical differences were attenuated by World War II .
 Economic change brought hitherto isolated rural populations into sometimes uneasy contact in towns like Vukovar or Mostar . But the same changes also accelerated integration across old social and ethnic boundaries .
 The rising post-war generation was encouraged to think of itself as ‘Yugoslav’, rather than ‘Croat’ or ‘Macedonian’ . Many, especially the young, the better educated and the burgeoning number of city-dwellers
 Younger intellectuals in Ljubljana or Zagreb were no longer interested in the heroic or troubled past of their ethnic forebears . Younger intellectuals no longer much interested in their ethnic past, they say .
 Bosnia had always been the most ethnically variegated region of Yugoslavia . Bosnia was perhaps not typical of the region . Bosnia has always been an ethnically diverse region .
 "The whole country was an interwoven tapestry of overlapping minorities," says President Obama . "But the whole country is an inter-nationalist," he says .
 The 580,000 Serbs living in Croatia in 1991 were some 12 percent of the population of that republic . Serbs lived in Croatia during the early years of the republic .
 Bosnia in the same year was 44 percent Muslim, 31 percent Serb and 17 percent Croat . Bosnia in same year as Bosnia in Bosnia was 44-percent Muslim and 31-percent Serb Serb . Bosnia is now 44-34 percent Muslim .
 Residents of ethnically mixed regions often had little sense of their friends’ or neighbors’ nationality or religion . Residents often had no sense of friends or neighbors' nationality .
 ‘ethnic’ fault-lines within Yugoslavia were never very well defined . Indeed the 'ethnic' fault line within Yugoslavia was never well defined. ‘Ethnic' fault lines within Yugoslavia never were well defined, say experts .
 The linguistic distinctions can serve as a representative illustration . The linguistic distinction can be explained by linguistic distinctions .
 'Serb' and 'Croat' forms of 'Serbo-Croatian' are spoken by the overwhelming majority of the population . But the differences between the ‘Serb’ and ‘Croat’ forms are small indeed, say experts .
 Serbs use the Cyrillic alphabet and Croats use the Latin alphabet . The two ‘languages’ are identical, but there are some differences in spelling .
 Montenegrins write in Cyrillic but pronounce in the Tekaviari manner, like Croats and Bosnians . Serb residents of Bosnia also write in the same manner, as do the Serbs .
 Only the historical inhabitants of Serbia proper use the ‘Ekavian’ variant . Bosnian Serb nationalist leaders sought after 1992 to impose official ‘Serbian’ pronunciation on their fellow Serbs in Bosnia .
 Serb writers’ obsession with preserving or re-affirming ‘pure’ Serbian . The same was true of certain Serbs' obsession with 'pure' Serb . Serbs were obsessed with preserving their 'pure Serbian' Serbian .
 In former Yugoslavia it was the mass of the population who actually spoke an interchangeable single language . A minority of nationalists sought to differentiate themselves by accentuating the narcissism of small differences .
 The distinction between Catholic Croats and Orthodox Serbs, for example, mattered far more in earlier centuries—or in World War Two . In earlier centuries, Catholics and Serbs wielded Catholicism as a weapon against Serbs and Jews .
 By the 1990s religious practice in the fast growing cities of Yugoslavia was on the wane . Only in the countryside did the correspondence between religion and national sentiment still count for something .
 Ottoman practice of defining nationality by religion had left its mark, mostly by exaggerating the place of Orthodox Christianity among the southern Slavs . The evidence of this was increasingly attenuated, with the evidence of it being exaggerated .
 The only generalized discrimination in recent years was the one directed at the Albanian minority in the south, castigated by many Slovenes, Croats, Serbs, Macedonians and Montenegrins as criminal and shiftless .
 An estimated 1,728,000 Albanians in Yugoslavia constituted 16. percent of the federal total in 1991 . By 1991, Albania had a far higher birthrate than any other country in Yugoslavia .
 Most of the Albanian citizens of Yugoslavia lived in Serbia, in the autonomous region of Kosovo, 2< We shall kill some Serbs, deport others, and oblige the rest to embrace Catholicism’—thus the Ustashe Minister of Religion in Zagreb, July
 Kosovo had historic significance for Serb nationalists as the last holdout of medieval Serbia against the advance of the Turks . Kosovo was the site of a historic battlefield defeat in i389.
 Albanian predominance was seen by some Serb intellectuals and politicians as both demographically troubling and historically provocative . It echoed the Serbs’ displacement by Muslims as the largest minority in the adjacent Bosnian republic . The local Albanian majority was seen as a threat to Serbs'
 Serbs, it appeared, were losing out to hitherto subservient minorities who had benefitted from Tito’s rigorous enforcement of federal equality . Serbs are losing out, says the former president . Tito's rule of equal rights to Serbs was a hallmark of Tit
 Serb dislike of Albanians fed on proximity and insecurity, in the far north of Yugoslavia . The growing distaste for feckless southerners was ethnically indiscriminate and based not on nationality but economics .
 As in Italy, so in Yugoslavia, the more prosperous north was resentful of impoverished southerners . The north was sustained by transfers and subsidies from their more productive fellow citizens . In Yugoslavia, as was Italy, the north was increasingly resentful .
 Slovenia was responsible for 29 percent of Yugoslavia’s total exports in 1990 . Macedonia generated just 4 percent and Kosovo 1 percent of the total exports . Slovenia, Macedonia and Kosovo had approximately the same share of the national population .
 Per capita GDP in Slovenia was double that of Serbia proper, three times the size of GDP in Bosnia and Bosnia and eight times that of Kosovo . Slovenia's per capita GDP was double the GDP in Serbia proper .
 In Alpine Slovenia, the illiteracy rate in 1988 was less than 1 percent; in Macedonia and Serbia it was 11 percent . In Slovenia and Serbia, illiteracy rates in 1988 were 1 percent .
 In Slovenia by the end of the 1980s the infant mortality rate was 11 deaths per 1,000 live births . In Slovenia, infant mortality rates were 11 deaths a day per birth . Slovenia was one of the fastest-growing countries in the world, Slovenia .
 In neighbouring Croatia, the figure was 12 per 1,000 people per year . In Bosnia and Croatia, Bosnia, 16 per year were the highest rates of suicide in Europe .
 In Serbia, the figure was 22 per 1,000, in Macedonia and in Kosovo . Serbia, Macedonia, Macedonia and Kosovo were the highest rates of suicide in the world .
 Slovenia and Croatia already ranked alongside the less prosperous countries of the European Community . Kosovo, Macedonia and rural Serbia more closely resembled parts of Asia or Latin America .
 If Slovenes and Croats were increasingly restive in their common Yugoslav home, this was not because of a resurfacing of deep-rooted religious beliefs . This was not, of course, the way things appeared to Croats and others, who could point to Serb domination of
 It was because they were coming to believe that they would be better off if they could manage their own affairs without having to take into account the needs and interests of underachieving Yugoslavs to their south .
 Tito's personal authority and his vigorous repression of serious criticism kept such dissenting opinion well out of public view . Tito’s personal authority kept such dissent out of the public view, he says .
 During the Sixties and early Seventies, when the West European boom was sucking in Yugoslav labor and sending back substantial hard currency remittances, over-population and under-employment in the south posed less of a problem than in the 1960s .
 From the end of the Seventies, the Yugoslav economy started to unravel . The Yugoslav economy began to unravel in the early 1980s . The country's economy has been in decline for decades .
 Through the course of the 1980s, the country moved steadily into hyper-inflation . The country's inflation rate was the highest in the world .
 The economic mistakes were being made in the capital, Belgrade, but their consequences were felt and resented above all in Zagreb and Ljubljana . The consequences of the economic mistakes in Belgrade were felt by the Croatian capital, but resented by Lj
 Many Croats and Slovenes, Communists and non-Communists alike, believed that they would be better off making their own economic decisions free of corruption and nepotism in the Federal capital .
 A growing fear that a small group of apparatchiks around Slobodan Milosevic, the hitherto obscure President of the League of Communists in Serbia, was making a bid for power in the political vacuum that followed Tito’s death . These sentiments were exacerbated by a
 Milosevic’s behavior was not inherently unusual for Communist leaders in these years, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . Sutter: Milosevi was a Communist leader in Yugoslavia, but his behavior was unusual .
 In the GDR the Communists sought to curry favor by invoking the glories of eighteenth-century Prussia . National Communism’ had been on display for some years in neighboring Bulgaria and Romania .
 In the era of Gorbachev, with the ideological legitimacy of Communism and its ruling party waning fast, patriotism offered an alternative way of securing a hold on power . In the 1980s, patriotism was seen as a way to secure the power of the Soviet Union .
 In the rest of eastern Europe this resort to nationalism risks arousing anxiety among foreigners . But in Yugoslavia the price would be paid at home . In Yugoslavia, the price of nationalism was paid in the country's national spirit .
 Serbia needed to strengthen its influence over Yugoslavia as a whole, he says . But to preserve and strengthen Serbia’s influence, he needed to transform the federal system itself .
 Tito's charismatic leadership fostered first by Tito’s charismatic leadership and then by a revolving presidency . The carefully calculated balance of influence between the various constituent republics had been fostered by the charismatic leadership .
 Kosovo and Vojvodina 'absorbed' into Serbia proper, while retaining their two seats in the federal presidency . Serbia forced through an amendment to Serbia’s own constitution to ‘absorbed’ the hitherto autonomous provinces of Kosovo and . Vojavodina
 Milosevic’s goal was to forge a more unitary state, something that the other four republics would naturally resist . The federal system of government was effectively stalemated in Yugoslavia . The U.S. has been in a state of war with Serbia since 1992 .
 Survival depended upon re-calibrating one’s public allegiances with the conventional party alignments of a liberal political culture, says Julian Zelizer . “Survivorism” is a key to the survival of the Democratic Party, he says .
 However implausible the transition in many individual cases, it worked . However, it is implausible that it worked. However, the transition worked.
 Yugoslavia offered fertile opportunities for demagogues like Milosevic, or Franjo Tudjman, his Croat counterpart . The country had not undergone the genocides and population transfers that had re-arranged places like Poland or Hungary in earlier decades .
 In fashioning their exit from Communism around a new political constituency they could play an ethnic card no longer available elsewhere in Europe . In Europe, they could substitute it for a concern with democracy . In Germany, they would play a card that is available elsewhere, not in the U.S
 In the Baltic states, or Ukraine, or Slovakia, post-Communist politicians could resort to national independence as a route out of the Communist past . It's possible to build a new state and a new democracy all at once without worrying unduly about minorities .
 Under these circumstances, once one republic declares itself independent, others would feel bound to follow suit . The U.S. State of the Union has declared itself independent .
 Yugoslavia now faced the same intractable issues that Woodrow Wilson and his colleagues had failed to resolve at Versailles seventy years earlier . In short, Yugoslavia now faces the same problems that Wilson and colleagues failed to . Wilson and . his colleagues tried to resolve the same issues at Vers
 Throughout the 1980s there had been sporadic Albanian demonstrations and protests at Belgrade’s mistreatment of them, notably in Pristina .
 Their institutions had been closed down, their leaders dismissed, their daily routines constrained by harsh policing and, from March 1989, by a curfew . Their institutions were closed down and leaders dismissed .
 Hitherto, thanks to their leaders and politicians, politicians and their vassal mentality felt guilty before themselves and others, felt guilty . The U.S. has been in a state of shame for years, but it has never been before .
 Belgrade shut down the provincial Kosovo Assembly, placing the region under direct rule from Belgrade . A few months later, following bloody clashes between police and demonstrators with many dead and injured, the region was placed under direct control .
 The course of events in the far south of the country directly affected decisions made in the northern republics . The events directly affected the decisions made by the north and south .
 Ljubljana and Zagreb were far more concerned at the rise of Serbian authoritarianism . At best mildly sympathetic to the Albanians’ plight, they were at best sympathetic to them .
 At the Slovene elections of April 1990, a majority of the voters still favoured remaining in Yugoslavia . They gave their backing to nonCommunist opposition candidates openly critical of existing federal arrangements .
 The following month, in neighboring Croatia, a new nationalist party won an overwhelming majority . Its leader, Franjo Tudjman, took over as President of the republic .
 The last straw, revealingly, came in December 1990 when Serbia seized 50 percent of the entire drawing rights of the Yugoslav federation to cover back pay and bonuses for federal employees and state enterprise workers .
 Slovenes, whose 8 percent of the population contributed one-quarter of the federal budget, were especially incensed . The Slovenes contribute one-third of the nation's federal budget .
 The Slovene Parliament announced that it was withdrawing from the federal fiscal system and proclaimed the republic’s independence . The following month the Slovene parliament announced that Slovenia had withdrawn from the fiscal system .
 Slovenia’s distance from Belgrade, and the presence of less than 50,000 Serbs in the republic, gave grounds for hope that a peaceful exit might be engineered . Slovenia is far away from Serbia, but Belgrade's distance from the country is not Serbia .
 Washington had suspended all economic aid to Yugoslavia because of the Serbian measures in Kosovo . But it nevertheless publicly opposed any moves to secede .
 Slovenia and Croatia took control over their frontiers and initiated unilateral secession from the federation . The overwhelming support of their citizens and the tacit backing of a number of prominent European statesmen led the move .
 Yugoslav attack on Slovenia lasted just a few weeks, after which the army withdrew and allowed the secessionist state to depart in peace . Yugoslavia attacked Slovenia in 1991, but it was allowed to leave in peace after the attack .
 There then followed a far bloodier war between Croatia and its rebellious Serb minority (backed by the army of ‘Yugoslavia’—in practise Serbia and Montenegro) that lasted until an unsteady cease-fire brokered by the UN early the following year
 Serbs of Bosnia declared war on the new state and set about carving out a ‘Republika Srpska’ with the backing of the Yugoslav army . Serbs laid siege to a number of Bosnian towns, including the capital Sarajevo, in 1992
 In January 1993, a separate civil war broke out between the Croats and Muslims of Bosnia, with some Croats attempting to carve out an ephemeral statelet in the Croat-dominated region of Herzegovina .
 In each of these conflicts there was both an internal dynamic and external engagement, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "In all these conflicts, there were both internal and external engagements," he says .
 Slovenian and Croatian independence was driven forward by wellfounded domestic considerations, as we have seen . Slovenia and Croatia's independence was made up of well-founded domestic concerns .
 Hasty German recognition of the two new states confirmed their existence for friend and foe alike . But it was the hasty German—and subsequently European Community—recognition .
 The prospect of an independent Bosnia with a Croat-Muslim majority aroused similar anxieties . In Bosnia, where Serbs were present in far larger numbers, the prospect of independent Bosnia arouses similar anxiety .
 After 1991 the Croats and Muslims of Bosnia were bound to prefer sovereign independence to minority status in what remained of Milosevic’s Yugoslavia . They voted accordingly in a referendum at the end of February 1992 .
 Serbs of Bosnia were exposed for some months to talk from Belgrade not merely of Ustashe massacres but of a coming Muslim jihad . Serbs were no less understandably disposed to prefer union with Serbia, or at least their own autonomous region, to minority status .
 Bosnia declared itself independent in March 1992 . Serbs boycotted both the referendum and the parliamentary vote . Bosnia's Muslim and Croat leaders declared it independent .
 The following month Bosnian Serb leaders declared the Republika Srpska and the Yugoslav army marched in to help them secure territory and ‘cleanse’ it . Bosnian Serb leaders declared the Republyika Srpska 
 Serb-Croat and Bosnian wars wrought a terrible toll on their peoples . The Serbs and Bosnians were killed in the Bosnian and Serbian wars .
 Much of the fighting was conducted by irregulars, notably Serb irregulars . Although there was initially some open warfare between more or less regular armies, much of the war was fought by irregular forces .
 'Serb Volunteer Guard' massacred hundreds in eastern districts of Croatia and Bosnia . These were little more than organized bands of thugs and criminals, armed by Belgrade and led by professional felons like 'Arkan'
 Colonel Ratko Mladic placed himself in charge of the Bosnian Serb forces from 1992 . He helped organize the first attacks on Croat villagers living in majority-Serb communities in the Krajina .
 The primary strategic objective was not so much the defeat of opposing forces as the expulsion of non-Serb citizens from their homes, land and businesses in the territories claimed for Serbs . Non-Serbs were expelled from homes, businesses and homes in the territory claimed for the Serbs
 Serb forces were far and away the worst offenders in the fight for Serbia . This ‘ethnic cleansing’—a new term for a very old practice, was engaged in by all sides, but Serbs were the worst . This 'ethnic cleansing' is a new term,
 In the first year of the wars in Croatia and Bosnia there were 3 million people from Yugoslavia (one in eight of the pre-war population) seeking refuge abroad . One in eight Yugoslavs sought refuge abroad during the war .
 The international community was hardly unaware of the Yugoslav tragedy unfolding in real time on television screens of the world, with harrowing pictures of starving Muslims in Serb prison camps and worse .
 The Europeans were the first to try and intervene, sending an EC ministerial team to Yugoslavia in June 1991 . It was on this occasion that the unfortunate Jacques Poos, foreign minister of Luxembourg, unburdened himself of the deathless claim that ‘the hour of Europe’ had
 The European Community and its various agencies proved quite helpless . Its members were divided between those, like Germany and Austria, who favored seceding republics and others, led by France, who wanted to retain existing borders and states .
 Since the United States remained resolutely above the fray, that left only the United Nations . The U.N. is the only nation to be involved in the fight in Syria .
 The UN has imposed sanctions on Serbia, Serbia and Montenegro . But beyond imposing sanctions on Belgrade, there appeared little to be done by the UN .
 Only practical achievement of the international community before 1995 was to install a 14,000-strong UN Protection Force in Croatia to separate Croats and Serbs after the fighting there had subsided, followed by the insertion into selected towns in Bosnia .
 Of greater long-term significance, perhaps, was the setting up in The Hague, in May 1993, of an International Tribunal for War Crimes . The Tribunal was set up in the Hague, The Hague in 1993, to prosecute war crimes .
 The mere existence of such a court confirmed what was by now obvious—that war crimes, and worse, were being perpetrated just a few score miles south of Vienna, Austria .
 Until then all talk of foreign intervention had been stymied by the claim that the Bosnian Serbs were strong, determined and well armed . The claim was propounded by French and British officers in and out of UN forces .
 Bosnian Serbs were accorded a virtual free hand 6 , but nevertheless the Serbs proceeded to overplay it . The Serbians were given the chance to win the Bosnian War .
 A 'Muslim-Croat' Federation (formed in March 1994 in a ceremony in Washington that put an end to Croat-Muslim fighting) should receive 51 percent of a newly federal Bosnia, with the Serbs getting 49 percent . The Serb leaders based in the town of Pale took
 In February 1994, Sarajevo's forces lobbed a mortar shell from the surrounding mountains into the marketplace of Sarajeva, killing sixty-eight people and wounding hundreds more . The attack was the first mortar shell to hit the marketplace in the city .
 NATO with UN backing threatened air strikes in the event of further attacks . NATO and UN backed a temporary lull after the attacks .
 In May of 1995, in retaliation for some Bosnian military advances and Croatia’s successful recapturing of the Krajina, Serbia shelling of Sarajevo resumed . In May 1995, the shelling resumed in response to some military advances .
 Western governments importuned the UN and NATO to desist . Terrified for the fate of their soldiers, Western governments urged them to stop . NATO and UN have been accused of encouraging the deaths of soldiers .
 The international presence, far from constraining the Serbs, now offered them additional cover . Serbs' international presence now offers them more cover . The Serbs have a long history of fighting in the Balkans .
 Bosnian Serb forces under Mladic brazenly marched into one of the so-called UN ‘Safe Areas’, the eastern Bosnian town of Srebrenica . The town was overflowing with terrified Muslim refugees .
 When Mladic’s men arrived the Dutch battalion laid down its arms and offered no resistance whatsoever . Serbian troops combed the Muslim community, systematically separating men and boys from the rest .
 In the course of the next four days nearly all of the 7,400 killed were killed . Nearly all of them were killed in the four days .
 News of what appeared to have taken place at Srebrenica was broadcast worldwide . Within days the news of what had taken place in the Bosnian war was broadcast .
 NATO warns of resumption of air strikes if Serbs attack other 'safe areas' are attacked . Only immediate response was an official warning from NATO to the Serbs .
 President Clinton authorized a serious and sustained bombing campaign designed to reduce and ultimately eliminate the Serbian capacity to cause further harm . Clinton overcame a lingering reluctance on the part of the UN leadership .
 Bosnian Serbs folded after being faced with an open-ended assault on their positions . Milosevic had no backing from the Serbs, who now took great care to emphasize his distance .
 With Serbs out of the picture and the U.S. now very much in, it proved surprisingly easy to introduce peace . The United States is still in the Balkans, but it's unlikely to be a war-torn region .
 On November 1st the talks began, at a United States Air Force base in Dayton, Ohio .
 Tudjman represented Croatia, Alija Izetbegovic spoke for Bosnian Muslims . Alija Ijevic also spoke for the Bosnian Muslim . Slobodan Milosevic signed on behalf of both Yugoslavia and Bosnian Serbs .
 Dayton, from the American perspective, was to find a solution to the Yugoslav wars that did not entail a partition of Bosnia . The objective of Dayton was finding a solution that didn't involve a partition, the U.S. says .
 Serbs, Muslims and Croats of Bosnia all had a degree of administrative and territorial autonomy but within a single Bosnian state . The external boundaries of the state would remain unaltered .
 It was at French insistence that the signing ceremony was held in Paris—an exercise in ceremonial overcompensation that only drew attention to Frances previous reluctance to act .
 Most of those expelled from their homes (Muslims, above all) never returned, despite assurances and encouragement from local and international authorities . Most Muslims never returned to their homes .
 Serbs were systematically expelled by Zagreb from the newly retaken Krajina or else pressured by their own armed militias to leave their homes in Sarajevo and elsewhere and settle in predominantly Serb areas . Indeed there were to be further ‘cleansings’
 The peace was kept by a 60,000-strong NATO army acting as an Implementation Force and a civilian High Representative . The High Representative was empowered to administer the country until it could assume responsibility for its own affairs .
 Both the High Representative and the international troops are still in Bosnia and continue to oversee its affairs at the time of writing . The situation is an indication of the calamitous condition of the country following the war .
 Bosnian economy after 1995 depended almost entirely upon the presence and expenditures of these agencies . Bosnian economy after 1995 depended on the presence of the agencies .
 A World Bank estimate of January 1996 suggested that in order to recover Bosnia would need $5.5 billion over three years . World Bank estimates that Bosnia needs $5 billion to recover from the collapse of Yugoslavia .
 Once the Bosnian war ended, international interest in Bosnia has subsided . International agencies were put in place to help secure the peace .
 The European Union, as usual, was transfixed by its own institutional concerns . Clinton was taken up first with domestic election issues and then with NATO expansion .
 Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia were now ostensibly independent states . But the Yugoslav problem had not yet been resolved . Yugoslavia still had a long-standing Yugoslav problem .
 Slobodan Milosevic was still in control of what remained of his country and the issue on which he had ridden to power in the first place was about to explode . The issue of the former president's role in the Serbian government was going to explode, but it was not until
 The Albanians of Serbia had continued to suffer discrimination and repression . With international attention deflected to the crisis farther north they were more vulnerable than ever .
 Milosevic turned back to Kosovo after a series of defeats to his name . Serb nationalist politicians in Belgrade criticized him for compromising with Serbia’s ‘enemies’
 Milosevic had opportunity to condemn all Albanian resistance as ‘terrorist’ and authorize a campaign of increasing violence . Its tactics — consisting mostly of guerilla attacks on isolated police stations — offered him an opportunity .
 In March 1998, Serb forces killed and wounded dozens of people in massacres at Drenica and other Albanian villages . The international community at last responded to pleas from Rugova and began paying closer attention .
 Kosovo Albanian leadership decided that only complete separation from Serbia could save their community . By now all the Kosovo Albanians are in exile or in hiding . Most of them are in hiding or hiding .
 The U.S. and the ongoing ‘Contact Group’ countries continued to try to mediate between Milosevic and the Albanians . Partly to broker a 'just' solution, partly to head off a broader war in the south Balkans .
 Newly independent Macedonia, known at Greek insistence as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 9, was a historically sensitive zone . The area is now known as Macedonia 9 by Greek insistence .
 Its frontiers with Bulgaria, Greece and Albania had all been disputed before and after both World Wars . The border with Albania, Bulgaria and Greece was disputed by both sides of the war .
 The landlocked little state is utterly dependent on trade and access to the outside world . It was looked upon with suspicion by all its neighbors, including its neighbors .
 Yugoslavia's survival following the break-up of Yugoslavia was by no means a sure thing . And its survival after the break up of Yugoslavia is not always assured . But the country's survival was not always a guarantee .
 If Macedonia were to collapse, Albania, Bulgaria, Greece and even Turkey might be drawn into the conflict . Albania and Bulgaria could be involved in the conflict if the country collapses .
 Milosevic’s continued mistreatment—massacres—of the Albanians in Kosovo was bound to bring down upon him the disapproval and ultimate inter9 . The ageing Greek Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou claimed that the term ‘Macedonia’ was part of
 If the Slav state carved out of southern Yugoslavia called itself by that name it must harbour irredentist ambitions . The Slav state in southern Yugoslavia was formed from a Slavic state of Yugoslavia .
 Papandreou could not acknowledge that many of the ‘Greeks’ of Greek Macedonia were themselves of Slav descent . Many of the 'Greek' of Greek Macedonian descent were actually Slavs, albeit officially Hellenized .
 President Jacques Chirac of France, President Madeleine Albright of the United States, and NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana of Spain, were warned by U.S. Secretary of State Madelein Albright and others . President Albright was warned by French President Jacques
 Like Saddam Hussein a few years later, Milosevic was isolated and insulated from Western opinion . He was overconfident of his own ability to manipulate foreign statesmen and maneuver between them .
 Milosevic had good reason to think that he was seen in the West not as an intransigent foe but as a privileged interlocutor . He was pleased by frequent visits from certain U.S. diplomats .
 The Yugoslav dictator was well aware of the international community’s overarching concern to avoid any further redrawing of international boundaries . And the Yugoslav dictator is well aware that this is not the case .
 Contact Group of foreign ministers publicly ruled out independence as a solution in Kosovo . As late as July 1998, despite clear evidence that the situation in Kosovo was now desperate, the Contact Group had ruled out a solution .
 Milosevic failed to grasp the transformative impact of the Bosnian catastrophe upon international opinion . The Bosnian war had transformed the world's view of the conflict in Bosnia .
 Human rights were now high on everyone’s agenda, if only out of a gnawing collective guilt . Human rights, ethnic cleansing in particular, were now on everyone's agenda . The world was now feeling guilt at the failure to act in time .
 Hundreds of Albanian 'terrorists' now being killed by special police units drafted in from Serbia . Growing evidence that under the cover of this conflict Belgrade was planning to ‘encourage’ the departure of the Albanian population, forcing them to flee their land .
 Serb police actions were sometimes in response to KLA attacks, more typically involving mass executions of one or more extended families . The actions were intended to terrorize whole communities into fleeing into Albania or Macedonia . In the winter of 1998-99 there were reports of Serbs police actions .
 The United States and most NATO partners openly favored some form of military intervention on behalf of the besieged Albanians as early as October 1998 . The U.S. and most of its NATO partners were open to military intervention in 1998 . Albania has been in the throes of a civil war
 In the winter of 1996, following palpably fraudulent results in local elections, Serb students demonstrated for three months in the streets of Belgrade, demanding change . But at the UN (which would have had to authorize such intervention in the ostensibly ‘domestic’ affairs of a
 Within the EU and NATO itself Greece, for its own reasons, opposed any intervention in Yugoslav affairs . Greece was opposed to any intervention by the EU or NATO .
 Ukraine and Belarus offer ‘unconditional solidarity’ and ‘moral support’ to their fellow Slavs in Serbia . Meanwhile Ukraine and Belorussian offered ‘condemns’ support for Serbia, Serbia .
 The apparent stalemate might have continued indefinitely had Belgrade not upped the ante with a series of brutal mass murders in early 1999, first on January 15th at the village of Racak in southern Kosovo and then in March all across the province .
 The Racak attack, in which 45 Albanians were killed (23 of them apparently executed), served finally—like the marketplace massacre in Sarajevo, to stimulate the international community to take action .
 Belgrade refused to withdraw its forces from Kosovo and accept a foreign military presence there . After fruitless negotiations at Rambouillet between Madeleine Albright and a Yugoslav delegation, intervention became inevitable .
 NATO ships, planes and missiles went into action over Yugoslavia on March 24th, in effect declaring war on the Belgrade regime . Despite the absence of formal UN approval, NATO declared war on Yugoslavia in effect .
 President Clinton’s imprudently public insistence that there should be no NATO ground troops engaged . The outcome was a foregone conclusion, but it played into the Serb cult of victimhood .
 The occupation of Kosovo marked the end of the decade-long cycle of Yugoslav wars . Milosevic himself was also the beginning of the end for the Yugoslav leader .
 Milosevic was overwhelmingly defeated in the Yugoslav presidential election of September 2000 by opposition candidate Vojislav Kostunica . His credibility was undermined by this latest and worst setback for the Serb nationalist project .
 Milosevic cynically conceded that Kostunica had more votes, but declared that the margin was so close that a runoff was needed . The Serb leader aroused a storm of popular protest among the longsuffering Serbs themselves .
 On October 5th Milosevic finally conceded defeat and stepped down . Tens of thousands of protesters took to the streets of Belgrade to protest .
 As with the Sarajevo atrocity, Belgrade and its apologists insisted either that it never happened or, when that became untenable, that it was a staged ‘provocation’ by the victims themselves . Six months later the government of Serbia, increasingly desperate for
 U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali described Bosnia as ‘a rich man’s war’ when its representatives did arrive in the Balkans they spent most of their time blocking any decisive military action against the worst offenders .
 France in particular displayed a distinct reluctance to place any blame for the course of events on Serbia . France displayed a marked disinclination to get involved in Serbia's crisis in Serbia .
 Mitterrand accused the Americans of ‘over-dramatizing’ and refused to place Yugoslavia on the agenda of an upcoming OSCE summit in Paris in 1990 . The French President refused to include Yugoslavia in the OSCE meeting .
 Dutch government vetoes NATO strikes on Bosnian Serb strongholds until all Dutch soldiers are safe out of the country . Government vetoed any NATO strikes until all troops are out of country .
 There was no British embassy in Sarajevo to issue such visas, the only way a Bosnian family could secure them was by making its way to a third country . The UK government would and did claim that since they had found asylum somewhere else, Britain need not admit them .
 Germany, Austria and the Scandinavian countries played generous host to hundreds of thousands of Yugoslav refugees between 1992 and 1995 . However, the UK actually saw a decline in the number of asylum seekers in these same years .
 It took Washington an extraordinarily long time to focus upon events in the Balkans . Once the U.S. did engage there, its record is distinctly better .
 US defense establishment was reluctant to take any risks and because many U.S. politicians continued to believe that their country had £ no dog’ in this war .
 The idea of deploying NATO in these novel circumstances was not an easy sell . The United States might unilaterally intervene in the domestic affairs of a sovereign state with which it had no quarrel .
 The failure of the Yugoslav federal system was precipitated by Belgrade, but Ljubljana and Zagreb were not sorry to see it go . Belgrade's failure precipitated the collapse of the Yugoslavia's federal system .
 Bosnian Muslims, it is true, had only restricted opportunities to commit war crimes of their own . For the most part, they were on the receiving end of other people’s aggression . The Bosnian Muslim community was not at the forefront of war crimes .
 Theirs is the saddest loss of all—and the destruction of Sarajevo a particular source of grief . Theirs are the sadest losses of all, and theirs are a source of their grief .
 Armed Croats, on the other hand, were responsible for innumerable acts of violence against civilians, writes Zagreb . Armed Croat was responsible for atrocities against civilians under direction and on their own initiative, he says .
 Croat extremists deliberately set about expelling Muslims and mixed families from the western half of the city of Mostar, Bosnia . Croat extremists set about to expel Muslims and Muslims from the west half of city . Mostar is a town in western Bosnia with an unusually high percentage of interfaith marriages
 Croat peasants driven into the town and radicalized by their own experience of ethnic cleansing in the villages, and set siege to the Muslim eastern districts . They then replaced them with Croat peasants who had been driven into town . Croat peasants set siege in eastern districts of the town .
 In November 1993, they systematically destroyed the sixteenth-century Ottoman bridge across the Neretva river . The bridge was a symbol of the town’s integrated and ecumenical past . In the meantime, the town was destroyed by the authorities .
 Of all the post-Communist leaders who emerged from the rubble, Franjo Tudjman was one of the more unattractive . The Croats, then, had little to boast of—and of all the former Communist leaders, he was one .
 Only after Tudjman’s death could the Croat state begin credibly to re-position itself as a candidate for membership of the international community . Croat state he had founded began credibly . Only after his death, Croatia will be able to rejoin the world's international community
 Serbs and their elected leader Slobodan Milosevic were responsible for the Yugoslav catastrophe . But in the end the primary responsibility for the Serbian catastrophe must rest with the Serbs, writes David Frum .
 It was Milosevic whose bid for power drove the other republics to leave . It was his bid to power that drove the others out of the country . The former Yugoslavia was one of the last republics that left the country in 2008 .
 Milosevic encouraged his fellow Serbs in Croatia and Bosnia to carve out territorial enclaves . He backed them with his army and backed them in Bosnia and Croatia . It was then backed by the Serb in Croatia, Bosnia and Bosnia .
 Milosevic authorized and directed the sustained assault on Yugoslavia’s Albanian population that led to the war in Kosovo, he says . And it was Milosevi who authorized the sustained attack on Yugoslavia's Albanians .
 Serbs lost land in Krajina region of Croatia; they were forced to accept an independent Bosnia and abandon plans to carve from it a sovereign Serb state . They were defeated in Kosovo, from which most of the Serb population has since fled in justified fear of Albanian retribution
 Serbs may well be the greatest losers in the Yugoslav wars . Serbs have a long history of collective self-pity at the injustice of history . In the longer run the Serbs are likely to be the biggest losers in Yugoslav wars.
 Even Bulgaria and Romania rank above Serbia in present living standards and future prospects . It says something about the condition of their country that today even even Serbia ranks above Serbia . Serbia is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 The appalling ferocity and sadism of the Croat and Bosnian wars was the work of Serb men, mostly young, aroused to paroxysms of casual hatred and indifference to suffering by propaganda and leadership from local chieftains .
 Serb propaganda could call Bosnia a history of past sufferings that lay buried just beneath the misleadingly placid surface of post-war Yugoslav life . Serb history was a history upon which Serbs could call—a history of sufferings .
 Wars did not just break out from spontaneous ethnic combustion . But those wars did not break out of spontaneous ethnic combustions, they did .
 Yugoslavia was the worst case, but post-Communism was difficult everywhere . The country's post-communist crisis was particularly acute in Yugoslavia and Yugoslavia .
 The path from authoritarianism to democracy in Portugal or Spain accompanied the accelerated modernization of a backward agrarian economy . Portugal and Spain was familiar from its own past with the rest of Western Europe's past .
 The much-anticipated passage from capitalism to socialism had been theorized ad nauseam in academies, universities and coffee bars from Belgrade to Berkeley . No-one had thought to offer a blueprint for the transition from socialism to capitalism .
 Of Communism’s many encumbering legacies, the economic legacy was the most tangible . The economic legacy of Communism was the economic inheritance of the Communist Party .
 Slovakia, Transylvania, or Silesia, coupled economic dysfunction with environmental irresponsibility . The obsolescent industrial plant of Slovakia, or Transylnania, is the result of economic and environmental dysfunction .
 Before there could be investment in new industries the old ones would need to be dismantled and someone would have to make good the damage they had wrought . The old industries would need a new industry to be built .
 In the eastern Lander of Germany the bill for undoing the damage of Communism was assumed by the Federal government . In the east of Germany, it has been assumed that the cost of undoing Communism was the responsibility of the government .
 The Treuhand spent billions of Deutschmarks over the next four years buying up and selling off obsolete industrial plants and factories . They paid off redundant employees and paid off their redundant employees .
 Elsewhere the cost of reinventing economic life had to be borne by the victims themselves . Elsewhere, the cost was also the responsibility of the victims . The victims themselves had to reinvent their economic life .
 The first strategy conformed best to the free-market theorems beloved of an emerging generation of post-Communist economists and businessmen . The second strategy was more politically prudent .
 The 'big bang' approach was applied earliest and with the greatest consistency . It was in Poland, under the determined supervision of Leszek Balcerowicz, the country’s central bank .
 Obviously, Balcerowicz argued, his country could not recover without international aid . He argued that his country, which is insolvent in all but name, could not survive .
 Poland needs to put in place credible structures that would reassure Western bankers and lending agencies . But that aid would not be forthcoming unless Poland put in credible structures, the Polish PM says .
 It was not the International Monetary Fund that was forcing harsh measures on Poland . Poland would merit and receive the help it needed, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The only way to do this was fast, during the postCommunist honeymoon and before people realized how painful the process would be. And the only way of doing this was to do it was fast .
 At the other extreme stood men like Slovakia’s Meciar, Romania’S Iliescu or Ukraine’�s Prime Minister Leonid Kuchma . At the end of the decade, the Slovakian Prime Minister said he would not be surprised if he
 Ukraine has been reluctant to liberalize domestic markets or reduce the state’s share in the economy . Wary of upsetting their constituents they delayed the introduction of change as long as possible .
 First tier of former Communist states re-emerged on a more secure foundation in the early 1990s . Former Communist states are able to attract Western investors and envisage EU membership .
 The relative success of the Polish or Estonian economic strategies when compared to the fortunes of Romania or Ukraine is obvious to any visitor . The more successful eastern European countries have fared better than former East Germany, for all the latter’s apparent advantages .
 It is tempting to conclude that the more ‘advanced’ post-Communist states like Poland were able to bridge the gap from state socialism to market capitalism . Meanwhile a second tier of countries in the Balkans and the former Soviet Union was left to struggle in their wake .
 The miracles of economic transformation on offer in the capital cities of certain countries are not always replicated in their distant provinces . In Prague or Warsaw or Budapest, for example, the miracle of economic change is not always replicable in their far provinces .
 More revealing than the differences between the post-Communist experiences of these lands are their similarities . Rather than differences in post-communist experiences, the similarities are the similarities of the two countries .
 In every country, after all, the new ruling elites faced the same strategic choices . In all countries, the choices were made by the new rulers, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The ‘market-economic romance’ was universal, as Russian Premier Viktor Chernomyrdin termed it dismissively in January 1994 . The 'market-economy romance' was universal .
 These were outcomes that almost everyone sought, but there was no alternative, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There were no alternative" to the outcome of the Obama administration .
 If there were deep differences in public policy in post-Communist societies, it was not because of division of opinion over where these countries had to go or how to get there . It is not because there are divisions in opinion over what these countries must do or how they must go,
 These were the people who would be in charge of their countries after 1989 no less than before . The post-Communist generation would emerge, but a new generation could emerge .
 When the state sold its interest in everything from drilling rights to apartment blocks, these were the men (and they were mostly men) who would do the selling . Ukraine’s future prime minister Yulia Timoshenko being a notable exception .
 Capitalism, in the gospel that spread across post-Communist Europe, is about markets . Capitalism is in fact about markets, the gospel of post-communist Europe .
 The fire-sale of publicly owned commodities in post-1989 eastern Europe had no historical precedent . The fire sale of publicly-owned commodities had no history precedent, it said .
 The cult of privatization in western Europe that had gathered pace from the late Seventies offered a template for the helter-skelter retreat from state ownership in the East .
 In many post-Communist countries such laws and institutions are quite unknown—and dangerously underestimated by neophyte free-marketers there . In some post-communist countries it's dangerous to underestimate free-marketeers .
 At its most shameless, in Russia under the rule of Boris Yeltsin and his friends, the post-transition economy passed into the hands of a small number of men who became quite extraordinarily rich . By the year 2004 thirty-six Russian billionaires had corralled an estimated $
 Public assets and institutions were pulled apart and re-allocated to one another by officials . Officials extracted and secured quite literally anything that moved or could be legally re-assigned to private parties . Public assets, institutions and institutions pulled apart .
 Public goods, state loans or subsidies passed directly from the hands of government to the pockets of a few clans . Much of it then transited on to private accounts overseas, much of it transiting onto private accounts .
 The new 'capitalists' in these countries did not actually make anything, they merely laundered public assets for private benefit . The new ‘capitalists’ in these . countries did . not actually . actually make . anything; they merely . laundered . public assets .
 In Romania and Serbia, state assets suffered a similar fate or else were not sold off . In Serbia and Romania, the state assets were sold off or not privatized . Local political chieftains prefer to maintain their power in the old way .
 Like Albanians at about the same time, Romanians seeking instant market gratification were offered pyramid schemes instead . They promised huge short-term gains without risk without risk .
 At its peak one such operation, the ‘Caritas’ scam, which ran from April 1992 to August 1994, had perhaps four million participants . The scam was nearly one in five of the Romanian population .
 The balance of risk favoured foreign investors, if only because the prospect of EU membership was accelerating institutional reform and legislation . Elsewhere in Central Europe, the balance of risks favoured foreign investment . EU membership is accelerating the necessary institutional reform, legislation and legislation, experts say .
 Much of the initial privatization in Hungary or Poland consisted of the transformation of Communist-era black market activities into legitimate business . Even so, much of the early privatization in Poland or Hungary consisted of transformation of the black market into legitimate businesses .
 Only 16 percent of Poland’s state-owned businesses have been sold into private hands . Three years after the revolution only 16 percent had been sold to private hands in Poland .
 One reason for the distortions attendant upon privatization in post-Communist Europe was the virtual absence of Western engagement . The distortions attendant to privatization were due to the absence of the Western engagement, writes Peter Bergen .
 Moscow or Warsaw was awash in young American economists offering to teach their hosts how to build capitalism . German firms showed an early interest in relatively upscale Communist companies like the Czech car manufacturer Skoda .
 As in the past, eastern Europeans have had to compete with the West on a markedly uneven playing field . Eastern Europeans lack local capital and foreign markets and export only low-margin foods and raw materials . Eastern Europe has to compete on uneven playing fields .
 In 1992, when Estonia left the ruble zone, 92 percent of Estonia’s trade was with the former Soviet Union . Estonia has been in the process of leaving the Soviet Union since 1992 .
 Three quarters of trade was with the West, much of it across the Baltic . Five years later over three quarters of that trade was in the West .
 Unemployment remained endemic in many places, and with the loss of a job went the cheap facilities and other benefits that had traditionally accompanied work in these countries . Unemployment remains endemic .
 With prices rising steadily, anyone on a fixed income or a state pension had good cause to wax nostalgic for the past . Most teachers, doctors and engineers were once the pride of Socialism .
 Many people in Eastern Europe—above all those over forty, complained bitterly of what they had lost in material security and cheap board, lodging and services . This did not mean that they were necessarily longing to return to Communism .
 Opinion polls of Latvians would be horrified to imagine a return to Russian rule . But peasants especially are convinced they were better off in Soviet times, polls show .
 In the late Eighties, before the revolutions, East Europeans were avid cinemagoers . East Europeans are still avid cinemas .
 Bulgaria, Bulgaria, Romania, Romania and Russia had fallen 96 percent . The same was true everywhere—in Bulgaria it was down 93 percent, in Romania it was 94 percent . In Russia it was also down 96 percent.
 Cinema attendance in Poland in the same years was only down by 77 percent, in the Czech Republic by 71 percent, and in Hungary by 51 percent . In Poland, attendance was only 77 percent .
 Data suggest a direct relationship between prosperity and film-going and confirm the explanation offered in one Bulgarian poll for the decline in local cinema at16 . And inefficiency—one irony of ritualized privatization in eastern Europe was that once collective farms were broken up into tiny plots they could no longer
 In the circumstances, the difficult and incomplete economic transformation of Eastern Europe prompts the Johnsonian observation that though it was not done well, one is surprised to find it done at all . The difficult economic transformation is not well done, says Johnson .
 With the exception of Czechoslovakia, none of the formerly Communist societies had any living memory of genuine political freedom . Many local commentators were pessimistic about the chances for pluralist politics .
 Democracy, it was feared, risks slipping into competitive demagogy . If capitalism without legal restraints descends readily into theft, it could slip into competition .
 By concentrating power, information, initiative and responsibility into the hands of the party-state, Communism had given rise to a society of individuals not merely suspicious of one another and skeptical of any official claims or promises, but with no experience of individual or collective initiative and lacking any basis on which
 It was older people who were least equipped to negotiate the transition to an open society . Older people are less equipped to deal with transition to open society, experts say .
 The younger generation had better access to information—from foreign television and radio and, increasingly, from the internet . "The younger generation has better access than the older generation," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This made many young voters more cosmopolitan and even sophisticated, it also opened a breach with their parents and grandparents . But while this made many . young voters in these countries more . cosmopolitan, even sophisticated . It also made them more . sophisticated, but opened a . breach with parents
 A survey of young Slovaks taken a decade after their country’s independence revealed a clear generation gap .
 This generation gap would have political consequences everywhere, with older and poorer voters becoming susceptible to the appeal of parties offering nostalgic or ultra-nationalist alternatives to the new liberal consensus .
 The disruption and dislocation was worst in parts of the former Soviet Union, where democracy was hitherto unknown . Predictably, this problem was worst for parts of Russia .
 Russia and Ukraine especially were easily attracted to authoritarian politicians . Gratingly poor, insecure, and resentful at conspicuous new wealth of a tiny minority .
 While it proved easy enough in post-Communist lands to invent model constitutions and democratic parties, it was another matter altogether to forge a discriminating electorate . Thus while it proved . enough in . post-communist lands . to invent . constitutions, democratic parties it was . another
 This transformation of the old nomenklatura was less bizarre than it might have appeared to outside observers . This transformation was less than it appeared to be a surprise to some .
 Soviet Communism and traditional nationalists had a common foe— capitalism, or ‘the West’—and their heirs would prove adept at manipulating a widespread envious egalitarianism into blaming post-Communist woes on foreign interference .
 One Romanian voter in three opted for Tudor over the only available alternative, the former Communist apparatchik Ion Iliescu . Tudor was the only candidate in the 2000 presidential elections .
 Even when nationalist politicians began as critics of Communism, they slipped comfortably enough into a symbiotic sympathy for the Soviet past . Even in the case of the Russian ‘national-patriotic’ movement Pamyat, the 'nationalist’s sympathies for Soviet past
 The appeal of outright nationalism proved strongest and most enduring in Russia . Recycled Communists made alliances everywhere with genuine nationalists .
 Russia's disintegration was a source of deep humiliation to older Russians, many of whom shared the resentment of the Soviet military at NATO’s absorption of the Russian l8 But Romania is perhaps unique .
 The wish to recover some international ‘respect’ drove much of Moscow’s post-Soviet foreign policy . It accounts for the nature of the presidency of Vladimir Putin and the broad support on which Putin could draw .
 The citizens of Russia’s former empire in central Europe were not disposed to nostalgia in this form . For obvious reasons, Russia's former empire was not disposed towards nostalgia . The country's former Russian empire is now in ruins .
 The lost world of Communism held some appeal even in East Germany, where polls in the mid-’90S showed a widespread belief that, except for travel, the electronic media and freedom of expression, life had been better before 1989 .
 In the Balkans especially, ‘antiAmericanism’ was typically a code for anti-capitalism, a cover for ex-Communists who could not openly express nostalgia for the old days but traded on it just the same in their disguised public pronouncements . ‘AntiAmerican
 On these goals there was little to distinguish the major competing parties, all of which would win elections by criticizing the ‘failed’ policies of their opponents and then implement a strikingly similar program .
 The result in Central and Eastern Europe was a new ‘wooden’ language of public policy . ‘democracy’, ‘market’ and ‘budget deficit’ are of very little meaning or concern to many citizens. ‘Competition’ is
 Voters who wished to register their protest or express their pain were thus drawn to the margins . Voters were also drawn into the margins of the country .
 In the early Nineties observers saw in the rise in post-Communist Europe of national-populist fringe parties and their demagogic leaders . The atavistic retreat of a backward region imprisoned for half a century in a time-warp .
 In more recent years, the success of Jorg Haider in Austria, Jean-Marie Le Pen in France and their close counterparts in Norway to Switzerland has tended to dilute the patronizing tone of Western European commentary .
 The success of political democracy in many former Communist countries had ambiguous consequences for the intellectuals who had done so much to bring it about . Political democracy in former communist countries had consequences for intellectuals who helped bring about its success .
 Adam Michnik in Poland maintained an influential voice through journalism . Some of the world's most influential journalists have maintained a voice through their own journalism .
 Others, like Janos Kis in Hungary, passed from intellectual disinterest to political career . Others have moved back into academic life after turbulent years in public eye .
 Opposition intellectuals of earlier years did not make a successful conversion into post-Communist politicians or public figures, except as transitional figureheads . Many who tried proved sadly inept .
 "Most of them were quite unprepared for the messy political and technical issues of the coming decade," says David Cameron . Most of them are quite unprepared, he says, for the future .
 They were unprepared for the dramatic fall in the public status of intellectuals in general, as reading habits changed . Younger generation turned away from traditional sources of guidance and opinion, they say .
 By the mid-Nineties some of the once-influential periodicals of an older intellectual generation had become sadly marginal . By the 1990s, some of these periodicals had been left marginal .
 Barbara Toruriczyck’s Zeszyty Literackie, a widely admired literary journal published from Paris by a ’68 generation Polish exile, had played a major role in sustaining Polish cultural debate before 1989 . Zeszzyty literackie was published
 After its triumphant establishment in the capital of its liberated homeland, it struggled to maintain a readership of 10,000 . Now, after its triumph, it struggles to maintain its readership .
 Literdrni Novitiy is the oldest and most influential Czech cultural weekly . It did barely better, with a circulation of less than 15,000 by 1994 . It was the most influential publication in Czech history .
 In Central Europe their increasingly marginal place represented a traumatic shift in cultural priorities . These figures, pro-rated to population, would not have seemed so unworthy to the publishers of literary magazines and periodicals in most Western countries .
 One of the reasons for the decline of the intellectuals was that their much remarked-upon emphasis on the ethics of anti-Communism had been overtaken by the practical business of constructing a market economy . The need to construct a morally aware civil society to fill the anomic space between the
 Within a few short years ‘civil society’ in Central Europe had become an archaic notion, of interest only to a handful of foreign sociologists . ‘Civil society' in the region has become an antiquated notion, says historian .
 The high moral tone of the wartime Resistance had been dispelled and displaced by the practical business of reconstruction and then by the Cold War . Something rather similar had happened after World War Two in western Europe .
 French or Italian writers in those years still had a sizeable audience thanks to their loudly advertised political engagement . But their Hungarian or Polish counterparts were not so fortunate .
 The intellectuals who did make a successful leap into democratic public life were usually ‘technocrats’—lawyers or economists, who had played no conspicuous part in the dissenting community before 1989 .
 Not having performed a hitherto heroic role they offered more reassuring models for their similarly unheroic fellow citizens . They offered them a reassuring model for those similarly un-heroic citizens .
 Allusions to bad conscience raised the troubling question of retribution . "What people had done in the Communist past and what should happen to them now"
 This was to prove to prove a traumatic dilemma for almost every post-Communist regime . This was a difficult dilemma for most of the time .
 On the one hand there was broad agreement, not just among moralizing intellectuals, that political crimes committed in the Soviet-era should be brought to light and punished . On the other hand, there was also broad agreement that the crimes committed should be investigated .
 Communists had been in government for over forty years in all these countries . On the other hand, Communists were in power for over 40 years in each country .
 Its laws, institutions and police had been the only force in the land . Its laws and institutions were the only forces in the country . It has been the country's only police force in its history .
 No international court or tribunal had ever declared Communism to be a criminal regime . They had certainly been recognized as such by foreign governments, foreign governments .
 Some of those who were most prominent in early calls for vengeance against Communist tyranny were of doubtful provenance themselves . Antommunism in the ’90s overlapped with a certain nostalgia for the regimes the Communists had replaced .
 Separating condemnation of Communism from rehabilitation of its Fascist predecessors was not always going to be easy . Separated condemnation of communism from rehabilitation from rehabilitation .
 Such matters, it was felt, felt, were best left for historians, who would now have access to archives and could get the story right for the benefit of future generations .
 Czech Communist leaders collaborated in the overthrow of the Prague Spring . Polish policemen responsible for the assassination of Father Popieluszko . East German authorities who ordered the shooting of anyone trying to scale the Berlin Wall, and so on. East German police who ordered shooting . East Germans who ordered
 After 1989 the decisions were being taken not by an army of occupation but by the parties directly concerned . These questions were broadly comparable to those faced by Allied occupiers of post-war Germany trying to apply their program of de-Nazification .
 The second was in some ways more complicated still, and only emerged over the course of time . The first was more complicated than the second was more complex still .
 Communist regimes did not merely force their rule upon a reluctant citizenry . They encouraged people to collude in their own repression, by collaborating with the security agencies and reporting their activities .
 The scale of this subterranean network of spies and informers varied from country to country . But it was present everywhere, including the UK, and the US .
 The consequence was that while the whole society fell under suspicion, who might not have worked for the police or the regime at some moment? It became hard to distinguish venal and even mercenary collaboration from simple cowardice or even the desire to protect one’s family .
 The price of a refusal to report to the Stasi might be your children’s future . The cost of refusing to report may be the price of your children's future .
 The grey veil of moral ambiguity fell across many of the private choices of helpless individuals . It fell across the private choice of helpless people .
 Adam Michnik: Many of those same former dissidents were the most vigorously opposed to any retribution for their fellow citizens . And it is striking that many of those former dissidents—Adam Michnik prominent among them, were the .
 The difficulties are common to every post-Communist state, each country dealt with them in its own way . For all that these difficulties were common to all post-communist states, they were common in their own way.
 In places where there never really was a transition, the past remained untouched . Communists or their friends remained in power under a new nomenclature and with freshly laundered ‘Western’ agendas .
 In Germany, revelations concerning the size and reach of the state security bureaucracy had astonished the nation . But in Germany, it has astonished the public with the size of the security bureaucracy .
 It turned out that in addition to its 85,000 full-time employees the Stasi had approximately 60,000 ‘unofficial collaborators’, 110,000 regular informers and upwards of half a million ‘part-time’ informers . Many had no means
 Husbands spied on wives, professors reported on students, priests informed on parishioners . Husbands and wives spied, professors spied and reported students . Priests informed on their parishioner, wives and priests .
 There are files on 6 million residents of former East Germany, one in three of the population . 6 million former East German residents are one in 3 of Germany's population .
 "The whole society had in effect been infiltrated, atomized and polluted by its self-appointed guardians," says the author . The whole society was infiltrated by the government, he says .
 Federal Government appointed a Commission under the former Lutheran minister Joachim Gauck to oversee the Stasi files and prevent abuse .
 Individuals would be able to ascertain whether they had a ‘file’ and then, if they wished, come and read it . Individuals would have been able to find out if they had 'file'
 People would learn, sometimes with devastating domestic consequences, who had been informing on them; but the material would not be open to the public at large . People would thus learn—sometimes with domestic consequences—who had been informed on them .
 Gauck Commission was trusted not to abuse its powers, but the information it controlled was hardly ever exploited for political advantage . There was no way to undo the human damage, but because Gauck .
 It was fear of just such exploitation that inhibited similar procedures elsewhere in Eastern Europe .
 In Poland, accusations of past collaboration became a familiar way of discrediting political opponents . Lech Walesa was accused of collaborating with the former special services in 2000 .
 Michnik and others favoured simply drawing a final line under the Communist past and moving on . One post-Communist Interior Minister even threatened to publish the names of all his political opponents who were tarnished by the brush of collaboration .
 Michnik opposed efforts in 2001 to try the former Communist President Jaruselski for giving orders back in 1970 to shoot striking workers . Michnik even opposed efforts to try him for killing striking workers in the 1970s .
 In 1989 the recent memory of martial law and its aftermath had made it seem unwise to open up the past and assess guilt . By the time it was safe to do so the opportunity had passed, popular attention was elsewhere . The quest for belated retroactive justice looked more like political
 In Latvia it was decreed that anyone with a record of KGB involvement would be barred from public office for ten years . Anyone with a history of involvement in the KGB would be banned from office for 10 years .
 From 1994 Latvian citizens were at liberty, following the German model, to see their own Communist-era police files . The contents of the files were made public only if a person ran for office or sought employment in law enforcement .
 In Bulgaria the new government has established tribunals with the authority to impose ‘civic degradation’ upon those guilty of certain offenses associated with the previous regime . The new government, drawing on the practice of post-Vichy France, has set up the practice .
 In neighbouring Romania, efforts to mount a local version of the Gauck Commission foundered for some years . The post-Communist political elite would certainly be implicated in any serious interrogation of the Ceau§escu regime’s activities .
 Eventually a 'National College for the Study of the “Securitate” Archives’ was inaugurated, but it could never aspire to the authority of the German original . Eventually a ‘National College’ for the study of ‘Securite’ Archives
 In none of these countries was the problem of coming to terms with the Communist past resolved to everyone’s satisfaction or with complete fairness . In many countries, the problem was not resolved with everyone's satisfaction .
 In Czechoslovakia, the solution that was adopted aroused controversy reaching well beyond the country’s borders . The solution was adopted in the Czechoslovak state of the then-Czechoslovakia .
 Stalinism here had come later and lasted longer than elsewhere, and the ugly memory of 'normalization' was still alive . Stalinism was still very much alive in the Soviet Union .
 At the same time Communism had a firmer political basis in the Czech region than anywhere else in Eastern Europe . At the time Communism was a stronger political basis than any other region .
 Czechoslovakia’s apparent serial failure to resist tyranny—in 1938, in 1948 and after 1968. Finally, there was a certain national discomfort at the memory of Czechs . Czechs are uncomfortable about the failure of their government in resisting tyranny .
 For one reason or another, the whole country—as it seemed to its critics—suffered from a bad conscience . The whole country, as well as its critics, suffered from bad conscience. The country was suffering from a "bad conscience"
 ‘lustration’ 22 law (renewed for five years in 1996 and renewed again when it expired early in the twenty-first century) purpose was to vet all public officials or would-be public officials for links to the old security services . But it was followed by
 This legitimatesounding objective led, however, to widespread opportunities for abuse . This legitimating objective led to widespread opportunity for abuse, but it has led to abuse .
 Czech writers included a number of the best-known Czech writers . Some of them were not even resident in the country . The Czech Republic is one of the world's most famous writers .
 The secret police lists soon found their way into the press, published and publicized by politicians and parliamentary candidates hoping to discredit opponents .
 In the course of the mud-slinging even Havel was mentioned as a one-time candidate for recruitment into the police network of spies .
 Secret police files furnished copious data about those they sought to recruit . But they were all but silent on the identities of the policemen doing the recruiting .
 CNN.com: "It was from the outset an overtly political device. More seriously, perhaps, it was perhaps an overtly . political device," says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Vladimir Mediar in Slovakia also opposed the lustration law, not least because of his own widely rumored links to the former secret police . Mediar made copious use of the information in police files for his own political ends .
 In the first twelve years of its application, the lustration law did relatively little direct damage . In the past 12 years, it did little direct harm to the environment .
 Czech society was cynical about the way the 'velvet revolution' had played itself out . But the more lasting impact of the legislation was the bad taste it left behind . The legislation left behind a bad taste in the Czech society .
 Far from discrediting Communism and legitimizing its overthrow, the law merely reinforced the skeptical detachment of the public at whom it was directed, it was aimed at .
 The fissile political temper of the Nineties was not confined to the countries of the former Communist East . Beatrice Webb is the author of a new book on the subject of '90s politics .
 The same urge to escape the bonds of centralized rule was felt in the West . The urge to relinquish responsibility for impoverished fellow citizens in distant provinces was also felt .
 From Spain to the United Kingdom the established territorial units of Western Europe were subjected to extensive administrative decentralization . They all managed more or less to retain the form of the conventional national state .
 In some places this centrifugal propensity had already surfaced decades earlier, as we saw in Chapter 16 . In some parts of the U.S. it had emerged decades earlier as a result .
 Catalonia especially had emerged within a generation as virtually a state-withina-state . Catalonia has its own language, institutions and governing councils . Basque region had been recognized by the new constitution in Spain .
 Catalan was to become the ‘dominant language of instruction’ in 1983 Law of Linguistic Normalization . Generalitat decreed the exclusive use of Catalan in kindergarten and infant schools . Catalan is to be the only Spanish language used in Spanish kindergarten .
 Over a quarter of all foreign investment in Spain came to Catalonia, much of it to the flourishing provincial capital, Barcelona . Per capita income in Catalonia as a whole was more than 20 percent above national average .
 Catalonia would count among the more prosperous states on the European continent . Catalonia is one of the most prosperous states in the continent .
 The rise of a distinctive Catalan identity was an easily stoked resentment at the substantial contribution Catalans were expected to make to the national exchequer . In part to the setting up in 1985 of an Inter-Territorial Compensation Fund to assist Spain's poorest regions .
 Franco exploited to exhaustion of the traditional gamut of national claims . Franco exploited the glory of Empire, the honour of the military, the authority of the Church . After his fall many Spaniards had scant interest in the rhetoric or tradition .
 The old industrial districts of the Basque country were in decline . The six million Catalans were prospering, but the old industrial areas of the country were declining . Catalans are prospering but the Basques are in decline.
 Unemployment was endemic and income levels in the region were lower than in Catalonia, hovering close to the national average . Income levels in Catalonia are lower than those in Catalonia . Unemployment in Catalonia was endemic .
 Basque nationalists failed to capitalize on these problems because many of the region’s two million inhabitants were new to the area . By 1998 only one person in four could even speak Euskera, the Basque language .
 Herri Batasuna, the political wing of ETA, is losing votes to moderate autonomists and mainstream Spanish parties . ETA was losing votes in Spain to moderate nationalists and even mainstream parties, says Spanish media .
 By the end of the decade it had declined into an all-purpose outsiders’ party for disaffected Greens, feminists, Marxists and anti-globalizers . It had declined to become a Greens party for women and Marxists .
 In Spain, the splintering of the nation-state was driven by past memories . In Spain it has been driven by memories of the past . Spain is now the most populous country in the world .
 Such regions also benefitted from a range of regional subsidies and other encouragements from the European Union in Brussels .
 Their place, however, had been taken by a decidedly more threatening form of regional separatism . Their place is now in place of those who want to leave the country .
 Piedmont, Umbria, or Emilia had at least as strong a claim to historical distinction as Catalonia or Galicia . The regional linguistic distinctions that had been so striking just a few decades before were now fading, but they had not yet completely disappeared .
 The new regions of Italy were largely an administrative fiction . But the new regions were largely administrative fiction in Italy . The regions of Spain were largely the provinces of Italy and Spain .
 The regional units of Italy could neither overcome the ultra-local identification of Italians with their native village or town, nor break the political and above all the financial reach of the capital .
 The establishment of regions was to remind Italians of the fundamental and continuing rift between the prosperous North and the dependent South . It also offered political expression to which this gave rise to resentments to which it gave rise .
 Italian north has long been markedly richer than the rest of the country . Piedmont, Lombardy and Lombardy have been richer than rest of country .
 The poverty rate in the Mezzogiorno at the end of the Eighties was three times that of northern Italy . Poverty rate in Mezzogorno was three .
 North and northcentral Italy were comparable in wealth and services to France or Britain . But the South had fallen ever further behind, opening a gap that was only made good in part by substantial cash transfers .
 The League’s charismatic founder and leader Umberto Bossi was to gut Rome of its fiscal powers, separate the North from the rest, and ultimately secure independence for Lombardy and its neighbours . The impoverished, ‘parasitic’ rump of the country was
 The resemblance to Catalonia (or Slovenia, or indeed the Czech Republic under Vaclav Klaus) will be clear . Catalonia will have a similar resemblance to Slovenia under Klaus, or Slovenia, under Klaus .
 In national elections of the 1990s the Northern League was able to command enough of the vote in Lombardy and the Veneto to ensure itself a foothold in conservative governing coalitions . The Northern League is currently in charge of Italy's most conservative parties .
 In spite of these mutual antipathies, there was never any serious question of Italy breaking apart or any of its provinces becoming independent . Bossi’s more reckless supporters were more reckless, he says .
 Mitterrand presidency undertook limited administrative decentralization in France . Much of the same was true of France, where he attempted to disperse institutions and resources to the provinces .
 Of the country’s newly established regional units not even Alsace or the French Basque districts evinced much interest in cutting ties to Paris, despite their historical identities .
 Only Corsica saw the rise of a movement for national separation, based on a genuine sense of linguistic and historical uniqueness . Corsica would flourish with independence from the mainland, but the island would flourish without independence .
 Corsican nationalists’ taste for violence (and interfamilial score-settling) confined their appeal to a minority . But, like ETA, they’re not a minority of Corsicans, but a minority.
 Even the faintest stirrings of regional separatism triggered in Paris an avalanche of neo-Jacobin disdain across the political spectrum . What was distinctive about France was that whereas elsewhere in Europe politicians and commentators now paid formal homage to the virtues of autonomy .
 The provinces of France with the strongest sense of difference have been dependent on government largesse for decades .
 The few remaining Breton or Occitan separatists, mostly ageing militants, were left stranded by the retreat from Sixties-era enthusiasms . Everything from infrastructructural spending on high-speed railway lines to tax benefits for inward investment came from Paris .
 Despite their heavy economic dependence upon London, the Celtic fringes had undergone something of a national revival . Across the English Channel in Britain, however, the Scottish city of Leithith had undergone an economic revival .
 Only in the more mountainous and underpopulated areas of north Wales did demands for full independence actually find a sympathetic response . Plaid Cymru is a nationalist party backed by nationalists .
 Plaid Cymru made an initial breakthrough in the national elections of 1974 and maintained a small but visible presence thereafter . But they were never able to convince their compatriots of the nationalist case . As a result, they were not able to win support in Wales .
 Of the minority of Welsh voters who turned out in a March 1979 vote on devolution to regional assemblies, most were opposed . Most of the Welsh voters turned out against devolution in 1979 .
 When devolution eventually came to Wales two decades later, it was not at the behest of local nationalists but as part of an administrative overhaul by the first New Labour government of Tony Blair . Blair calculated that the limited powers assigned to a new Welsh parliament in Cardiff would almost certainly fall into the
 The outcome appears to satisfy whatever demand there was in the principality for a separate national identity . The outcome is a Welsh Assembly with considerable symbolic value but little real power .
 Wales, after all, had been absorbed into and under England in 1536 during the reign of Henry VIII . Recent revival of interest in its language and history was real enough, but it should not be mistaken for a full-scale recovery of national consciousness .
 If there was anger or resentment under the surface of Welsh public life it derived from economic woes, not thwarted national aspirations . Welsh people are not angry or resentful, but they are frustrated by their economic woes .
 Welshmen offered choice between independent Wales and recovery under English rule of mining valleys and villages devastated by de-industrialization and unemployment . Welshmen would not have hesitated.
 SNP overtook Conservatives at 1974 elections, placing pressure on Labour strongholds . SNP was a ‘single-issue’ party at the time of its breakthrough in 1974 .
 Scottish Parliament in Edinburgh indisputably speaks for a country which thinks of itself as a distinct and separate nation, if not quite a state . Unlike the Welsh, Scotland did favour devolution of power .
 Scottish nationalism benefited from the fortuitous discovery of North Sea oil and gas . Scottish administrators and businessmen were able to bypass London and forge direct links to Brussels .
 Its sense of self rested less on linguistic or religious distinctions, which had grown tenuous for most of its residents, than on a curious admix of superiority and ressentiment . The city's sense of self rested on linguistic and religious distinctions .
 Some of the greatest achievements of English-language political and social thought since the Enlightenment, from David Hume to Adam Smith and on to John Stuart Mill and beyond, were actually Scottish . In the same way that so many of the classics of modern English literature are in fact Irish .
 Edinburgh was the intellectual capital of early industrial Britain and Glasgow the radical core of the British labour movement in the early years of the twentieth century . Scottish businessmen, Scottish managers and Scottish emigres were responsible for establishing, settling and administering much of England’s empire .
 An independent Scotland would have been by no means the smallest or poorest nation-state in the European Union . Scotland would not have been smallest or the poorest state in the EU, but would have had to be part of the EU .
 Scotland has secured much of the appearance and some of the substance of independence . Whether the majority of the Scottish population would ever wish to go further is less certain .
 The limitations of geography, demography and resources which have kept Scotland dependent upon the UK are still there . Scotland as elsewhere the engine of nationalism was running out of steam in the Nineties .
 Scottish emigrants who had crossed into Ireland were less clear . Whether the same was true among the descendants of those who crossed into the country was not clear .
 The channel separating Scotland from Northern Ireland is less than fifty miles wide . But the gulf between the sensibilities of the two communities remains .
 The Unionists and the Provisionals were finally forced into compromise in the last years of the century . This was not for lack of determination on the part of extremists on both sides .
 Whether the Good Friday Agreement could resolve the national question in Ireland remains unclear . Good Friday agreement was signed in April 1998 .
 The interim solution on which both sides reluctantly concurred left much unresolved . "The interim solution leaves much unresolved," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The terms of the accord brokered by the Prime Ministers of Ireland and the UK, with assistance from President Clinton, were much that could have been imagined, with good will on all sides, twenty years earlier . Local self-government by an Assembly based in Ulster, with guarantees of representation
 As an armistice in Irelands Hundred Years War the agreement seemed likely to hold for a while . The agreement was agreed to end the conflict in 1914-15 .
 The ageing radicals at the head of the insurgency appeared to have been won over by the prospect of office . Not for the first time in such matters, the ageing radicals appear to have won over .
 The Republic of Ireland underwent an unprecedented socioeconomic transformation in the course of the 1990s . It now bore little discernable resemblance to the ‘Eire’ of nationalist imaginings .
 To anyone familiar with their earlier history, the new politics of sub-national particularism in western Europe might appear simply as the reversion to type following the centralizing detour of the previous century .
 Germany, the largest European state west of the former Soviet Union, did not experience a comparable separatist resurgence . Germany is not the only country in Europe to experience a similar resurgence .
 Post-Nazi Germany was already a truly federal republic . This was not because of any peculiarities of its history but because post-Nazi German was already federal . This is not because it was not unique to Germany, but because of its peculiarities, its history .
 Germany’s distinctive past probably did play an inhibiting role in Lander . To the limited extent that . identity politics might have appealed to Germans, the Lander offered a serviceable surrogate .
 Belgium was one West European state whose internal schisms bore some resemblance to contemporary developments in the post-Communist east . Belgium is the size of Wales with a population density exceeded only by the adjacent Netherlands .
 National states of Western Europe remained intact after separatist wave of late twentieth century receded . Its story may cast light on why national states of Europe remain intact, says author .
 By the 1990s the towns and valleys of Wallonia were sunk into post-industrial decline . Wallonia was once a major industrial hub in France .
 Belgian coal production in 1998 was less than two million tons per year, down from twenty-one million tons in 1961 . Belgium coal production fell from 20 million tons to less than 2 million tons a year in 1981 .
 In what was once Europe’s most profitable industrial region there remained only the decrepit mills of the Meuse valleys above Liege and the gaunt, silent mining installations around Mons and Charleroi .
 Most of the former miners, steel-workers and their families in these communities depended upon a welfare system administered from the country’s bi-lingual capital . The welfare system was paid for—as it seemed to Flemish nationalists—out of the taxes of gainfully employed
 In 1947 over 20 percent of the Flemish workforce was still in agriculture . 50 years later fewer than 3 percent of Dutch-speaking Belgians derived their income from the land .
 In the decade from 1966 to 1975 the Flemish economy grew at the unprecedented rate of 5. percent per annum . Even during the economic trough of the late Seventies and early Eighties it continued to grow, at a rate nearly twice that of Wallonia .
 Antwerp and Ghent flourished with the growth of services, technology and commerce, aided by their location athwart Europe’s golden banana’, running from Milan to the North Sea .
 There are now more Dutch speakers than French speakers in the country . Dutch speakers produced and earned more per capita per capita .
 The Belgian north had overtaken the south as the privileged, dominant region . A crescendo of demands from Flemish for political gains to match their newfound economic dominance .
 Flemish nationalism had been shaped by resentment at the obligation to use French . The French-speakers’ apparent monopoly of power and influence, at the francophone elite’s .
 Flemish nationalists, then, had traditionally taken for themselves a role comparable to that of Slovaks in pre-divorce Czechoslovakia . Even to the extent of actively collaborating with the occupiers during World War Two, they actively collaborated with the Nazis .
 Flanders was presented by its nationalist politicians as Slovenia : a dynamic modern nation trapped in an anachronistic and dysfunctional state . Flanders is now presented as Slovenia, not in the image of backward Slovakia, but as Slovenia .
 Flemish separatist politics woven into fabric of Flemis separatist politics . Dutchspeaking provinces of the north had long since won the right to use their own language in public affairs .
 The dramatic events at Leuven—a curiously parochial and chauvinist echo of contemporary student protests elsewhere—brought down a government and led directly to a series of constitutional revisions over the course of the ensuing thirty years .
 The institutional re-arrangements of Belgium were always understood by the separatists as mere stepping stones on the road to ultimate divorce . Although devised by moderate politicians as concessions to satisfy the demands of the separatists, the . separatists . Belgium was always understood as a mere stepping stone on the .
 Neither side quite achieved its aims, but they did come close to dismantling the Belgian unitary state .
 The regions and the linguistic communities don't exactly correspond . There are German speakers in Wallonia and a number of French-speaking towns within Flanders .
 Special privileges, concessions, and protections were established for all of these, a continuing source of resentment on all sides . Special privileges and concessions were established .
 Two of the regions, Flanders and Wallonia, are effectively unilingual, with the exceptions noted . The exceptions noted are Flanders, Wallonia and Flanders . Flanders is one of Belgium's most populous regions .
 Brussels was pronounced officially bilingual, even though at least 85 percent of the population speaks French . Brussels is pronounced bilingual, but it is not officially French .
 Linguistic equality on the Cour d’Arbitrage was similarly mandated, with the presidency alternating annually across the language barrier . The presidency alternates between the president and the president of the court in each language .
 In Brussels, the four members of the executive of the capital region would henceforth sit together (and speak in the language of their choice) to decide matters of common concern . But for Flemish or Francophone 'community' affairs they would sit separately, two by two .
 Belgium was no longer one, or even two, states but an uneven quilt of overlapping and duplicating authorities . As a consequence Belgium was not one, but an overlapping and overlapping authorities . Belgium is now one of the world's most populous states .
 The politics of this constitutional upheaval were just as convoluted as the institutional reforms themselves . The politics was just as complicated as the reforms themselves, says CNN's John Sutter .
 On the Flemish side, extreme nationalist and separatist parties emerged to press for the changes and benefit from the new opportunities to which they gave rise . The new Belgian state of Belgium is the most populous country in Belgium .
 In Wallonia and Brussels, politicians from the French-speaking mainstream parties adopted a harder ‘communitarian’ line, the better to accommodate Walloon voters who resented Flemish domination .
 Belgium had the highest ratio of public debt to gross domestic product in Western Europe . It is expensive to duplicate every service, every loan, every grant, every sign, and every sign .
 By the end of the century’s century, ‘Belgium’ had taken on a decidedly proforma quality .
 Visitors could hardly miss the colorful placard informing them of the province (Liege, say, West-Vlaanderen) that they had just entered, much less the information board indicating that they were in Flanders or Wallonia .
 Belgium is one of the most successful states in Western Europe . There are three factors that help account for Belgium’s improbable survival . Belgium is the only state of Western Europe to survive .
 In the first place, with the passing of generations and the implementation of constitutional reforms, the separatist case lost its urgency . In the second place, the case has been dropped, the government has said .
 The old communitarian ‘pillars’ -- hierarchically organized social and political networks that substituted for the nation-state -- were already in decline . The old 'pillars' were already declining, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: ‘The old communitar ‘
 The main newspapers, Le Soir and De Standaard, have almost no readers outside the French and Dutch-speaking communities respectively . A younger generation of Belgians was prov2 .
 Neither side takes much trouble to report news from the other half of the country . As a result, neither takes much time to report from other half .
 Even information boards on interregional trains switch back and forth between Dutch and French as they cross the regional frontiers .
 English is now the common language of Belgium . It is only pardy a jest to say that English is the most common language in the country .
 The decline in religious practice, the accessibility of higher education, and the move from countryside to town loosened the grip of the traditional parties . The decline of religious practice and the rise in higher education have loosened their grip .
 Like the new Basques, these people have pressing concerns of their own . These people have little interest in the dusty agendas of ageing separatists . The new Basque people are not interested in separatist agendas .
 Opinion polls through the Nineties indicated that most people, even in Flanders, no longer put regional or language issues at the head of their concerns . Opinion polls have shown that most Flanders do not put regional and language issues in the top of concerns .
 The obvious difference between Belgium and other parts of Europe where nationalists were able successfully to exploit communal sensibilities is that for the vast majority of residents of modern Belgium life was both tranquil and materially sufficient . For the majority of Belgian life was tranquil and materialistic .
 The same prosperity that underwrote the ‘Flemish miracle’ also attenuated the politics of linguistic resentment . The country is at peace—if not with itself then at least with everyone else .
 Catalonia's more extreme exponents of the case for national independence saw their arguments defanged by the demobilizing effects of unaccustomed affluence . This observation applies with equal force to Catalonia or even parts of Scotland, where the more extreme arguments were defanged .
 The third reason for the survival of Belgium has less to do with economics than with geography . The two are closely related, though the two are very different . Belgium's internal fragmented nation-states are a key reason for its survival .
 Flanders—or Scotland—could in the end remain comfortably part of Belgium or the UK . It was not because they lacked the intensity of national sentiment that appeared to have re-surfaced in former Communist lands .
 The states of Western Europe were no longer free-standing national units with a monopoly of authority over their subjects . What made the difference was the fact that the states of Europe no longer had a monopoly on authority .
 The formal mechanism for a move towards full European Union was set out in the Single European Act of 1987 . But what really drove the process forward was the end of the Cold War . The EU was set up in 1987, but what drove it forward was end of Cold War.
 The SEA committed by 1992 to achieving by 1992 the full and free circulation of goods, services, capital and people . The same objectives were already envisaged in principle decades before . The SEA had committed the twelve members of the Community to achieve by 1992 .
 Maastricht Treaty of that year propelled the Union’s members into a truly novel set of institutional and financial arrangements . These were the direct outcome of radically changed external circumstances .
 The European Commission is authorized to impose fines upon reprobate governments . The German negotiators—wary of the profligate tendencies of ‘Club Med’ countries like Italy or Spain—imposed draconian conditions for membership .
 These terms were designed to insure that the new euro would be as inflation-proof as the Deutschmark itself . In poorer member states it was widely feared that they would constrain public policy and perhaps even prevent growth .
 Jacques Delors promised large increases in EU structural funds in return for their signatures on the Treaty . Delors all but bribed the finance ministers of Greece, Spain, Portugal and Ireland .
 The UK and Denmark signed the main body of the Treaty but opted out of the proposed common currency . Partly in anticipation of its economically restrictive impact; partly because of its symbolic resonance in nations already reluctant than most to abandon the trappings of sovereignty to transnational agencies .
 Under the restrictive terms of the Treaty it was clear (as the French at least had intended) that the newly liberated countries of eastern Europe could not possibly join the European Union in the immediate future . Neither their fragile legal and financial institutions nor their convalescent economies were remotely capable of operating
 The symbolic value of extending NATO in this way was obviously considerable, which is why it was immediately welcomed in the new candidate member-states . NATO's symbolic value was obvious, as was the symbolic value it was .
 Central European nations were admitted to NATO a few years later . Washington had reasons of its own for favouring the expansion of the North Atlantic Defense community .
 Maastricht Treaty provoked an unprecedented level of interest in what had hitherto been the obscure workings of the European Union and its anonymous bureaucracy .
 The Treaty was approved in every country where it was put to a national vote . It aroused sufficient opposition to place the question of ‘Europe’ on domestic political agendas .
 For four decades, institutions and rules of a new continental system had been quietly designed and decided in obscure Benelux towns with no reference to public wishes or democratic procedure . The institutions and . rules of the new continental . system had . been quietly decided and decided by obscure Benelsux
 Maastricht cleared the way for the coming together not, indeed, of Europe, but at least of its western half . The third consequence was that it cleared the . way to the . coming together . of Europe .
 The end of the Cold War and the EU’s commitment to a single market, removed impediments to membership for the remaining members of the old European Free Trade Area, the old EU .
 Sweden, Finland and Austria all applied, no longer constrained by their commitment to neutrality . Sweden, Austria and Finland all duly applied . All three countries were left out of the common European space .
 The accession negotiations with the new applicants were completed in just three years . Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic joined in 1999, just in time to be committed to NATO’s engagement in Kosovo .
 Bulgaria, Romania, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Lithuania and Lithuania were admitted in 2004 . Slovenia, Slovakia and Slovenia were admitted to the U.S. in 2004.
 Norway and Switzerland are the last remaining hold-outs in Switzerland and Norway . The same would have been true of the last two hold-out nations .
 Despite considerable enthusiasm on the part of local business leaders the populations of both countries voted against membership . Both countries are fearful of losing their autonomy in a supranational federation .
 A similar skepticism marked the closeness of the vote in Sweden in 1994, when EU membership was put to a referendum . A comparable skepticism marked a similar skepticism in 1994 .
 Gahrton’s feelings were shared by many northern Europeans, including some who nonetheless voted in favour of membership .
 In Sweden and Norway, the EU was seen as a choice, not a necessity . The EU is seen as an important part of the country's economic history .
 In Central and Eastern Europe, membership of 'Europe' was the only possible option . The EU is now the most important part of the continent .
 New rulers from Tallinn to Tirana looked to Brussels to modernize their economies . Whether it was to secure new markets, obtain foreign aid, stabilize their domestic politics, lock themselves into ‘the West,’ or simply head off the temptation of a retreat into national Communism .
 The prospect of joining the EU, with its promise of affluence and security, was dangled temptingly before the liberated electorates of post-Communist Europe . But the prospect of the EU was not always as secure as it was offered to the liberated electorate .
 Don’t be seduced by those who tell you it was better under the old system, they were warned . They were warned. Don't be fooled by those saying it was good under the new system .
 East European countries lost between 30 and 40 percent of their national income in the years after 1989 . East European nations lost 30 to 40 per cent of national income after 1989, according to the OECD .
 Each new agreement and treaty had further complicated the requirements placed upon memberstates in return for binding them into the ‘European’ family . These regulations and rules had the cumulative result of building ever-higher fences .
 The Schengen Treaty was a boon for the citizens of participating states, who now moved unhindered across open borders between sovereign states . The treaty was signed by the European Union in 1998 .
 Residents of countries outside the Schengen club were obliged to queue, quite literally, for admission . But residents of those countries outside of the club were not allowed to queue .
 Maastricht, with its rigid requirements for a common currency and its insistence that all aspiring member-states integrate into their systems of governance, was the ultimate bureaucratic exclusion zone . The acquis communautaire was the rapidly burgeoning code of European practices .
 It posed no impediment to Nordic applicants or Austria, but presented an awesome hurdle for would-be candidates from the East . Austria, Austria, and the Nordic countries were the most successful candidates .
 EU in practice sought to keep new Europeans out as long as possible . EU was committed by its charter to welcoming the new Europeans into its fold .
 Even the wealthiest of the new hopefuls, Slovenia, say, or the Czech Republic, were distinctly poorer than any existing EU member . Most of them were very poor indeed, and most of them are very poor .
 The life expectancy of males in Hungary was eight years short of the EU average; in Latvia, eleven years . In Latvia, life expectancy is eleven years, according to the average in the EU .
 If Hungary, or Slovakia or Lithuania were admitted to the Union on the same terms as its present members, the cost in subsidies, regional assistance, infrastructure grants and other transfers would surely break the EU budget . Poland, Hungary, Slovakia and Lithuania, with its 38 million inhabitants, would surely
 In December 1994 the Bertelsmann Foundation in Germany published a study suggesting that if the six countries of Central Europe then seeking entry to the EU were admitted on the same terms as existing members, the cost in structural funds alone would exceed thirty billion Deutschmarks a year . The cost in
 The recipient countries in the East were in no position to put up even the minimum matching funds required under existing EU regulations . In any case, the recipients of the funds would not be able to pay the minimum amount required .
 What post-Communist Europe really needed was a Marshall Plan, he says . No-one was offering it, but no-one offered it, he adds .
 There was talk of western Europe being overrun’—a distant but unmistakable echo of Herder’s fears of the rumbling of the ‘wild peoples’ of eastern Europe . Herder feared western Europe would be overrun .
 With these concerns in mind, western Europeans procrastinated . Western Europeans duly procrastinate .
 In the immediate aftermath of 1989 the German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher initially proposed that the European Union absorb all the countries of Eastern Europe as soon as possible as a prophylactic measure against a nationalist backlash .
 Margaret Thatcher continued to press enthusiastically for early enlargement . But he was soon brought to heel . The French approach came to dominate EU strategy . Margaret Thatcher had hoped for a pan-European free trade area .
 Francois Mitterrand’s first response had been to propose a loose-knit‘European Confederation’—a sort of outer tier of associate membership, open to all-comers with no conditions and few material benefits .
 In later years French diplomats would bemoan the lack of support for this suggestion . regretting the lost opportunity for ‘calm collaboration’ towards an enlarged Union .
 At the time it was seen as a transparent ploy to corral the newly liberated Eastern European states into an ersatz ‘European community’ that would justify keeping them out of the real thing indefinitely . But at the time, it was rightly seen as the ploy, to cor
 Relations between eastern and western Europe remained stuck at the level of bilateral exchanges and trade accords . Certain countries—Hungary, Poland, Czech Republic and Slovakia—accorded a strictly limited ‘associationaP status vis-a-vis the EU but nothing more .
 The transition to a new common currency and the translation into practice of the Maastricht plans for institutional integration were the dominant preoccupation in every Western European capital . The transition of a new currency and a new national currency were the main preoccupations in Europe .
 The Yugoslav catastrophe had served to remind Western statesmen of the risks of underestimating postCommunist problems in general . Meanwhile, the Yugoslav catastrophe has now become a full-time obsession .
 The gaze of prominent intellectuals, a sure barometer of passing political fashions, had moved away . The gaze has moved away from prominent intellectuals in recent years .
 Prague and Budapest, their miraculous transition out of tyranny already a fading memory, had been left to tourists and businessmen . Prague's miraculous transition from tyranny was already fading memory .
 Bernard-Henri Levy and Susan Sontag were more likely to be found in Sarajevo than in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
 Central Europe’s fifteen minutes of fame had passed and with it any public pressure to expedite its absorption into Western institutions had passed . Central Europe's 15 minutes of fame had passed, with it with no public pressure to expedite its absorption
 Under EU's own rules it could not deny countries the right to apply for membership . Under the EU’s own rules, the EU cannot deny memberships .
 The European Commission was constrained to accept applications from Hungary and Poland in 1994, Romania, Slovakia, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania and Bulgaria in 1995, and Slovenia and the Czech Republic in 1996 . The Commission accepted applications from all over the world .
 All of these candidate countries were now parked in a rather crowded ante-room, awaiting the Union's attention .
 In 1997 the Treaty of Amsterdam added a series of important technical amendments to the original Rome Treaty . The amendments filled out the goals of Maastricht and putting teeth into the Union’s stated intention to develop a program of European citizenship and Europe-wide institutions .
 At this point, with the common currency scheduled to come into effect in 1999, the Union had completed a decade of internal integration that had absorbed all its bureaucratic energies . The common currency was scheduled to be implemented in 1999 .
 There is no longer any excuse for postponing the far thornier issue of expansion . There was no longer an excuse for delaying the issue of expanding the country's borders .
 The European Union began the accession process of all ten eastern European applicants in 1998 . But it soon became clear that this might be politically imprudent . Left out in the cold Romania or Poland could drift into dangerously undemocratic waters .
 From this point the enlargement took on a dynamic of its own, notwithstanding continuing misgivings on the part of a number of existing EU members . Opinion polls show a widespread lack of enthusiasm among their populations .
 Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, Poland and Slovenia . Bulgaria, Romania, Slovakia, Latvia, Lithuania, Lithuania and Malta also make the list .
 Poland’s presence in the first group, despite the economic difficulties it posed, was explained by its size and prominence . Poland was the only country to qualify for the first-tier tournament .
 Slovakia, conversely, was ‘relegated’ to the second tier in response to the stagnation and corruption wrought there by Meciar’s authoritarian rule . Slovakia was also a warning and example to others as a warning to others .
 There followed five years of intense and sometimes acrimonious negotiations . The United States is now the world's largest country .
 The applicants pressed as hard as they dared for assurances that they would have free access to EU consumers, while defending their domestic market from being overwhelmed by more attractive and efficient goods and services from the West .
 The EU was the longstanding and openly avowed object of Eastern desires . The putative new members of the EU could offer little in return except the promise of good behaviour .
 New members of the EU would have to accept that the EU, despite its commitment to a single market, was going to impose considerable restrictions on their own export of goods and, especially, people . And thus it was agreed that while the new members would be accorded a few limited concessions
 European Commission report published in 2000 prophesied an annual exodus of 335,000 from the ten eastern accession states if the frontiers were opened without restriction . Most of the Western member-states insisted on quotas being placed on the number of eastern Europeans who could move to the West .
 Only the UK and Ireland declared their willingness to conform to the ‘open door’ principles of the Union . The UK announced welfare benefits for work-seekers from Eastern Europe would be kept to a minimum . Work-seekers would be allowed to work in the UK, Ireland and Ireland
 The eastward extension of agricultural subsidies and other benefits was also placed within strict limits . Eastward extensions were also placed under strict limits.
 The main reason for enlargement was to hold down the cost of enlargement and minimize competition for Western producers . But the main reason was simply to hold the cost down, the government says .
 Not until 2013 would East European farmers get the same subsidies as those already being paid out in the West . By which time, most of them would have retired or gone out of business .
 By the time the negotiations were complete, the terms agreed and the 97,000 pages of the Union’s acquis communautaire duly incorporated into the governing codes of the applicant states, the actual enlargement itself came as an anti-climax .
 Most of the new states have waited fifteen years to join the U.S. Federal Reserve . They have been joined by Canada and South America .
 In any case, many of the practical benefits of Western engagement had already been discounted . In car manufacturing, former Communist states had a ready supply of cheap, skilled labour .
 Between 1989 and 2003 the cumulative total of foreign direct investment for Eastern Europe as a whole had reached $117 billion . Eastern Europe's total foreign direct direct investment in Eastern Europe reached a total of $117billion .
 By the early twenty-first century, foreign investment in former Communist Europe was tailing off . Foreign investment in ex-Communist Europe was actually tailoring off in the 1990s .
 Once they were inside the Union it would certainly be easier to do business in and with countries like Poland or Estonia, it would be easier for them to do so .
 Poland expected to double its food exports to the EU within three years of joining the EU . Poland is expected to increase its food export by more than a third in three years . Poland joined the EU in 2007 and joined the European Union in 2010 .
 Once they were inside the EU, wages and other costs in the countries of Eastern Europe would begin to rise to Western levels . The EU is expected to become a major source of growth in the region .
 The region's cost advantage over factories in India, or Mexico, would be lost . The region’s cost advantage is lost .
 Profit margins would start to fall in the manufacturing sector . The manufacturing sector would benefit from lower margins .
 In Poland it was just 41 percent, in Latvia, the poorest new member, 33 percent . Latvia is the poorest member of the European Union .
 Slovenia would take twenty-one years to catch up with France . Even if the economies of the new EU states kept growing on average 2 percent faster than those of the old EU states . Slovenia would have to grow 2 percent more than France in the next twenty years .
 The citizens of formerCommunist states had no access to such data, of course . Former Soviet Union citizens were not allowed to access such data .
 The formal implications of the EU’s ‘big-bang’ enlargement were real enough . Nonetheless, for all the . justified skepticism of the beneficiaries, the . benefits of the . beneficiaries are real enough, writes Andrew Keen .
 Its population increased by one-fifth (though its economy expanded by less than 5 percent) Its land mass increased by almost as much as its land mass .
 Its economic troubles were perhaps the most familiar and in the end the least serious of its concerns . The country's economic troubles are perhaps the biggest and most familiar of its troubles .
 With or without new member states the EU continued to spend huge sums of money on its farmers . The EU continues to spend—as it had done from the outset—hugely disproportionate sums of . money on farmers .
 Forty percent of the Union’s budget—or $52 billion in 2004—went on politically motivated ‘farm support payments’ Many of the payments were to large mechanized agri-businesses in France or Spain that hardly needed the help .
 Farm price supports would still constitute over a third of the EU’s total expenditure well into the second decade of the new century, placing an intolerable burden upon the budget . Even after agreement had been reached to reduce subsidies and cut the Common Agricultural Program it was anticipated that farm price supports
 The European Union started out, half a century before, as a customs union . It was bound together by not much more than a common external tariff . The EU started out as a ‘common market’ with a single external tariff.
 A highly optimistic assumption. Its pattern of expenditure was driven and then constrained by ne7 . Its pattern was driven by the state of the country .
 In the years following their accession to the EC in 1986, the economies of Spain and Portugal grew on average between 1 percent and 1. percent faster than the rest of the Community . Portugal and Spain joined the European Economic Community in 1986 .
 Over the years its ambitions had expanded into the realms of culture, law, government and politics . It had taken on—in Brussels and elsewhere—many of the external trappings of a conventional government .
 European Union had and has very few revenue-raising capacities of its own . But conventional governments are free to raise money to meet their anticipated costs . The European Union is free to meet its anticipated costs, but has few resources to raise .
 Very little of the EU’s income is under the direct control of the Union’�s own administration . All of it is vulnerable to political pressures within the separate member-states .
 Most of the latter are recipients of EU largesse rather than contributors to its budget . Most of them are recipients, not contributors to the EU, rather the latter .
 In 2004, following its enlargement to the East, 19 of the Union’s member countries received from Brussels more than they paid in . The EU received more than it paid in following the enlargement of the East .
 Ominously for the Union’s future prospects, all six countries petitioned the Commission in December 2003 to have national contributions to the EU budget reduced from 1.24 percent of GNI to just 1 percent .
 The EU's budget is tiny in comparison to that of even the smallest memberstate and mostly spent on structural funds, price supports and the EU’s own costly administration . The EU is a permanent hostage to the interests of contributors and recipients alike .
 The levers of the Union’s economic machinery depend for their efficiency upon the consent of all its constituent parts . The levers depend on their efficiency on their consent .
 The EU has made remarkable progress on open internal borders, or unrestricted markets for goods and services . The EU is a place where everyone more or less concurs on the principle and benefits of a given policy .
 EU’s single market commissioner expressed his surprise in July 2004 at watching France and Germany revert to the ‘protectionist’ policies of the Seventies in defense of threatened local firms .
 Both Berlin and Paris have tax-paying voters whom they simply cannot ignore . But then both have unelected commissioners in Brussels, unlike the unelected EU commissioners . The EU Commission is an unelected body of power .
 These paradoxes of union are nicely captured in the tribulations of the euro . The euro is a union of nations, but it is not a one of the most powerful in Europe .
 Countries wishing to join the euro were obliged to hold their public debt down to no more than 60 percent of GDP . Eurozone countries were expected to run budget deficits of no over 3 percent of the same .
 Any country that failed these tests would be subject to sanctions, including substantial fines, imposed by the Union . Any country failing the tests would face sanctions including substantial fine .
 The point of these measures was to ensure that no euro-zone government would let down its fiscal guard, overrun its budget at will and thus place unfair strains on the economies of other members . Eurozone members who would have to bear the burden of ensuring the stability of the common currency .
 To everyone’s surprise, the traditionally spendthrift southern tier proved surprisingly disciplined . To everyone's surprise the traditional spendthrifts in the South East proved surprisingly .
 Even Italy managed to pass the Teutonic tests, albeit with more than a little juggling of figures and the one-time sale of public assets .
 By 2003 the euro-zone encompassed twelve countries, ranging from Ireland to Greece . By 2003 it had encompassed 12 countries, including Ireland and Greece .
 The strains of a ‘one size fits all’ currency soon began to tell . But as many skeptics had predicted, the strains of the currency soon begin to tell. But—as many skeptics .
 The newly established European Central Bank in Frankfurt maintained from the outset a relatively high interest rate to support the new currency and secure it against inflation .
 Eurozone economies differ with respect to their level of development and their point in the economic cycle . But the economies of the euro-zone states differed with respect both to their development and point in economic cycle.
 Some countries were booming but others lagged far behind and could have used the boost to domestic activity as well as exports that would have been achieved by lowering interest rates and ‘softening’ the currency .
 Portugal was obliged by the terms of the ‘pact’ to reduce government expenditure . It ought, in conventional economic theory, to have been spending its way out of recession . Shorn of the power to implement such measures, the government of Portugal was forced to reduce spending .
 The fact that neither France nor Germany was adhering to its own rules represented a significant challenge to the whole agreement . Given the size of their respective economies, the fact that . France and Germany was not adherding to their own rules was significant challenge .
 Paris and Berlin made it clear they had no intention of paying fines or even committing themselves to doing significantly better the following year . But this time, they regarded the ‘temporary’ deficits as economically unavoidable . The Commission set in motion the penalty proceedings .
 The EU's smaller states had striven mightily and at some cost to meet the pact’s terms . Those such as the Netherlands and Luxembourg feared for the stability of what was now their currency too .
 Within less than a decade of its appearance, the growth and stability pact was dead . The pact was the first of its kind .
 Just how much the euro would actually suffer if the participating countries were allowed more flexibility in their domestic budgets was by no means clear .
 There were many who felt that the real problem lay not with national governments but with the rigid and seemingly unresponsive Central Bank . Central Bank was still fighting the anti-inflationary battles of the 1970s .
 Jean Monnet and his heirs had deliberately eschewed any effort to imagine, much less implement, a democratic or federal system . Monnet, his heirs, had deliberately avoided any attempt to imagine or implement a democratic system .
 To the extent of other concerns ever arose, they were serially postponed . "To the extent, other concerns never arose," they were postponed .
 By the 1990s, the European Union was still run along lines that had been laid down decades before and mostly for managerial convenience . The EU was still running along the lines that were laid down in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The unelected Commission in Brussels administered a substantial bureaucracy . It initiated policies and implementing agendas and decisions subject to approval of a Council of Ministers .
 In the original Rome Treaty its function had been strictly consultative, but no power of initiative . An unwieldy European Parliament, sitting variously in Strasbourg and Brussels and directly elected since 1979, has a slowly expanding oversight role .
 Uncontentious decisions are typically made in Brussels by experts and civil servants . The Brussels government is expected to make a decision in coming days .
 Policies likely to affect significant electoral constituencies or national interests were hammered out in the Council of Ministers .
 Britain, Germany and France could not always count on getting what they wanted . But whatever they truly did not come to pass, it was not coming to pass . The dominant member states, Britain and Germany, did not always get what they hoped .
 It bore no relation to the condition of the separate states of North America in 1776 . They emerged as satellites of a single country, Britain, whose language, culture and legal system shared .
 Member-states of the European Union remained completely independent and separate units in a voluntary association to which they had, over time, conceded a randomly accumulated set of powers and initiatives without saying what principle lay behind the arrangement .
 What brought matters to a head was not the inherently complicated and incremental nature of the Union’s system of rule, but the impossibility of maintaining it with twenty-five members, he says .
 Hitherto the chairmanship of the Council of Ministers rotated every six months, with each country getting to host a self-promoting bi-annual European conference . The new system is already much disliked by the Union's full-time administrators .
 The prospect of such a circus shambling around twenty-five different capitals, from Lisbon to Ljubljana, was plainly absurd . The circus will travel to Lisbon, Lisbon, Lijubljan and Lijans .
 A decision-taking system designed for six member-states and already cumbersome for twelve, much less fifteen, would simply grind to a halt with fifty European Commissioners or a European Council representing twenty-five member-state . Each with a power of veto, each with a veto, would be
 The likely difficulties were all too well foreshadowed at a meeting in Nice, France in December 2000 . A meeting in France in 2000 was also foreshadowing .
 The conference ended in acrimonious and deeply embarrassing horse trading . Ostensibly called to lay the groundwork for enlargement and to devise a new voting system in the EU Council .
 Leading European statesmen like Tony Blair, Jacques Chirac and Gerhard Schroeder spent sleepless nights bargaining and bickering for status and influence in their common European home . The unseemly scramble for influence at Nice illustrated the price that was now being paid for previous neglect of
 The presidency of the Convention was assigned to the ageing but ever-vainglorious Valery Giscard d’Estaing . Following a certain amount of lobbying from Paris, the presidency of Paris was assigned .
 The Convention emitted something more than a draft but decidedly less than a constitution . After two years of deliberations, the Convention emitted a draft draft . The convention was held in Washington, D.C.
 Shorn of its portentous Giscardian preamble, the Convention’s document offered little by way of classic constitutional proposals . No sweeping definitions of individual liberty, no clear statement concerning the division of powers, etc.
 The proposed constitution would have served to reduce—over time— the top-heavy system of national representation in the Commission . It devised a system for voting in the European Council that proved, after a certain amount of haggling, to be acceptable to all parties .
 If the technocrats who built the institutions of the new ‘Europe’ had shown a haughty unconcern for the opinions of the public at large, this sentiment was now being repaid in kind and in earnest .
 With each direct election to the European parliament the turnout fell . The only exceptions to this rule were those occasions where national and European elections coincided .
 In France it fell from 60 percent in 1979 to 43 percent in 2004; in Germany from 66 percent to 43%; in the Netherlands from 58 percent to 39 percent . Otherwise the decline was unbroken; in France, it fell between 60 and 43 percent .
 The contrast between the level of interest that electors exhibited for national politics and their growing unconcern for the parliament in Strasbourg is especially revealing .
 The decline in the Dutch vote may be especially ominous . It was closely replicated in the new member-states of the East, even though this was their first opportunity to vote in an election .
 The Netherlands in recent years has been retreating into itself, a development both illuminated and accelerated by the rise of Pirn Fortuyn and his assassination .
 In Hungary the turnout in the June 2004 European elections fell short of the last national elections by 32 percentage points . In Slovakia, where the latest national elections had seen a 70 percent turnout, the share of the electorate that bothered to come and vote in the European elections was 17 percent .
 In Poland the turnout of just 20 percent represented a 26-point decline from the national elections of 2001 . Turnout was the lowest since the fall of Communism and was the highest since the end of Communism .
 In large part because of a widespread belief that they had no influence over them, they were left out of influence . That is in large part due to a belief that the government has no influence .
 Most European governments had never held a vote to determine whether or not they should join the EU or the euro-zone . In those countries where the issue had been put to a national referendum it was rejected, or else passed by the narrowest of margins .
 The Union was not ‘owned’ by its citizens, it seemed somehow to stand apart from the usual instruments of democracy . So the Union stood apart from other tools of democracy, he said . The Union seemed to be not owned by citizens, he added .
 Real power lay with a Commission appointed by national governments and a Council of Ministers . Real power belonged to national governments, according to the Commission, which was appointed by governments .
 National elections, in short, were where the crucial choices were made . National elections are crucial choices for the future of the country .
 ‘faceless’ men and women in Brussels now wield real power, says Brussels expert . But the 'faceless' now wields real power in Brussels, he says .
 Everything from the shape of cucumbers to the color and wording of a person’s passport was now decided in Brussels .
 Every national government had at one time or another over the past two decades found it convenient to blame ‘Brussels’ for unpopular laws or taxes, or economic policies .
 Many of those who did bother to turn up at the polls gave their support to overtly anti-EU candidates . It was not by chance that in the same European elections of 2004 that saw such a sharp falling off in voter interest .
 In Belgium the Vlaams Blok, in Denmark the Dansk Folkeparti and in Italy the Northern League all played on a similar register as they had done before .
 In France, Jean-Marie Le Pen’s Front National took a similar position . But French doubts over European enlargement were not confined to the political extremes .
 Mitterrand, Chirac and their diplomatic representatives had all worked hard to postpone the inevitable for as long as possible . The French president and French President Francois Hollande were killed in the fall .
 The economic benefits of the single market have been real, even the most ardent British Euroskeptics had come to concede, particularly with the passing of the passion for ‘harmonizing’ that marked the Commission Presidency of Jacques Delors .
 The newfound freedom to travel, work and study anywhere in the Union was a boon to young people especially . Young people especially benefited from the newfound freedom of travel .
 In recent years the citizens of Europe had even acquired their own court . The European Court of Justice is the largest in the world .
 In January 2004 only one French adult in fifty could name the ten new EU member states . The European Court of Justice was set up in 1952 under the same Treaty of Paris .
 By the end of the century its judges were authorized to settle legal disputes between member-states and EU institutions . They were also authorized to hear cases brought against lower court decisions or even against national governments .
 The ECJ had, in effect, assumed many of the powers and attributes of a pan-European Court of Appeals . The European Court of Appeal has been given many of its powers .
 As the example of the Court suggests, the rather indirect and often unintentional manner in which the Union’s institutions emerged had its advantages, the Court says .
 Few would have been willing to relinquish local legal supremacy had they been asked to do so at the outset . Even the most pro-European states of the European ‘core’ would have relinquished legal supremacy .
 If a clearly articulated ‘European project’ had ever been put to the separate voters of the states of western Europe it would surely have been rejected . Similarly, if a clearly articulating 'European project' were put to voters it would be rejected by western Europe .
 The advantage of the European idea in the decades following World War Two had thus lain precisely in its imprecision . The advantage, however, had been in the absence of an answer to the question .
 Like ‘growth’ or ‘peace’, ‘Europe’ was too benign to attract effective opposition . 'Europe' was 'too benign' for effective opposition, says David Cameron .
 For all its faults as a system of indirect government, the Union has certain interesting and original attributes . The Union has some faults as an indirect government but has some interesting attributes, writes David Cameron .
 Decisions and laws may be passed at a transgovernmental level, but they are implemented by and through national authorities . Decisions, laws may not be passed by transgovernmental levels, but by national authorities, they can be implemented through national governments .
 The ECJ should not be confused with the European Court of Human Rights, set up under the auspices of the Council of Europe . The European Union has neither means nor mechanisms to pre-14, while the EU has neither .
 The lesson that war was too high a price to pay for political or territorial advantage had already been brought home to the victors after World War One . But it took a second war to convey the same lesson to the losing side .
 Third intra-European war would have been catastrophic and perhaps terminal, but could not have happened in the early postwar years . But just because it would have happened doesn't mean it could have happened, at least in postwar years, says historian .
 The elites and institutions of the European Union were so intertwined and interdependent that armed conflict, while never impossible, had become somehow inconceivable . By the end of the century, however, armed conflict had become inconceivable. Armed conflict was never impossible .
 'Europe' was such an object of desire to aspirant members like Latvia or Poland, an escape route out of their past and an insurance policy for the future . That is why ‘Europe’ was such a target of desire for aspirant nations .
 The EU's own leaders proved so fatuously helpless when confronted with the reality of war in the Balkans . But it is also, ironically, why the EU’s own leaders failed to act .
 Its humiliation over Yugoslavia 17 is a reminder that the European Union cannot escape the defects of its virtues . The European Union is not exempt from the defects it has committed itself to, say experts .
 The EU has no mechanism for determining or enforcing its own security interests . EU citizens' primary loyalties remain to the country in which they find themselves, their laws and laws .
 The European Community and its successor the EU have for many decades been extremely effective in advancing and defending their interests in international forums and against foreign competitors . On the contrary, the European Community has been extremely successful in advancing its interests in the international forums .
 The White House has been defined in overwhelmingly economic terms . But those interests have from the outset been defined as overwhelmingly economic interests .
 European ministers and trade commissioners have engaged in open combat with Washington over tax breaks for American exporters or import restrictions on European products . European trade ministers are engaged in an open fight with Washington .
 EU has also fought very effectively to maintain high external tariffs in defense of Europe’s subsidized farmers . The EU also fought to keep open trade in commodities like sugar like sugar, for example, to the detriment of farmers in Africa or Central America .
 U.S. Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger foresaw that the Europeans ‘will screw up and this will teach them a lesson’ l8 The EU was not alone in subsidizing its own farmers to the detriment of others .
 Norway, Switzerland, Japan and the United States all pay out more in per capita terms . The U.S. pays out more than any other country in the world .
 Brussels preaches virtue to the world at large, but its own practice is often selective . Brussels is often quite selective, and it's not always the same thing .
 East Europeans are instructed to incorporate and adopt a veritable library of European Union regulations . West European governments exempt themselves from those same rules .
 In the early 1950s there were many who thought that in future the Western Europeans could and should organize their military affairs collectively . At an August 1950 meeting of the Council of Europe’s Consultative Assembly, Paul Reynaud of France even argued the case for a European Minister of War
 The defeat of the proposal for a European Defense Force put an end to such ideas for a generation . Instead Western Europe snuggled comfortably under the American nuclear umbrella .
 Following the end of the Korean War and the retreat from empire, every Western European country cut its defense budget . The budget was slashed after the fall of the Cold War .
 In the late Eighties the average share of defense spending in NATO members’ budgets had already declined to 3. percent of GNP . By 2003 Denmark was spending just 1. percent on defense; Italy 1.1 percent; Spain a mere 1.5 percent .
 Only the French and British spent substantially more, though spending now exceeds 5 percent . France and Britain spent more, but spending now exceed 5 percent—negligible .
 Since Treaty of Amsterdam his functions were duplicated by a High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy, answerable only to the EU Council of Ministers .
 Neither the Commissioner nor the High Representative had any authority to initiate his own policy, despatch armed forces or speak for foreign policies or ministers of the member-states unless previously instructed .
 Henry Kissinger’s sardonic question of an earlier decade—‘If I want to phone Europe, what number do I call?’ — had lost none of its force . Henry Kissinger's sardic question of earlier decade — ‘What number do you call
 Despite its size and wealth, the EU was not a state, much less a great power . But these limitations have served to enhance its image, at home and abroad . The EU is now a powerful and powerful organization .
 If the values and norms of this new Europe were under pressure at the end of the twentieth century it was not from established nation-states against which the European idea had been traditionally but misleadingly juxtaposed . It was not the established nations against which European idea was traditionally juxtaposed.
 The impact on the world economy of new and rapid networks of transport and communications at the end of the nineteenth century was at least as dramatic as the transformation wrought by the Internet and the deregulation and liberalization of financial markets a century later .
 International trade regimes were so consistently accommodating to the interests of the powerful and wealthy . Nor was there anything new about the unequal global distribution of the benefits of liberalized trade, writes Andrew Hammond .
 From European perspective the latest transformations in the world economy were distinctive in one important respect . But from the European perspective, they are distinctive in the way they look at the world's economic development .
 Government expenditure would increase dramatically, partly to pay for wars but increasingly for the purpose of servicing social and welfare needs . Government expenditure—financed out of new, progressive taxes—would increase dramatically .
 The European state was now in retreat—first in Britain, then much of Western Europe and finally in the formerCommunist East . The Single European Act, with its provisions for open competition within and across borders, was further abetted by the implementation after 1987 of the single European Act
 Through mergers, acquisitions and the internationalization of their operations, companies and corporations now operated on a global scale . Companies now operate on a worldwide scale .
 The production and distribution of goods was often beyond the control of individual countries . The production of goods is often beyond individual countries' control of production .
 Money was beginning to multiply and migrate in ways that would have been unthinkable a few years ago . As for money, it was starting to multiply in ways unthinkable few years before . But money was still growing in the United States .
 In 1980 the sum of all international bank lending was $324 billion a year; by 1991 that figure had grown to $7 trillion . That figure has grown to a 2,000 percent increase in just over a decade . International bank lending has grown by $7.2 trillion .
 Controls on the movement of capital appeared as antiquated as food rationing . Control of capital controls had been abolished by most European states in the Eighties .
 The ‘crash’ of September 1992 was a highly symbolic moment . The UK and Italy were forced out of the European Monetary System and obliged to devalue by private speculators .
 The advantages of this revolution in the international economy were self-identident . The advantages were selfevident, says President Obama .
 1990 foreigners already held 34 percent of German debt . Investment capital, no longer restrained by national frontiers, flowed unchecked wherever it was needed .
 European manufacturers are now at liberty to seek out international investors and a more malleable and inexpensive foreign workforce . European manufacturers were constrained by the high wages and overhead costs of employing skilled labor in Germany or France or Sweden .
 Instead of importing into Europe cheap workers from poor countries, firms now export their factories instead . Instead, they install them in Brazil or Nigeria, Portugal or Romania and then directly sell the finished product to markets all over the world .
 This further accelerated the de-industrialization of Western Europe, adding to the already chronic unemployment in many regions . The burden on state unemployment compensation and other social services is increasing .
 When the last coalmine in France closed in April 2004, no-one even pretended that the former miners would ever find regular work again . The last coal mine in France was Creutzwald in the Moselle .
 Unemployment in the Moselle district hovered around 10 percent of the active population . Further north, in the former mining towns along the Belgian border, it was 15 percent .
 France as a whole had lost 1. million industrial jobs in the last three decades of the century, most of them since 1980 . Most of the industrial jobs have been lost since 1980s, according to the French government .
 Spain shed 600,000 jobs in the twenty years following the transition to democracy . The economy shed its comparative advantage from being one of Western Europe's more backward economies .
 At the height of the recession of the mid-1990s, 44 percent of the country’s under-25 workforce was unemployed . At the same time of recession 44 percent was unemployed in 1990s .
 The social costs of economic disruption in the last years of the twentieth century were taking place in a time of plenty . But what was distinctive about the social costs in the 1930s was that they took place during plenty . The social cost of social disruption was distinctive in the 20th century,
 Privatization and the opening of the financial markets had created great wealth, albeit for a relative few . In certain places, London, say, or Barcelona, its consequences were strikingly visible .
 Information about the way other people lived was immediately and copiously available to all . And thanks to the shrinking of distances and the increased speed of communications, information was immediately available .
 The contrasts between wealth and poverty, prosperity and insecurity, private affluence and public squalor drove a growing skepticism in Europe about unregulated markets and untrammeled globalization . Many Europeans were themselves the indirect beneficiaries of the changes they deplored .
 In the last years of the century, even as the rest of the European energy market was deregulated, EdF remained in state ownership . EdF has been a state-owned energy company for more than 20 years .
 The CGT, once the dominant blue-collar union in France, was a shadow of its former self . The French union movement as a whole had lost two-thirds of its members since 1980 .
 A protected core of traditional employees in factories, service industries or the public sector . Then came a second tier, a protected core, with many of their traditional benefits and guarantees still intact .
 To these should be added the very sizeable and typically family-based ‘grey’ economy in Southern Europe .
 The 'informal' sector contributed at least one quarter of Italy’s Gross Domestic Product in 1997 .
 In some regions, 'unofficial' workers constituted as much as 45 percent of the local labour force . In Portugal the national figure was 22 percent; in some regions it was as much .
 Women and young people no longer figured on unemployment rolls . But many are now doing low-paid, part-time work without benefits . Others are employed on fixed-term contracts in job programmes subsidized or under-written by the state .
 Those whose wages were too low to support them and their families could still turn to the welfare state, and many did . The welfare state is a major source of income for many people .
 One in six depend upon Income Support or Family Credit programmes to keep them above the poverty line . One person in six depended upon income support or family credit programmes to stay above the line .
 Within a few miles of some of the most expensive real estate in the world parts of the British capital were beginning to resemble the ‘Outcast London’ of late-Victorian notoriety .
 Economic upswings had tended to lift many of the poor into better paid and more secure employment . This was no longer happening, says the author of the book .
 Europe was developing an under-class in the midst of plenty . Europe, in other words, was developing a under class in midst of lots of wealth .
 As the end of the industrial era would see the birth of a new caste of casual, temporary workers—a ‘non-class of non-workers’— at once marginal to modern life and yet somehow right at its heart . Andre Gorz predicted back in the 1960s
 The poor, like Europe as a whole by the end of the century, were strikingly multinational—or ‘multicultural’ as it had become custom to describe it . Many dark-skinned Dutchmen or Germans or Brits were the native-born children or grandchildren of the original
 Towns like Rotterdam or Leicester were now multi-lingual and multi-colored in a way that would have amazed anyone returning after an absence of two decades . Towns such as Leicester now have a population of multi-colors and multilingual backgrounds .
 In 1998, white children were a minority in the local authority secondary schools of inner London . White children are now a minority of white children in local authority schools .
 High-paying city jobs were still going to white Europeans . But low-paying work was now done by ‘minorities’, often black or brown, many of them without working papers .
 These were frequently the offspring of refugees, asylum-seekers’ in the jargon of the day, whose numbers had ballooned in the wake of the Yugoslav wars . But also of migrant workers from Central and South-East Asia, the Middle East and much of Africa . Many of them
 In Germany, asylum facilities were by far the most generous in Europe 22 but it was traditionally very difficult for immigrants to obtain full citizenship . In Germany it was estimated that there were five million such people by the end of the century .
 The majority of asylum applications to Germany by the beginning of the new century came from Iraq, Turkey and the countries of former Yugoslavia . There were also growing numbers from Iran, Afghanistan, Russia and Vietnam, growing numbers of Iranians .
 Fear that Western Europe might be ‘overrun’ by ‘economic refugees’, illegal immigrants, asylum-seekers and the like contributed to a widespread lack of enthusiasm for EU enlargement .
 Undocumented workers from Poland were present in large numbers in the British and German building trades . Already by the 1980s undocumented workers had been present in Britain and Germany .
 The problem was not so much Poland, or Hungary, or the other would-be accession states of Central Europe, but rather the lands to their east . Poland, Hungary, Poland and Hungary were among the countries to be considered for accessionism .
 In 1992 Poland had 290,000 ‘irregular’ immigrants, mostly from Bulgaria, Romania and the former USSR . Hungary, with a population of just 10 million, was home to over 100,000 asylum-seekers . In 1992, Poland itself had 290k 'irregular
 Life in Slovakia or the Czech Republic was hard, but not intolerable, it was not intolerable . The gap separating these countries from their Western neighbours was already being bridged, however slowly . Life there was hard but it was also not intolerable in Slovakia .
 The gulf between Central Europe and the rest of post-Communist Europe yawns far greater . The gulf is yawning far greater than the gap between the two regions .
 By the late-Nineties the average monthly wage in Poland and the Czech Republic was already approaching $400 . In Belarus, Ukraine and Romania it hovered around $80; in Bulgaria at under $70; and in Moldova at just $30—itself a misleading average,
 In 1992 alone, the Federal Republic opened its doors to nearly a quarter of a million Yugoslav refugees . In such circumstances the only hope for Moldovans—or Ukrainians, or indeed Ukrainians, is to help them .
 Involuntary Moldovan and Ukrainian guest-workers’ join the Roma (Gypsies) at the bottom of the continent’s multi-cultural heap .
 The victims of the sex trade were largely invisible—like earlier generations of white migrants from Europe’s fringes . They blended easily enough into the local majority, which is why they proved so hard for police and social services to trace .
 Most of the people whom French sociologists and critics had taken to describing as les exclus were perfectly visible . But most of them were people who had been dubbed "les exclus"
 In 2004, a study by the French interior ministry concluded that some 2 million such people lived in urban ghettos . Study: Some 2 million people live in urban areas with social exclusion, racial discrimination and high levels of domestic violence .
 In some quartiers chauds youth unemployment had reached 50 percent . The worst affected were young people of Algerian or Moroccan descent . In some of these quartiers .
 All too often this under-class was distinguished not just by colour but by creed . It was distinguished by colour and creed, but also by creed, not just colour, but creed, it was .
 For in addition to being multi-cultural the European Union was now increasingly multi-religious . The EU is now increasingly religious, with the EU becoming increasingly multicultural .
 Christians remained the overwhelming majority, albeit nonpracticing in most cases . Christians remained in the majority, however, in most of the population .
 Jews were now a small minority, their numbers significant only in Russia, France and the UK and Hungary . Jews are now a minority in many countries, including Russia and France .
 Hindus and above all Muslims were now a visible presence in the UK, Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany . Hindus and Muslims are now a substantial presence in many of Europe's major cities .
 Among the major world religions in Europe, the number of adherents to Islam was rising rapidly . The number of Muslims in Europe is rising rapidly, especially among the major religions .
 Nearly two million Muslims in the UK and a significant presence in the Benelux countries and Italy . These figures suggest a total of perhaps fifteen million Muslims as a whole .
 Official policy in France advocated cultural integration and forbade the display of signs of faith in school . In Britain and the Netherlands, there was a broader tolerance for cultural distinction and assertive religious selfidentification .
 Growing anxiety across Europe at the rise of a new generation of xenophobic parties . If such questions had risen rapidly to the top of national political agendas, it was because of growing anxiety all across the continent .
 Some of these parties had roots in an earlier age of sectarian or nationalist politics . Others were of very recent provenance, like Dansk Folkeparti or List Pirn Fortuyn .
 All of them have proved unexpectedly adept at exploiting ‘anti-immigrant’ sentiment . But all of them had proven unexpectedly adept . At least one of them has proven unexpectedly .
 On the one hand slower growth combined with vulnerability to global economic forces was exposing many working people to a level of economic insecurity unprecedented in living memory . On the other hand, slower growth and vulnerability in the global economy was exposed to an unprecedented level of insecurity .
 The prospect of even more foreigners feeding at the welfare trough or taking ‘our’ jobs once the floodgates from the East were opened was icing on the cake for the new Right . The presence in increasing numbers of a visible and culturally alien minority in their midst was seen as
 Populist demagogues promised to stop immigration, repatriate ‘foreigners’ and return the state to its embattled white citizenry, outsiders .
 Gunter Grass argues responsibility for the racist violence should be placed squarely at the feet of the country’s complacent and amnesiac political elite . Grass points to the self-centered indifference of West German political culture .
 The scale of public support for the new Right was cause for serious concern . But even if the level of violence was contained, the scale of support for new Right is cause for concern .
 To avoid falling foul of the law, Haider was generally careful to avoid behaviour that would tar him too obviously with the brush of Nazi nostalgia .
 For the most part the Austrian revealed his prejudices only indirectly . For example, he named people who just happened to be Jewish . He also named instances of what it was in public life that offended him .
 Haider had bitten deep into the traditionally Socialist electorate of working-class Vienna . Even more ominously, Haider's election victory was a blow to the traditional Socialist electorate .
 One Austrian in three believed with Haider that ‘guest-workers’ and other foreigners in Austria had too many benefits and privileges, this was hardly surprising . Considering that one in three believe that 'guest workers' and 'foreigners' in Austria have too many privileges
 Once in government, exposed to the wear and tear of office and constrained to share responsibility for unpopular policies, it would soon lose its appeal . Once in office, exposure to wear and wear and share of unpopular policies would lose appeal, he says .
 List Pirn Fortuyn rose briefly into the ranks of Dutch government only to see its support collapse to just 5 percent at the subsequent election . After winning 17 percent of the vote in 2002, in the wake of its leader’s assassination, its parliamentary representation fell from 42 to
 In Italy the Lega Nord’s ascent into government under the wing of Berlusconi precipitated a steady fall in support . In Italy, the party's rise in support has been seen as a result of its rise in popularity .
 In Denmark, Dansk Folkeparti had risen from obscure beginnings in 1995 to become the country’s third-largest parliamentary group . By 2001, the party had become the third largest parliamentary group in Denmark .
 By staying out of office and focusing almost exclusively on the immigration issue, the party and its leader Pia Kjaersgaard were able to leverage their influence out of all proportion to size .
 Both the leading Danish parties now compete to outbid the other in their newfound 'firmness' on laws governing asylum and foreign residents . Both parties are now competing to outbbid each other in a bid to get more asylum laws .
 The BNP won 11,643 votes (14 percent) in two districts of Oldham, a former mill town in Lancashire where race riots had broken out shortly before the elections . Its best recent performance had been 7 percent of the vote in 1997 in an East London district where
 The BNP came nowhere near winning a parliamentary seat in France . These were negligible figures compared with developments on the Continent .
 The hard Right was able to frighten Prime Minister Tony Blair into tightening still further the UK’s already ungenerous provisions for would-be immigrants and refugees . But because (according to opinion polls) its concerns appeared to reflect a widespread national unease .
 Front National had issue—immigrants; mass backing—2. million voters at the general elections of 1986 . Front National leader brilliantly adept at converting generalized public dissatisfaction into focused anger and political prejudice .
 France's far-Right movement could not be dismissed as an atavistic, nostalgic regurgitation of Europe’s Fascist past . Le Pen has links to an older tradition of far-right politics, including his support for the Poujadists .
 Both took care to emphasize their desire to preserve their countries’ traditional tolerance . They asserted that religious fanaticism and retrograde cultural practices of the new Muslim minorities were under threat .
 President Obama took ostentatious care to emphasize his post-war credentials . The president's post-World War II credentials are not what he says .
 In Austria as in France it was the fear and hatred of immigrants that has replaced the old obsessions . Anti-semitism especially is the tie that binds the far Right . In France and Austria, anti-immigrantism has replaced obsessions with anti-Semitism .
 In Italy, a new generation of young magistrates began courageously to chip away at decades of barnacled public silence . The Christian Democrats had enjoyed a cozy and profitable relationship with bankers, businessmen, contractors, city bosses, state bosses and—it was widely rumored—the Mafia .
 Former Prime Minister Bettino Craxi forced to flee across the Mediterranean into exile in Tunisia . The party was disgraced and its leader, the former Prime Minister, was forced to fled .
 The Socialists’ affairs were inextricably intertwined with those of the Christian Democrats, their long-time coalition partner . But the Socialists' affairs were intertwined with their coalition partner, Christian Democrats .
 Both parties were further discredited by the wave of arrests and charges that followed . They took down with them the whole web of political arrangements and accommodations that had shaped Italian politics for two generations .
 In 1994, all the country’s leading political parties except the former-Communists and the ex-Fascists were virtually wiped out . The only lasting beneficiary of this political earthquake was a former lounge singer, the louche media magnate Silvio Berlusconi .
 In view of ETA’s reputation, this might not have sufficed to discredit the charismatic Gonzalez . But revelations of graft and influence-peddling by his Socialist colleagues aroused widespread anxiety over the moral condition of a Spanish democracy still in its infancy .
 In France, scandals that disfigured public life in the Nineties suggested not so much the fragility of institutions and mores as the rising cost of practicing democracy under modern conditions . In France—or Germany, or Belgium—the spate of scandals suggested not as much .
 Public cash for political parties was strictly limited in Europe by law by law and tradition . Public cash was usually made available only for the purpose of standing at elections .
 Major political parties of Western Europe began to seek out alternative ways to attract funding . The abolition of controls and the globalization of business, there was a whole lot more money around .
 At the end of the 1980s, the Belgian government contracted to purchase forty-six military helicopters from the Italian firm Agusta . The Belgian government also gave the French company Dassault the job of refitting its F-16 aircraft .
 Three countries were involved in the project, and it lends an ecumenically pan-European quality to the affair . In itself this is not unusual, and the fact that three countries were . involved even lends a ecumenical . quality to this, with three countries involved .
 Andre Cools was killed in a parking lot in Liege in 1991; Etienne Mange was arrested in 1995 . Willy Claes, a former prime minister of Belgium, found guilty in 1998 of taking bribes for his party .
 A fourth suspect, former army general Jacques Lefebvre, died in mysterious circumstances in March 1995 . The former general was closely involved in the affair .
 The duplication and dilution of constitutional authority in Belgium has led to the near-collapse of much of the apparatus of the state, including the criminal justice system . It is perhaps because of the dilution and the absence of government oversight led to a near collapse of the justice system,
 Most of the crimes and misdemeanors were undertaken quite literally for the good of the party 26 . Elsewhere, with the exception of Italy as noted above, there was strikingly little evidence of personal corruption .
 French President Jacques Chirac protected by his office during a time when the city was awash in party-political graft and favourpeddling . Had he not been protected, he would surely have joined the ranks of the French city .
 What is perhaps most striking about these developments is how little discredit they seem to have brought upon the political system as a whole . What is most striking is that they have brought little discredit to the whole political system, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The decline in turnout at elections certainly bespeaks a general loss of interest in public affairs . But this could already be detected decades earlier in rising abstention rates and the diminished intensity of political argument .
 The real surprise is not the rise of a new cohort of right-wing populist parties but their failure to capitalize on the disruption and discontent since 1989, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "The real surprise" is that they have failed to do even better than they have, to
 At the core of the European system of government there is something that even the most radical anti-system parties have not dared to attack head on . Europeans may have lost faith in their politicians, but at the core they have not attacked the system .
 That something is certainly not the European Union, for all its merits . The EU is not the only thing to blame for its troubles in Europe .
 ‘In Europe we were Asiatics, whereas in Asia we, too, are Europeans’ ‘The Creator of Europe made her small and even split her up into little parts, so that our hearts could find joy not in size but in plurality'
 For forty-five years, the uneasy outcome of World War Two had been frozen in place . World War II had been a distant memory beyond the living memory of most Europeans . For 40 years, most Europeans have forgotten the outcome of the conflict .
 The accidental division of Europe, with all that it entailed, had come to seem inevitable . Europe's accidental division was seen as inevitable, but it was not .
 In retrospect the post-war decades took on a radically altered significance . The post-WWII era was a time when the U.S. was in the grip of the world's greatest power .
 With the disappearance of the world of 1945-1989, its illusions came into better focus . With the collapse of the real world, the illusion of its illusions was better defined .
 The much-heralded ‘economic miracle’ of post-war Western Europe had returned the region to the standing in world trade and output that it had lost in the years 1914-45 . Rates of economic growth subsequently settled back into levels broadly comparable to those of the late
 This was no small achievement, but it was not quite the breakthrough into infinitely incremental prosperity that contemporaries had once fondly supposed . This is not quite as incremental prosperity as it had once been supposed, says historian .
 The recovery had been achieved not in spite of the Cold War but because of it, the author says . Moreover, the recovery had not been achieved because of Cold War, he says .
 The shadow of the Soviet empire shrank Europe but imposed upon the surviving rump the benefits of unity . Like the Ottoman threat in an earlier time, the Soviet threat in earlier times, it was like an Ottoman threat .
 After the collapse of Communism and the break-up of the Soviet empire, it could no longer be sustained . It could not be sustained after the collapse and the end of Communism .
 The happy cocoon of post-war Western Europe—with its economic communities and free-trade zones, its reassuring external alliances and redundant internal frontiers—seemed suddenly vulnerable, called upon to respond to the frustrated expectations of would-be ‘Euro-citizens’ to its
 Western Europeans were perforce drawn back into the common European past . Constrained once again to acknowledge their continent's broad eastern marches when sketching a common European future .
 From 1945 to 1989 inter-state war disappeared from the continent of Europe . Inter-state wars disappeared from Europe from 1945 until 1989 . The last inter-states war ended in 1989 .
 Two generations of Europeans grew up under the inconceivable impression that peace was the natural order of things . Two generations have grown up thinking peace was a thing to come to an end .
 As an extension of politics, war was outsourced to the so-called Third World . War was out-of-the-world politics, says David Cameron . War is now an extension to politics, he says .
 Eastern Europe too had lived through an age of unusual, albeit involuntary, calm . But compared with what had gone before, Eastern Europe has lived through a calmer era .
 The post-World War Two era is fast retreating into memory with the onset of new world orders . Whether the post-WWII era would become an object of nostalgic longing and regret depended on where and when you were born .
 The number of war-related deaths in Europe in the second half of the century was less than one million . From both sides of the Iron Curtain, the children of the Sixties looked back with affection upon ‘their’ decade .
 In the West, at least, their parents remained grateful for the political stability and material security of the era, contrasted with the horrors that had gone before . The West is grateful for political stability, material security and the safety of the day .
 Those too young to recall the Sixties resentful of the solipsistic self-aggrandizement of its ageing memorialists . Many older people who had lived out their lives under Communism recalled not just secure jobs, cheap rents and safe streets but also and above all, a grey
 There were limits to what could be recovered from the rubble of twentieth-century history . And on both sides of the divide there were limits on what could still be recovered .
 Peace, prosperity and security, but the optimistic convictions of an earlier age were gone for good . Peace and security are gone, but optimistic convictions are gone now for good.
 Sixty years later, at the end of the twentieth century, almost everything else had been recovered or rebuilt . Almost everything else in the wreckage had been found .
 The overwhelming sentiment among anyone reflecting on the continent’s thirty-year catastrophe had been ‘never again’ 2 In short, there was no way back. Inter-war Europeans recalling the Belle Epoque might murmur ‘if only’
 Communism in Eastern Europe had been the wrong answer to a real question . Communism in eastern Europe was not the answer to the real question, he said .
 After 1989, post-political Western Europe was faced once again with its eastern twin and ‘Europe’ had to be rethought . The post-war era of 'Europe' was marked by the rise of the Cold War in the 1980s .
 The familiar stasis of the past four decades was gone forever . But that ‘old world order’ -- the familiar stasi of the previous four decades -- was gone . The ‘Old World Order’ is gone forever.
 Europeans confronted not just with an uncertain future but also with a rapidly changing past . Europeans were now confronted with a changing past, says Mr. Frida Ghitis . Europeans confronted with uncertain future and changing past.
 What had recently been very straightforward was now, once again, becoming rather complicated . What had previously been very simple was now becoming quite complicated .
 The ‘Idea of Europe’ has a long history, some of it quite reputable . Some of it is a long-debated topic .
 Europe offers only a very partial insight into the life they lead there . But although a certain ‘idea’ of Europe—reiterated in assorted conventions and treaties—informs the Union to which most Europeans now belong, it offers only partial insight .
 In an age of demographic transition and resettlement, today’s Europeans are more numerous and heterogeneous than ever before . In the age of migration, Europe's population has become more diverse, more heterogeneous .
 Any account of their common condition at the dawn of the twenty-first century must begin by acknowledging that variety, by mapping the overlapping contours and fault-lines of European identity and experience .
 Europe's borders have long been established, but it has always depended upon where you stood . The continent's borders are still a key part of the continent's history . Europe has always been defined by its borders and borders .
 'Asia' began at the Landstrasse, the high road leading east out of Vienna, Austria .
 Mozart headed west from Vienna en route for Prague in 1787, he described himself as crossing an oriental border . Mozart was traveling from Vienna to Prague, Prague, when Mozart said he was crossing a border with Russia .
 East and West, Asia and Europe, were always walls in the mind of the mind as much as lines on the earth . "East and West" was always a wall in mind as well as lines in the minds of the world .
 From the Baltic to the Balkans, such regions and their inhabitants have for centuries understood themselves as the outer guard of civilization . Such regions have been seen as the vulnerable and sensitive point where the familiar world ends and barbarians are kept at bay .
 The same is true of competing Hungarian and Romanian narratives, or the insistence of both Croats and Serbs that it is their southern border that constitutes the vital outer defensive line of civilized Europe . The Serbian-Hungarian and Croatian narratives are the same as those of Hungary and Romania .
 The outer borders of Europe have for centuries been significant for interested parties to press with great urgency their competing claims to membership . What this confusion shows is that the outer boundaries of Europe are sufficiently significant .
 Over the centuries it came increasingly to serve as a source of collective identity . It came increasingly important to identify itself as an identity .
 At the end of the twentieth century, writers and politicians in places like Moldova, Ukraine or Armenia asserted their ‘Europeanness’ not on historical or geographical grounds, but precisely as a defense against history and geography alike . The Moldovan, Ukraine and Armenia assert their 'European
 The implications of exclusion were already clear to even the most casual visitor by the early years of the new century . It was already clear that the implications of excluding people from the country were already obvious .
 It was about asserting a claim, however flimsy and forlorn, upon a common future . It was not about the future, but it was about assertion of a claim of the future .
 Fear of being left out of Europe was not confined to the continent’s outer perimeter . The fear of being out of the European Union was not limited to Europe's outer borders .
 From the perspective of Romanian-speaking Moldovans, their neighbors are their neighbors . Many Poles, it should be noted, also insist upon their country’s place at the centre of Europe—a revealing confusion .
 NATO freed Serbia from Serbian oppression, they aspire to independent statehood less from nationalistic ambition than as a surety against the risk of being left in Serbia—and out of Europe . The Serbian statehood is not a matter of national pride, but it's a matter for national security
 Unlike Moldova they were seen by the West as legitimate if under-performing contenders for EU membership . Moldova was seen as legitimate but under performing members of the West . The West assured Moldova of a properly European future .
 Former Romanian Prime Minister, Adrien Nastase, was describing for readers of Le Monde in July 2001 the ‘added value’ that Romania brings to Europe . His fellow Romanians constituted over half the total number of aliens apprehended illegally crossing the Polish-German border .
 Tomas Masaryk foresaw the zone of small nations that he foresaw coming into being, from North Cape to Cape Matapan in the Peloponnese . This sense of being on the periphery of someone else’s centre, of being a sort of second-class
 Within recent memory the continent’s other margins were at least as peripheral—economically, linguistically, culturally, culturally . The continent's other margins have been as peripheral as those in recent memory .
 Edwin Muir described his childhood move from the Orkneys to Glasgow in 1901 as ‘one hundred and fifty years covered in a two days’ journey’; it is a sentiment that would not have been out of place half a century later . Muir’s
 Well into the 1980s the highlands and islands at Europe’s edges had more in common with one another, and their own past, than with the prosperous metropolitan regions of the centre .
 Even now, fault lines and boundaries cannot be counted upon to follow national frontiers . Even now—indeed above all now --fault lines and borders can't be counted on to follow international frontiers, writes David Perry .
 Tallinn and Gdansk are eager to position themselves at the centre of a re-invented (and Western-accented) Baltic community . This symbolic reassertion of ancient trading affinities was much appreciated by one-time Hanseatic cities like Hamburg or
 In other regions of some of the participating countries, notably Germany and Poland, the Baltic means little . But in other parts of the Baltic region, it means little to them .
 Munich and Vienna have rediscovered a common ‘Alpine’ heritage, facilitated by the virtual disappearance of the boundary separating southern Bavaria from Salzburg and the Tyrol .
 Regional cultural distinctions, then, clearly matter, but economic disparities matter even more . Regional cultural differences matter more than cultural differences, especially in the United States .
 Catalonia, Italy’s Lombardy and Emilia-Romagna are part of a common zone of European economic privilege . The Ile-de-France, Southern Germany and Austria are also part of the region . Switzerland, Luxembourg and parts of Belgian Flanders also make up the
 Absolute levels of poverty and economic disadvantage were still highest in the former Eastern bloc . But sharpest contrasts were now within countries rather than between them, the study found .
 In the UK, too, the gap between the wealthy regions of the south-east and the former industrial districts farther north had grown in recent years . The gap had grown between wealthy regions and former industrial areas .
 Despite keeping its distance from the euro zone, the British capital was now the unchallenged financial center of the continent . The city had taken on a glitzy, high-tech energy that made other European cities seem dowdy and middle-aged .
 Bus drivers, nurses, cleaners, schoolteachers, policemen and waiters who serviced the cosmopolitan new Britons could no longer afford to live near them . They were constrained to find housing farther and farther away, commuting to work as best they could along the most crowded roads .
 There was emerging a regional contrast unprecedented in recent English history . Beyond the outer limits of Greater London, now extending its tentacular reach deep into the rural south-east, it was emerging .
 Of England’s ten administrative regions only three reached or exceeded the national average wealth per capita . At the end of the twentieth century, only three of England's 10 administrative regions had exceeded the average wealth of the country .
 All the rest of the country was poorer, sometimes very much poorer indeed . All the other countries were poorer, often poorer indeed.
 The North East of England, once the heartland of the country’s mining and shipping industries, had a gross domestic product per head just 60 percent that of London . North East is now just 60% of the GDP of London.
 In Germany, comparable disparities were a direct if unintended consequence of a political decision . Similar disparities were not seen in Germany, however, as a result of political decisions .
 The absorption of the eastern Lander into a unified Germany had cost the Federal Republic more than one thousand billion euros in transfers and subsidies between 1991 and 2004 . The absorption cost the federal government more than 1,000 billion euros .
 Eastern Germany has fallen further behind the West since the late Nineties . But it has actually begun to fall further behind in economic terms .
 Private German firms had no incentive to locate in the East—in Saxony or Mecklenburg—when they could find better workers for lower wages . Workers in Slovakia or Poland could find lower wages and better transportation infrastructure .
 Ageing populations, poor education, low purchasing power, the westward departure of skilled workers and the entrenched hostility to foreigners on the part of those left behind meant that eastern Germany was distinctly unappealing to outside investors .
 In 2004, unemployment in former West Germany was 8. percent; in the east it exceeded 19 percent . Unemployment in the former West German states exceeded 8.5 percent .
 Germans, like everyone else in the new Europe, were increasingly divided by a novel set of distinctions that cut away from conventional geographical or economic divides . Germans are increasingly divided in Europe, with the exception of Germany and France .
 High incomes, low airfares, open frontiers and integrated rail network favoured easy mobility . High incomes and low air fares favoured easy and frequent mobility .
 These men and women, the villeins in Europe’s new medieval landscape, could not so readily benefit from the EU‘s single market in goods, services and labour .
 They remained bound to their country or their local community, constrained by unfamiliarity with distant possibilities and foreign tongues . Often more hostile to ‘Europe’ than their cosmopolitan fellow citizens . Instead they remained bound .
 International class distinction is starting to blur the old national contrasts . There were two notable exceptions to this new international class distinction .
 For jobbing artisans and laborers from Eastern Europe, the new work opportunities blended seamlessly with older-established traditions of migrant labour and seasonal overseas employment .
 Slovak house-painters were not likely to be found dining out in Brussels, vacationing in Italy or shopping in London . There was nothing uniquely European about that, and there was nothing unique about that .
 The second exception was the British—or rather, rather, the notoriously Euroskeptic English . The two exceptions were the British and the British .
 The irony of this juxtaposition of popular English disdain and mistrust for the institutions and ambitions of Europe was not lost on Continental observers, for whom it remained an oddity .
 The British, like the Irish, did not have to learn foreign languages . But then the British did not learn foreign language .
 Elsewhere in Europe linguistic resourcefulness (as noted above) was fast becoming the continent’s primary disjunctive identity tag, a measure of personal social standing and collective cultural power .
 In small countries like Denmark or the Netherlands, monolingualism in a tongue spoken by almost no-one else was a handicap the nation could no longer afford . In small nations like Denmark, it had long been accepted that monolingialism in the . Netherlands was long accepted
 In Denmark and the Netherlands, students and bank clerks alike would long since have become passively fluent from watching un-dubbed English-language programmes on television . It helped that in Denmark and Netherlands, as in many small European countries, English-speaking people would have long since become fluent
 In Switzerland, anyone who completed a secondary education often mastered three or even four local languages . It was nonetheless thought easier to speak English when communicating with someone from another part of the country .
 In Belgium, it was far less common for Walloons or Flemings to be comfortably conversant with the other’s language . Both sides would resort readily to English as a common communications medium .
 In countries where regional languages were now officially taught, it was not uncommon for young people to learn the local language but to spend their spare time speaking English . As a gesture of adolescent revolt, social snobbery and enlightened self-interest, this was done .
 The loser was not the minority language or dialect, but the national tongue of the surrounding state . The loser is not a minority language, but a national tongue that has no international future .
 With English as the default medium of choice, major languages are now being forced into the shadows . With English now being used in the majority of the world's major languages .
 As a distinctively European language Spanish, like Portuguese or Italian, was no longer widely taught outside its homeland . It was preserved as a vehicle of communication beyond the Pyrenees only thanks to its status as an official language of the European Union .
 German, too, was fast losing its place in the European language league . German is fast losing her place in Europe's top league .
 Spanish was once a common language of many tens of millions of people in the Americas . A reading knowledge of German had once been mandatory for anyone participating in the 7th World War II .
 The same was true of Portuguese, at least in its distinctive Brazilian form . Portuguese is a very distinctive Portuguese word .
 Until the war it had been the more widespread of the two, a language in active daily use from Strasbourg to Riga . Together with French, German had also been a universal language of cultivated Europeans .
 Central and eastern Europe was turned abruptly away from the German language . The destruction of the Jews, the expulsion of the Germans and the arrival of the Soviets turned the region away from German .
 An older generation in the cities continued to read and—infrequently, speak German . In the isolated German communities of Transylvania and elsewhere it limped on as a marginal language of limited practical use .
 The association of the Russian language with Soviet occupation considerably restricted its appeal, even in countries like Czechoslovakia or Poland where linguistic contiguity made it accessible .
 Most people made little effort to master the language, much less speak it, except when forced to do so . Citizens of the satellite states were obliged to study Russian .
 Germany and the Soviet Union had already eradicated any sustained familiarity with their languages . Within a few years of the fall of Communism it was already clear .
 In the lands that had for so long been trapped between Russia and Germany there was now only one foreign language that mattered . In the land that had been stuck between the two countries, only one language was spoken .
 To be 'European' in eastern Europe after 1989, especially for the young, was to speak English . To be ‘European’ in eastern . Europe, it was to be a 'Europe' in the 1980s .
 For native German speakers in Austria, Switzerland or Germany itself, the steady provincializing of their language was no point mourning the loss . Even those whose own language derived closely from German, like the Dutch, no longer widely studied or understood it .
 In the Nineties, major German firms like Siemens made a virtue of necessity and established English as their working language .
 German politicians and business executives became notable for the ease with which they moved in anglophone circles . They were notable for their ability to move around the world .
 French had not played a significant role in Europe since the decline of the imperial aristocracies of the old regimes . As a language of commonplace daily use French is no longer used in Europe .
 Only a few million Belgians, Luxemburgers and Swiss used French as their native tongue . Many of them spoke it in dialect forms disparaged by Academie Fran$aise .
 French had long been on the European linguistic periphery . In strictly statistical terms, when compared to German—or Russian— French . French is now a popular language in Europe .
 French had been the language of cultivated cosmopolitan elites . But since the decline of Latin, French has been the European language par excellence . French is now the language spoken in France and Europe's most important language .
 With the exception of Romania, where the situation was reversed and French had by far the broader constituency . When, in the 8th century, the French had far more than a wider constituency than in Romania .
 Well into the middle years of the century, comparable assumptions were still widely made—if not quite so boldly articulated—in academies and embassies everywhere . Well into that time, similar assumptions were made .
 The present author can vouch for both the necessity and the sufficiency of French as a medium of communication among students from Barcelona to Istanbul as recently as 1970 . French is still a popular language among students in the world .
 French had ceased to be a reliable medium of international communication even among elites . By the year 2000, French had stopped being a reliable communication medium of communication .
 Only in the UK, Ireland and Romania was recommended choice for schoolchildren embarking on a first foreign language . Everyone else learnt English, including the UK and Romania .
 In some parts of former Habsburg Europe, French was no longer even the second foreign language offered in schools, having been displaced by German . French is now the second language in schools .
 French had been the dominant official language in the Community’s early years . Now native French speakers in the bureaucracy exercised a significant psychological and practical advantage in Brussels .
 The seconded civil servants from London were all fluent in French . The arrival of Scandinavians, who were fluent in English, led to the rise of the community .
 Communication in one of the Union’s three core languages was indispensable for anyone wishing to exercise real influence on policy and its implementation . Despite the use of simultaneous translators , . communication in . the Union's three core language was indispensable .
 French authorities did not respond by switching to English in order to ensure their commercial and political effectiveness . Unlike the Germans, France did not switch to English .
 French governments of every political persuasion were all too happy to oblige, if only for le forme . French governments were all but happy to . oblige . France's President Nicolas Sarkozy was assassinated in 1998 .
 Toubon’s target—what he contemptuously dubbed the ‘mercantile English’ that was displacing French (the primary capital, the symbol of the dignity of the French people’— was already moving out of reach even as he took aim .
 The streets of Paris during the Occupation had fewer names in German than they had today in English . But a younger generation reared on films, television shows, video games, internet sites and international pop music could not have cared less .
 Legislation intended to oblige the French to speak French to one another was one thing— albeit honored largely in the breach . Legislation was passed by the French in the 1990s but was largely ignored by the public .
 Most French public figures and policy makers had resigned themselves to the harsh realities of twenty-first-century Europe . By the turn of the new century the truth had sunk in and most French politicians had resigned .
 The best illustration of the c ever-closer union’ into which Europeans had bundled themselves, or, more accurately, bundled by their enlightened political leaders, was to be found in the ever-denser network of communications to which it gave rise .
 The infrastructure of intra-European transportation has expanded beyond recognition in the course of the last decades of the century . It includes bridges, tunnels, roads, trains and ferries .
 Europeans now have the fastest and (with the exception of the justly maligned British rail network) the safest system of railways in the world . Europeans now had the fastest . and the safest . system of rail in Europe .
 In a crowded continent whose relatively short distances favored ground transportation over air travel, railways were an uncontroversial object of sustained public investment . Railways were an unsurprising object of public investment in Africa .
 The same countries that had come together in Schengen now cooperated—with significant EU backing—to lay an extended network of improved high-speed tracks . Plans for its further extension north into Scandinavia and eastwards through central Europe .
 TGV, ICE or ES trains 10 can now travel throughout Europe . Even in those regions and countries that might never be favored with TGV or ICE trains 10 . Europeans could now travel through their continent .
 As in the nineteenth century, railway innovation in Europe came at the expense of those towns and districts not served by it, which risked losing markets and population and falling behind competitors .
 Outside of the former Soviet Union, the southern Balkans and the poorest provinces of Poland and Romania, most Europeans now had access to a car . But now there was an extensive network of high-speed roads as well .
 Hydrofoil ferries and hydrofoils made it possible for people to live in one city, work in another and shop in another . Hydrofoils ferries, deregulated airlines and deregregated airlines helped make it possible to live, work and play in cities .
 It became quite common for young European families to contemplate living in Malmo and working in Copenhagen . Or commuting from Freiburg to Strasbourg or even across the sea from London to Rotterdam . Or even from Bratislava to Vienna .
 Increasingly mobile, Europeans now knew one another better than ever before . Europeans now know each other better than they did before .
 Respectively the French, German and Italian flagship expresses. Respectively, German, Italian and Italian express expresses. But some Europeans re-express themselves .
 Voltaire drew the contrast between a Europe that ‘knows’ and a Europe ‘waits to be known’, that distinction retained much of its force . Two and a half centuries after Voltaire’s contrast, Voltaire said that Europe should be known
 Power, prosperity and institutions were all clustered into the continent’s far western corner .
 When knowledge flowed in the opposite direction, however, it was not always in very flattering ways . It was often the case for the first time .
 It is not just that impoverished eastern and southern Europeans travelled north and west to sell their labour or bodies . It was not the first time they had to sell labour or their bodies, it was the second time .
 By the end of the century certain eastern European cities had begun to reposition themselves in a profitable niche market as cheap and tawdry vacation spots for down-market mass tourism .
 Tallinn and Prague established an unenviable reputation as the venue for British ‘stag flights’ Low-cost package weekends for Englishmen seeking abundant alcohol and cheap sex . Prague and Tallinn established a reputation for British stag flights .
 Travel agents and tour organizers now report rapturous enthusiasm for exotic treats on offer in the European east . Blackpool and Benidorm are now popular destinations for holidaymakers .
 Europe remained for so many of them an exotic object . But then the English, too, were peripheral in their way . The English were peripheral .
 Greater Berlin was now six times the area of Paris, a symbol of the relative standing of the Union’s two leading members .
 Two-thirds of the Union’s net income came from the Federal Republic alone . The Federal Republic is one of the largest economies in the world .
 Despite being its primary paymasters, Germans remained among the EU's most committed citizens . Germany is one of Europe's most important countries .
 If Germany was the country that ‘knew’ Europe best, it was appropriate that at the beginning of the twenty-first century two other former imperial states should have been most insistently seeking to be ‘known’ by it .
 Like Germany, Russia and Turkey had once played an imperial role in European affairs . Like Germany and Turkey, they once played a role in Europe's imperial affairs .
 In the late 1990s it was estimated that more than one hundred million Russians lived outside of Russia in the independent countries of eastern Europe . The majority of Russia's population was in eastern Europe in the 1990s .
 Preoccupied with violent rebellions in the Caucasus, it was maintained at a distance from the rest of Europe by the new buffer states of Belarus, Ukraine and Moldova as well as by its own increasingly illiberal domestic politics .
 Russian authorities were more interested in building pipelines and selling gas to the EU than in joining it . In any event, Russia was more than interested in joining the EU rather than joining it.
 Russia has been a ‘hands-on’ European power for three hundred years . Nevertheless, Russia had been a hands-on European power . The legacy remained and the legacy remained .
 Lithuanian president Rolandas Paksas was forced out of office in 2003 under suspicion of close links with the Russian mafia . He was accused of having links to the mafia in Lithuania .
 Hungarians who had lived in the Vojvodina region of northern Serbia were periodically assaulted and their properties vandalized by Serb youths . Hungarians had lived there for centuries and were attacked by Serbs .
 In a series of measures in the spring and summer of 2004, authorities curtailed both the rights of the press and the already restricted opportunities for public protest .
 Russia’s brief window of freedom was fast closing, says Julian Zelizer . Russia's brief window to freedom is now closing, he says . Russia is in disarray and the absence of constraint rather than genuine constitutionally protected liberty .
 In 2004, Russian observers estimated that KGBtrained officials occupied one in four of civilian administrative posts in the country . Russian observers estimate that KGB trained officials occupied 1 in four civilian posts .
 Russia was thus a decidedly uncomfortable presence on Europe’s outer edge . In the short run, Russia was therefore an uncomfortable presence in Europe .
 The Russian military was otherwise engaged and anyway in dilapidated condition . The Russian army is otherwise engaged .
 The health of the Russian population was a matter of serious concern . Life expectancy for men especially was falling precipitately . International agencies had for some time been warning that the country had seen a revival of tuberculosis .
 For the immediate future Russia was decidedly preoccupied with its own affairs . For the future, Russia was preoccupied by its own problems .
 Russia’s proximity, its sheer size and unmatched fossil-fuel reserves, must inevitably cast a shadow on the future of an energy-poor European continent . In the longer run, the simple fact of Russia's proximity and its size will inevitably cast the shadow on Europe's energy-
 Half of Poland’s natural gas and 95 percent of its oil came from Russia in 2004 . Already in 2004, half of Poland's natural gas was from Russia . Poland's economy has been hit hard by the recession .
 For Russians, the European West remained what it had been for centuries, a contradictory object of attraction and repulsion, of admiration and ressentiment . The European West is what it has been in Russia for centuries .
 Russia’s rulers and people alike remained markedly sensitive to outside opinion . Russia evincincincing deep suspicion of all foreign criticism or interference . Russia's rulers and its people remain markedly sensitive .
 History and geography had bequeathed to Europeans a neighbour they could neither ignore nor accommodate . Europeans had been forced to live with their neighbour for centuries . Europeans were forced to accept their neighbour's presence in Europe .
 For nearly seven hundred years the Ottoman Turks had been Europe’s ‘other’, supplanting the Arabs who had occupied the role for the previous half millennium . The Ottoman Turks were Europe's 'other' for more than seven centuries .
 For many centuries ‘Europe’ began where the Turks ended, and it was commonplace to speak of Christian Europe being periodically ‘saved’ from the jaws of Turkish Islam . Cioran was so depressed to be reminded of Romania’s long years under Ottoman rule
 From the mid-eighteenth century, as Ottoman Turkey slipped into decline, the ‘Eastern Question’ was the most pressing challenge facing European diplomats . The 'Eastern Question' was how to manage the Ottoman Empire’s decline .
 Turkey’s defeat in World War I, the overthrow of the Ottomans, and their replacement by Kemal Ataturk’�s ostentatiously secular, modernizing state, had taken the Eastern Question off the European agenda . The Eastern Question was off the
 Had it not been for Turkey’s strategic location, the country might well have disappeared altogether from Western consciousness . Turkey's strategic location athwart the Soviet Union's sea route to the Mediterranean might have kept Turkey from the public eye .
 Ankara became for the duration of the Cold War an accommodating participant in the Western alliance . Ankara contributed to NATO a rather significant contingent of soldiers . The Turkish capital is home to a large military presence in NATO .
 Turkish ‘guest workers’ migrated in large numbers to Germany and other Western European lands in search of jobs . Meanwhile, the rest of the Mediterranean basin’s surplus rural population has migrated to Western Europe .
 With the end of the Cold War, Turkey’s distinctive location took on a different significance . Turkey's distinctive location became a symbol of the country's identity .
 The country was no longer a frontier outpost and barrier state in an international geopolitical confrontation . The country no longer had to be a barrier state, it was a place in a geopolitical confrontation with Russia .
 It was now caught between Europe and Asia, with ties and affinities in both directions . Instead it was now a conduit, caught between Asia and Europe .
 Although Turkey was formally a secular republic, most of its seventy million citizens were Muslims . Most of Turkey's 70 million citizens are Muslims . Turkey was officially secular republic .
 Many older Turks were not especially orthodox, but with the rise of radical Islam there were growing fears that even Ataturk’s ruthlessly imposed secular state might prove vulnerable to a new generation rebelling against their secularized parents and looking for roots in an older heritage .
 Turkey’s educated professional and business elites were disproportionately located in the European city of Istanbul . But Turkey's educated professionals identified enthusiastically with Western dress, culture and practices .
 Like other ambitious eastern Europeans they saw Europe as the only possible future for them and their country . Like other eastern Europeans, they saw European values, European institutions, European markets and careers as possible future .
 Turkish officer corps identified wholeheartedly with Ataturk’s dream of a secular state . They expressed open irritation at creeping Islamisation in Turkish public life . This was one objective shared with the traditionally influential officer corps .
 Turkey’s application to join the European Union lay unaddressed for many years . Turkey's application for the EU was never discussed for years . The country has been in the process of joining the EU for several decades .
 Turkey’s prisons, its treatment of domestic critics and its inadequate civil and economic codes would need to be addressed before it could hope to get beyond a strictly trading relationship with its European partners . Turkey's prisons and treatment of critics are just some of many of many issues that would need
 The implications for national immigration policies, as well as for the EU’s budget, could hardly be ignored . The implications of the EU's immigration policies could not be ignored, as could national immigration .
 If Turkey entered the EU, the Union would have an external frontier abutting Georgia, Armenia, Iran, Iraq and Syria . The EU would have a border with Iran, Georgia, Iran and Iraq .
 Whether or not it made geographical sense to take ‘Europe’ to within one hundred miles of Mosul was a legitimate question . In the circumstances of the time it was unquestionably a security risk .
 The further Europe stretched its frontiers, the more it was felt by many that the Union should explicitly state what it was that defined their common home . And the closer Europe stretched it, the further it stretched it felt the EU needed to explicitly state its home .
 A number of politicians in Poland, Lithuania, Slovakia and elsewhere tried unsuccessfully to try unsuccessfully to insert a reminder that Europe was once Christian Europe . This, in turn, the Polish Pope in Rome, tried unsuccessfully, to insert such a reminder .
 Would-be European Turks were even more likely than other Europeans to emphasize the secular, tolerant and liberal dimensions of European identity . The irony was that precisely for this reason they could not define themselves as Christian (or ‘Judeo-Christian)
 European countries are trying to invoke European values and norms as a lever against reactionary influences in Turkish public life . Member-states of Europe itself had long encouraged. They were also, and with increasing urgency, invoking European values .
 In 2003 the Turkish parliament removed, at European bidding, many longstanding restrictions on Kurdish cultural life and political expression . But the lengthy hesitation-waltz performed by governments and officials at Brussels had begun to exact a price .
 Turkish critics of EU membership pointed insistently to the humiliation of a once-imperial nation . Turkey is now reduced to the status of a supplicant at the European door, importuning support for its application .
 Turkey has seen steady growth of religious sentiment in Turkey . The country’s moderate Islamist party won an electoral victory . The national parliament will debate a motion to make adultery, once again, a criminal offence .
 Opponents of Turkish membership could point again to its unsuitability . Opponents could point to Turkish membership in Germany, France and Greece .
 In 2004 the retiring Dutch EU Commissioner Frits Bolkestein warned of the coming Tslamisation’ of Europe .
 The cost of future rejection or further delays is now another notch . Meanwhile, the cost of rejecting or delaying the deal has been raised by the Turkish government .
 History should have weighed so heavily upon European affairs at the start of the twenty-first century, it was ironic, considering how lightly it lay upon the shoulders of contemporary Europeans . That history should have been weighed heavily on European affairs was ironic .
 The problem was not so much education, but history in schools, as the public uses to which the past was now put to use . In some parts of southeastern Europe this too was a source of concern .
 Europe, by its self-definition, was post-authoritarian . In authoritarian societies, of course, this was an old story . But Europe's self-defence, it says, is now more democratic than authoritarian societies .
 Governments no longer exercised a monopoly over knowledge and history could not readily be altered for political convenience . History could not be altered by political convenience, the historian says . Governments had no monopoly on knowledge, he says .
 In eastern Europe, nostalgia drew directly upon regret for the lost certainties of Communism . Communism, now purged of its darker side, was purged from its darker past .
 The exhibition attracted many older people for whom the grey sameness of the shoddily-made items on display must have been a recent memory .
 The response of visitors suggested a degree of affection and regret that caught the curators quite by surprise . And yet the response of those who visited the museum surprised curators .
 Ostalgie, as it was known in Germany, drew on a similar vein of forgetful remembering . It was known for its forgetful nature, and was a form of memory .
 The GDR demonstrated in the glow of retrospect a remarkable capacity to evoke affection and even longing . Considering that the GDR was little more than a security service with a state, it demonstrated a remarkable .
 Germans and Czechs, like other central Europeans, have had all too much experience of sudden, traumatic national re-starts . But they have had too much of a sudden national start-up, they say . The Czech Republic is one of the most successful countries in the world,
 Eine Deutsche Chronik attracted an average of nine million West German viewers per episode when it was televised in 1984 . The show was broadcast in West Germany from 1984 .
 The obsession with nostalgia swept across the rest of Western Europe in the last years of the old century, giving rise to heritage industries, memorials and reconstructions .
 The creative re-imagining of the national past in France and the UK at the end of the twentieth century was of another order altogether . But the re-imaginings of the past in the UK and France were of a different order altogether.
 It was not by chance that history-as-nostalgia was so very pronounced in these two national settings in particular . It's not a coincidence that history was so much pronounced in this country .
 Both countries had been stripped of territory and resources by war and decolonization . Having entered the twentieth century as proud imperial powers, both countries entered the 20th century as imperial powers .
 The confidence and security of global empire had been replaced by uneasy memories and uncertain future prospects . The confidence of the global empire has been replaced with uneasy memories .
 What it meant to be French, or British, had once been very clear, but no longer . What it means to be British, or French, was once very clear .
 The alternative, to become enthusiastically ‘European’ was far easier in small countries like Belgium or Portugal, or in places like Italy or Spain, where the recent national past was best left in shadow . The alternative was to become enthusiastic 'European'
 After Thatcherite revolution of the Eighties even this element of continuity was lost . But after the 1980s, even this has been lost .
 In the course of that decade the Britain that could feel a certain warm glow of recognition when looking back to the ’40s, or even to 1913, was swept away . In the ‘50s, the Britain’s image was quite swept away. In the 1930
 The past was not abused or exploited; it was sanitized and given a happy face . The past has been sanitized, but it was not exploited or exploited, says author .
 Barnsley, at the heart of the defunct South Yorkshire coalfield, was a case in point . The city was once at heart of South Yorkshire's former co-coalfield .
 Barnsley in the post-Thatcher era had been transformed beyond recognition . Once an important mining hub, the town has been transformed into a city of poverty .
 Its town center was eviscerated, its civic core ripped up and replaced by tawdry pedestrian malls encased in concrete parking garages . Its civic core was ripped up by the city's developers and replaced with a parking garage . The town center is now being torn up and
 Barnsley’s town hall and a handful of neighbouring buildings are now gone . All that remained were the town hall, which visitors were directed to by fake-ancient signposts .
 ‘Battle of Orgreave’ was rerun for television in 2001 . A few miles from Barnsley, near the village of orgreave, it was re-run in 2001 for television .
 The June 1984 confrontation between striking miners and police was the most violent and desperate of the clashes that marked Margaret Thatcher’s confrontation with the National Union of Miners that year . The miners were protesting against the government's decision to strike .
 Since then many of the miners had been unemployed . Some of them took part in the re-enactment, dressed in appropriate ‘period’ clothing .
 'Performing' of famous battles was an established English pastime . This ‘performing’ of famous battle battles was a popular pastime in the UK .
 Orgreave should have been getting the ‘heritage’ treatment was illustrative of the accelerated historicizing now under way . The Orgreaves should have had the 'heritage' treatment, it is said .
 It took three hundred years before the English got around to re-enacting the Civil War Battle of Naseby . Orgreave was being rerun for television just seventeen years after the fact .
 Barnsley figured prominently in George Orwell's The Road to Wigan Pier . Orwell wrote unforgettably of the tragedy of inter-war unemployment in Britain’s working class .
 Seventy years on, in Wigan itself, there was now not only a pier but also a signpost on the nearby motorway encouraging people to visit it .
 ‘The Orwell at Wigan Pier’ is a generic modern pub selling burgers and chips . Next to the cleaned-up canal there had been constructed 'The Way We Were' museum and a modern pub . ‘Orbitel' is a modern modern pub with burgers and
 Memories of Wigan 1930-1970 guide offered pretty sepia pictures of demure salesgirls and quaint shops .
 Orwell wrote of the pits and workers whose condition drew Orwell there and gave Wigan its dubious fame . But of the pit workers and their condition, there was not a word . Orwell said: 'Of the pits, there were no words'
 Josiah Wedgwood was a ceramics manufacturer in England's West Midland potteries district . Tourists and local schoolchildren encouraged to learn how he made his famous wares .
 The way things ought to have been substituted for the way they were could be multiplied hundredfold . And such examples could be multiplying hundredfold, he says .
 Industry, poverty, and class conflict have been officially forgotten and paved over . Industry and poverty are officially forgotten by the government .
 Even the most recent and contested past is available only in nostalgic plastic reproduction . And even a nostalgic past can be found in nostalgic replicas .
 This countrywide bowdlerization of memory was the signal achievement of the nation’s new political £lite . The country's new political 'lite' is the result of a countrywide 'bowdler' of memory .
 The English capacity to plant and tend a Garden of Forgetting, fondly invoking the past while strenuously denying it, is unique . The English can also invoke the past but strenuously deny it, says the author .
 France's otherwise comparable obsession with the nation’s heritage —le patrimoine —took a different form . France's obsession with France's heritage took different form.
 In France, the fascination with identifying and preserving worthy objects and places from the national past went back many decades, beginning between the wars with agrarian exhibitions . The Vichy regime’s efforts to replace the inconvenient urban present with an idealized rural past was accelerated by the
 France of President Mitterrand and Chirac was changing beyond recognition . But by the last decades of the century France had changed beyond recognition, it was changing .
 It was not the continuities with past glory—or past tragedy—that attracted comment, but rather the discontinues . Now it was not a continuities but a discontinuity, it was the discontinuity .
 The past, from Vichy to Algiers, offered little guidance for the future . The past—the revolutionary past, the peasant past, and the linguistic past —offered little guidance . The future of Algeria is not easy to predict .
 France's once-seamless history seemed set to disappear from national memory altogether . Overtaken by demographic transformation and two generations of socio-geographic mobility, France’s once-Seameless history seemed to disappear .
 An increase in the range of the official patrimoine, the official heritage collection, was an increase in . The state has also increased the number of monuments and artifacts stamped 'heritage' by the authority of the state .
 In 1988, at the behest of Mitterrand’s Culture Minister Jack Lang, the list of officially protected items in the patrimoine culturel of France was dramatically enlarged . Previously restricted to UNESCO-style heirlooms such as the Pont du Gard near Nimes,
 The preservation of a building which never even appeared in the film could be seen as a subtle French exercise in post-modern irony, or as symptomatic of the unavoidably bogus nature of any memory when subjected to official taxidermy .
 Mitterrand’s own distinctive contribution to the national patrimoine was not so much to preserve or classify it as to manufacture it in real time . He said: ‘Mitterrand's own contribution was to preserve and classify it, rather than to classify it .
 No French ruler since Louis XIV has marked his reign with such a profusion of buildings and ceremonials . No French leader since 17th century has marked the French capital with such buildings and ceremonies .
 No comparable publication has ever been conceived for any other nation, and it's hard to imagine how it could be . No comparable publications have been created for other nations .
 For Nora’s Lieux de Memoire captures the astonishing confidence of French collective identity . Eight hundred years of national history have bequeathed France a singularity and a common heritage that lend themselves to mnemonic representation .
 This is nostalgia as Angst the fear that one day—quite soon—the earth-colored information panels clustered along France’s magnificently engineered, impeccably landscaped autoroutes will cease to hold any meaning for the French themselves .
 The heritage industry in England suggests an obsession with the way things weren't . The cultivation, as it were, of genuine nostalgia for a fake past, is a problem .
 The French fascination with its spiritual patrimoine has a certain cultural authenticity . In contrast, the French fascination for its spiritual history has a different cultural authenticity.
 It was appropriate that regret for the keys to a lost Frenchness was focused upon a formal body of symbols, whether physical or intellectual . It was thus altogether appropriate that regrets for the loss of Frenchness were focused on symbols, such as symbols .
 Les Lieux de memoire encapsulates for thousands of readers an evanescent Frenchness already eluding them in daily French life . These assumptions were shared by politicians, intellectuals and people of all political persuasions .
 There was no assigned corner for Islam in the French memory palace . It would have run counter to the purpose of the undertaking to create one after the fact .
 The omission illustrated the trouble that France will have in accommodating the millions of new Europeans in its midst .
 Like the rest of the continent’s political elite, from Portugal to Poland, they represented above all white, Christian Europe . Like Portugal, Poland represented a white, white Christian Europe, the Polish PM was in power .
 The number of Christians who actually practiced their faith in Europe continued to shrink . The varieties of Christianity within Europe remained many, from Ukrainian Uniates to Welsh Methodists .
 In France, only one adult in seven acknowledged even attending church, and then on average just once a month . Only one in seven adults in France even attend church, according to French statistics .
 Christianity was on the wane even in Poland, where the citizenry was increasingly deaf to the moral exhortations of the once-powerful Catholic hierarchy . The Polish Catholic Church was once the most powerful in Poland .
 By the turn of the century well over half of all Poles (and a much larger majority of those under thirty) favoured legalized abortions . The majority of Poles favoured legalized abortion in the 1930s .
 Islam, in contrast, was expanding its appeal—particularly among the young, for whom it served increasingly as a source of communal identity and collective pride in countries where citizens of Arab or Turkish or African provenance were still widely seen and treated as ‘foreigners’
 Girls, especially, took to wearing traditional clothing and reli774 THE VARIETIES OF EUROPE gious symbols .
 The move was undertaken in February 2004 and targeted at the voile —the headgear of observant Muslim girls . But this move must be understood in a broader and more troubling context . The voile is the headgear worn by observant Muslims .
 Anti-Semitism was on the rise in Europe, for the first time in over forty years . Anti-Semitic anti-Semitic incidents were common in Europe for the past 40 years . Racial prejudice was being turned to political advantage by the far Right .
 Anti-Semitism in France or Belgium was immediately identified as a return to the continent’s dark past . Seen from across the Atlantic, anti-Semitism became a staple in the speeches of Europhobic politicians and neo-conservative pundits .
 Anti-Jewish feelings were largely unknown in contemporary Europe —except among Muslims and especially Europeans of Arab descent, where they were a direct outcome of the festering crisis in the Middle East . Anti-Semitism was largely unknown among Muslims in Europe, especially Muslims and those with Arab descent .
 Arab television stations, now available via satellite throughout Europe, regularly broadcast reports from Gaza and the Occupied West Bank . Arab TV stations regularly broadcast Gaza reports .
 The attacks on Jews and Jewish institutions in the first years of the new century sparked concern not because of their scale, or even on account of their racist character . Instead of being racist, the attacks were implicitly inter-communal nature, they were thought to be anti-Semitic .
 Racially motivated attacks on Arabs, Turks, Indians, Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, Senegalese and other visible minorities were far more numerous than assaults on Jews .
 Authorities worried more about the growing alienation of their Arab and other Muslim communities than they did about any putative revival of Fascism . Elsewhere, public authorities worried more . than they . did about a revival of . Fascism than a revival .
 U.S. treated 'Islam' and Muslims as a distant challenge, alien and hostile, best addressed by heightened security and 'pre-emptive war' Europe’s governments had good reason to see the matter very differently .
 The transmigration of passions and frustrations from persecuted Arabs in Palestine to their angry, dispirited brethren in Paris should not have come as a surprise . It was, after all, another legacy of empire. The transmutation of passions should not be a surprise.
 ‘We want the people at Nokia to feel we all are partners, not bosses and employees,' says Aneurin Bevan . Nokia boss: 'We want to feel that we are partners and not bosses'
 Nokia CEO Jorma Ollila: ‘Europeans want to be sure that there is no adventure in the future’
 Alfons Verplaetse 1996 ‘America is the place to come when you are young and single’ America is where you come from, he said in 1996 .
 The end of the twentieth century in Europe in Europe lacks the homogeneity implicit in confident descriptions of the previous fin-de-siecle. Europe lacks homogeneity in the past .
 In high culture, the state had retained its subventionary role, at least in Western Europe . In the performing arts, performing arts is a key part of Western culture .
 Museums, art galleries, opera companies, orchestras and ballet troupes all depended heavily on generous annual grants from public funds . Museums and art galleries depend heavily, many countries exclusively, on public grants .
 The egregious exception of post-Thatcherite Great Britain, where the national lottery had relieved the Treasury of some of the burden of cultural support, was misleading . The national lottery was misleading. It was misleading to say that it had relieved some of Britain's cultural burden .
 The high cost of such public funding had raised doubts about the possibility of sustaining lavish grants indefinitely . During the Nineties some of the Lander governments began to question the generous scale of their outlays .
 Public subsidies in Germany typically defrayed over 80 percent of the cost of running a theatre or opera house . Public subsidies typically cover the costs of running such a theatre .
 Culture at this level is closely bound up with status and with regional identity . Culture is closely tied to status and identity, but culture is closely associated with status, identity .
 Frankfurt, Munich, Stuttgart and many other German cities continued to support first-rate international ballet or opera companies . German cities paid annual salaries with full benefits and state pensions to performers .
 In France, the arts flourished in far-flung provincial towns thanks to direct aid distributed from central funds by a single Culture Ministry . In the French case, direct aid was distributed from . central funds .
 President Mitterrand spent sums unprecedented since the reign of Louis XIV . He spent huge sums on the Louvre, the Opera de Paris and the Com£die Franchise . He also spent money on regional museums, regional arts centres and provincial theatre companies .
 Much of the point of artistic subsidies in France was to preserve and display the riches of the nation’s own heritage . Whereas in Germany the high arts were proudly cosmopolitan (Vladimir Derevianko commissioned works from William Forsythe, an American choreographer,
 High culture in France retained a broadly acknowledged pedagogical function . The canon of French theatre in particular was still rigorously inculcated in the national curriculum .
 Jane Brown, the London headmistress who in 1993 forbade a school 2 Britain was not unique . Jane Brown's decision to ban the school was not the first in the world to do so .
 In one week in September 2004 the Spanish national lottery, El Gordo, took in 5,920,293 euros . The lottery took in more than five million euros .
 The scale of public funding was perhaps most striking in France and Germany . The state was the main—and in most cases the only—source of funding for the arts across Europe .
 ‘Culture’ was the last important area of public life in which the national state, rather than the European Union, could play a distinctive role as a near-monopoly provider . Indeed ‘culture’ is the last area in public life where the state could play
 Even in Eastern Europe, the older generation had good reason to recall with trepidation the implications of allowing government a controlling say in cultural life . The impoverished public treasury was the only alternative to the baleful impact of market forces .
 After Communism, Sofia was a hotbed of recherche postmodern experiments in choreography and staging . Many of the best musicians, dancers and even actors headed west .
 The new caste of transnational clercs who communicated readily across frontiers and languages had the means and the time to travel freely in pursuit of entertainment and edification no less .
 Reviews of an exhibition, a play or an opera would appear in the press of many different countries . Reviews of a play, an exhibition or a play would also be published in the world's most famous newspapers .
 A successful show in one city could hope to attract audiences and visitors from as far afield as Paris, Zurich or Milan . A successful London show could attract audiences from all over Europe .
 Whether the newly cosmopolitan audiences were genuinely sophisticated—as distinct from merely well-heeled—was a point of some contention .
 Longestablished events such as the Salzburg Festival or the periodic Ring cycle performances at Bayreuth still attracted an older audience . Long established events attracted older audiences familiar with material being performed but also the attendant social rituals .
 The trend was towards energetic efforts to popularize traditional material for younger audiences . But the trend was not to be taken for granted, with younger audiences having an acquaintance with the classics .
 The exploitable anxieties of under-cultivated nouveaux riches had been a theme of literary and theatrical mockery at least since Moliere . This was not as unprecedented a situation as cultural pessimists are wont to assert .
 What was new, however, was the continental scale of the cultural shift . What is new is the continent's cultural shift, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 The composition of audiences from Barcelona to Budapest was now strikingly uniform . So was the material on offer, and so was the content on offer .
 Whether the ever-closer Union of Europeans rendered its beneficiaries more cosmopolitan or simply blended their separate parochialisms was not just a question for the high-arts pages of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung .
 The FAZ, the FT, Le Monde and La Repubblica were now genuinely European papers, universally available and read all across the continent . The new generation of European newspapers is now more widely available than ever before .
 The mass-circulation tabloid press, however, remained firmly circumscribed by national languages and frontiers . Mass-circuit tabloid press is still tightly circumscribed .
 In eastern Europe and Iberia, the absence of a free press meant that many people, especially outside of the large cities, had missed out altogether on the newspaper era . The absence of free press in eastern Europe meant many people missed out on the newspapers era .
 Television is now the main source of information, ideas and culture for most Europeans . The latter was now the most popular form of information and culture .
 The traditional state-owned television stations faced competition from commercial companies and satellite channels . But they had retained a surprisingly large audience share .
 They had also followed the lead of the daily press and sharply reduced their foreign news coverage . The daily press has also sharply reduced its foreign press coverage .
 European television at the close of the twentieth century presented a curious paradox . As a consequence, European television presented a strange paradox. As a result, European TV at the end of the . century .
 Presentational style was remarkably similar, borrowing from the model of American local news . The presentational style of news broadcasts in the U.S. is remarkably similar .
 TV remained a distinctly national and even insular medium . On the other hand, television remained a distinct national medium . TV is still a national medium.
 Italian television was unmistakably Italian —from its curiously dated variety shows and stilted interviews to the celebrated good looks of its presenters . The distinctive camera angles were deployed when filming scantily clad younger women .
 In Austria an earnest moral seriousness informed locally produced talk shows, contrasting with Germany’s near-monopoly of the rest of the programming . In neighbouring Austria, an earnest . seriousness informed local . talk shows .
 In Switzerland each region had its own television channels, employing different languages, reporting different events and operating in sharply contrasting styles .
 The BBC has abandoned the ideals of its earlier days as the nation’s moral arbiter and benevolent pedagogue in the drive to compete with its commercial rivals . The BBC, as its critics bitterly observed, had abandoned the aesthetics and ideals of earlier days .
 In spite of being dumbed-down, it was even more unmistakably British than ever .
 The intellectual or political concerns, the . contrasting attitudes to authority and power, were as distinctive and different as they had been half a century before . Half a century later, the nation's political and intellectual differences were as distinct and different .
 In an age when most other collective activities and communal organizations were in decline, television was what the mass of the population of every country had in common . In the age of television, television is what most people have in common with social media .
 "It served very effectively to reinforce national distinctions and a high level of mutual ignorance," he says . "And it served very effective to reinforce ... national distinctions," he adds .
 TV channels showed remarkably little interest in events in neighbouring countries . In the early years, fascination with technology and curiosity led to numerous documentaries and ‘outside broadcasts’ from exotic towns and seascapes .
 Election results elsewhere in Europe were reported by national mass media only if they had shock value or trans-continental implications . Election results were only reported if they were significant or had implications for the region .
 For the most part, Europeans had very little idea what was going on in neighbouring countries . Europeans had little idea of what was happening in neighbouring nations .
 European elections are a natural by-product of the largely un-European mental universe of most Europeans . Their singular lack of interest in European elections did not just from suspicion or boredom in the face of Brussels .
 ‘Eurosport’ was devoted to broadcasting a wide-range of sports events in various European languages . A satellite television channel was dedicated to broadcasting sports in various languages . The channel was later known as Eurosport .
 Every national television station from Estonia to Portugal devoted considerable blocks of airtime to sporting competitions . Many of them inter-European and frequently not involving the local or national team .
 Even cricket, the iconic summer game of the English, had slipped to a niche position in entertainment terms, in spite of efforts to render it more colourful, more eventful—and to put an end to leisurely but commercially disastrous five-day games .
 The game was played in every European country, but in the initial post-war decades players stayed close to home . The game is played in all European countries .
 The relatively infrequent international games were treated in some places as vicarious, emotionally charged re-runs of military history . Spectators watched domestic league football; international games treated as re-run of history .
 Many other Europeans watched her funeral on television, but they lost interest soon enough . Her funeral was attended by a small group of Europeans .
 Well into the late 1960s it would have been highly unusual for a club player to find a foreigner on his team, except in Italy . Innovative managers were just starting to poach talented outsiders .
 Real Madrid team of the 1950s did indeed boast the peerless Hungarian Ferenc Puskas . Real Madrid's 1950s team was hardly a representative case of the great team . The glorious Real Madrid side of 1950s was one of the best in the world .
 The captain of Hungary’s national team, he had fled Budapest following the Soviet invasion and taken Spanish citizenship . He had fled the country following the invasion of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 A generation later, Juventus, Leeds, Real Madrid and just about every major European football club had a cosmopolitan roster of players drawn from many different countries . Real Madrid, Juventus and Leeds have players from all over the world .
 Arsenal, the leading British football team at the start of the twenty-first century, was managed by a Frenchman . Arsenal was the most successful club in the English Premier League at the time .
 The north London club’s first-team squad comprised players from France, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, Brazil, Switzerland and the Ivory Coast .
 Football was a game without frontiers, for players, managers and spectators alike . Football was football's first time it had been played without a front-edge .
 Manchester United parlayed their competitive success into an ‘image’ that could be marketed with equal success from Lancashire to Latvia . Fashionable clubs like Manchester United could also be marketed in Latvia .
 A handful of individual football stars have assumed a role in European public life and popular newspapers hitherto reserved for movie starlets or minor royalty . Football stars boast good looks, beautiful wives and an animated private life .
 David Beckham's move from Manchester United to Real Madrid in 2003 made headlines in every member-state of the European Union . Beckham was an English player of moderate technical gifts but an unsurpassed talent for self-promotion .
 Beckham’s embarrassing performance at the European Football Championships in Portugal the following year did little to dampen the enthusiasm of his fans . The England captain missed two penalties, hastening his country's ignominious early departure from the tournament .
 Despite the heightened fervor of international games, the common obsession with watching the game—any game—outweighed most partisan loyalties .
 At peak, BBC broadcasts of the matches played in Portugal that summer attracted twenty five million viewers in the UK alone . At peak of the summer, the BBC broadcast of the games in Portugal attracted 20.5 million viewers . The World Cup was the first major tournament to be held in Portugal
 Football could be played anywhere by anyone, unlike tennis or swimming or athletics, which required a certain level of income or else public facilities not widely available in many European countries . Requiring no equipment beyond a ball of some sort, football was played anywhere in the world .
 There was no advantage to being unusually tall or burly—quite the contrary, and the game was not especially dangerous . The game of the day was not particularly dangerous, but it was not unusual to play .
 As a job, football had long been a low-paid alternative for working-class boys in industrial towns . Now it was a path into the upper reaches of suburban prosperity and more besides . Football is no longer an alternative to the low-paying alternative .
 However talented and popular they might be, individual footballers were of necessity part of their team . Moreover, however talented or popular, individual players must also be part of the team .
 French cyclist Raymond Poulidor is a symbol of unrequited national endeavour . He was the first French cyclist to win the Tour de France in 1968 .
 Football was also far too straightforward to be turned to the metaphorical and quasi-metaphysical uses to which baseball in America was sometimes put . Football was far more straightforward than football was ever put to the figurative and quasi metaphorical uses of baseball .
 The game was open to Everyman (and, increasingly, Everywoman) in a way that was no longer true of professional team sports in North America, for example .
 As an object of European public attention, football, it was sometimes suggested, now substituted not just for war but also for politics . Football is sometimes suggested to be now substituted for war and politics .
 It certainly occupied far more space in newspapers; and politicians everywhere were careful to pay respects to sporting heroes and demonstrate due familiarity with their accomplishments .
 It's harder to describe political choices and allegiance in traditional party terms . But it did make it harder to say party allegiance in terms of party allegiance .
 Anti-capitalism was attractive to nativist reactionaries and internationalist radicals alike . It was cast as anti-globalization as though strictly domestic capitalism were somehow a different breed of capitalism .
 The notorious exception was a tiny but very hard core of German and English fans who travelled to international games explicitly in search of a fight, to the utter mystification of everyone else . As for the political mainstream, the old differences between parties of center-Right and center-Left 5 .
 Swedish Social Democrats and French neo-Gaullists might well have more in common with each other than with their respective ideological forebears . On a broad range of contemporary issues, they might well share more common than their ideological predecessors .
 The political topography of Europe had altered dramatically over the previous two decades . The continent's political landscape had changed dramatically in the last 20 years .
 Although it remained conventional to think in terms of ‘Left’ and ‘Right’, what they distinguished was unclear . What they distinguished themselves was unclear.
 The old-style political party was one victim of these changes, with declining membership and falling turnout at the polls, as we have seen . The old style political party has been a victim of this changes, as has been seen .
 The public intellectual is a venerable European institution, the public intellectual . It has been the subject of much of the world's most enduring debates .
 On the European scene a century later their would-be successors were, if not entirely absent, then increasingly marginal . On the continent a century after their success, they were marginalised .
 In central and eastern Europe, issues which had once mobilized the political intelligentsia now elicited a bored and indifferent response from younger generations . Marxism, totalitarianism, human rights or the economics of transition, now elicits a bored response from young generations .
 Ageing moralists like Havel and Michnik were irrevocably associated with a past which few cared to revisit . Michnik was a one-time political hero . Havel was one of the world's leading moralists .
 What Czeslaw Milosz had once described as the ‘irritation of East European intellectuals’ at the American obsession with purely material products was now increasingly directed at their fellow citizens . The American fascination with material products has now become an obsession .
 In western Europe, the exhortatory function of the intellectual had not altogether disappeared . But it had lost its object, and it was lost its aim . In France and Germany, quality press was still periodically subjected to incandescent political sermons .
 There are many particular sins against which public moralists might rail, but no general goal or ideal to mobilize their followers . There are no general goals or ideal in whose name to mobilize followers .
 Fascism, Communism and war had been expunged from the continent, together with censorship and the death penalty . Fascism and war were expunced from the European continent, along with censorship .
 Abortion and contraception were almost universally available, homosexuality freely permitted and openly practiced . Homosexuality was freely permitted in the U.S. in the 1960s .
 The depredations of the unrestricted capitalist market, whether global or local, continued to attract intellectual fire everywhere . In the absence of a self-confident anti-capitalist counter-project, this was a debate better suited to think tanks than philosophers .
 The only remaining arena in which European intellectuals could still combine moral .ness with universal policy prescriptions was in foreign affairs, free of messy compromises of domestic policy-making . Issues of right and wrong, life and death were still very much in play .
 intellectuals from west and east Europe strenuously took up the cudgels . During the Yugoslav wars intellectuals from east and west took up their cudeles .
 Some have identified body and soul with the Croat cause . Others have identified the Croatian cause as a cause of genocide .
 Most pressed the case for intervention in Bosnia or Kosovo on general principles, extending the rights-based arguments first espoused twenty years before . They emphasized the genocidal practices of Serbian forces .
 Even Yugoslavia, for all its urgency, could not return intellectuals to the centre of public life . But even Yugoslavia, with all its urgent urgency, was not able to return intellectuals back to prominence .
 Bernard-Henri Levy in Paris could get invited to the Elysee Palace for consultations with the President . Tony Blair would occasionally host retreats with favoured British journalists and other literary courtiers .
 Public intellectuals no longer have their once-crucial role in mobilizing opinion at large . Public intellectuals are no longer able to mobilize public opinion, as became clear in the course of 2003 .
 The European public was overwhelmingly opposed to the U.S. invasion of Iraq in that year and to the broader lines of United States foreign policy .
 The outpouring of anxiety and anger to which this opposition gave rise, though it was shared and expressed by many European intellectuals, did not depend upon them for its articulation or organization . It was shared by many Europeans, but not by intellectuals, it was expressed by them for their artic
 Michnik and Glucksmann urged their readers to support Washington’s Iraq policy, arguing that a policy of liberal interventionism in defense of human rights everywhere was justified on general principles . America was now, as before, in the vanguard of the struggle against political evil and moral
 President's foreign policy is 'isolated and ignored' by traditional audiences, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Michnik or Glucksmann had nothing to do with the particular cast of their opinions . But the irrelevance of Michnik and Glucksman's opinions is not the case, it's the cast of the cast .
 On May 31st 2003, Habermas and Derrida published an article entitled ‘Unsere Erneuerung.’ in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung . The article was published by Jurgen Haberma and Jacques Derrid
 America’s new and dangerous path was an urgent wake-up call for Europe: an occasion for Europeans to rethink their common identity . Europeans should draw upon their shared Enlightenment values and forge a distinctive European stance in world affairs .
 Umberto Eco in La Repubblica, Gianni Vattimo in La Stampa and Adolf Muschg in the Neue Zurcher Zeitungy the Spanish philosopher Fernando Savater in El Pais . Richard Rorty in the Suddeutsche Zeitung .
 The Derrida-Habermas initiative, even though it articulated sentiments shared by many Europeans, passed virtually unnoticed . But the initiative, in turn, was largely ignored .
 No-one implored its authors to take up their pens and lead the way forward . No one implored it to take it up its own way forward.
 The governments of a significant number of European states, including France, Germany, Belgium and later Spain, sympathized in general terms with the views expressed in these essays . But it did not occur to any of them to invite Professors Derrida or Eco in for consultation .
 One hundred years after the Dreyfus Affair, Europe’s leading intellectuals had thrown a petition—and no-one came . Europe's leading intellectuals threw a petition, but no one came .
 Six decades after the end of the Second World War, the Atlantic Alliance between Europe and the U.S. was in disarray . Six decades later, the United States and Europe were at odds with each other .
 NATO made little sense in its existing form and its future goals were obscure . In part this was the predictable outcome of the end of the Cold War . Few wished to see NATO dismantled or abandoned .
 The Alliance suffered further in the course of the Yugoslav wars, when U.S. generals resented sharing decision-making with European counterparts . European counterparts were reluctant to take the initiative in the field .
 NATO placed under unprecedented strain by Washington’s reaction to the assaults of September 11th 2001 . NATO was placed under pressure by Washington's reaction to attacks on 9/11 .
 President Bush’s uncompromising and tactless unilateralism ensured that America—no less than the ‘terror’ on which it had declared indefinite war—would now be regarded as a leading threat to world peace and security .
 The ‘Old Europe-New Europe’ distinction explained little about intra-European divisions and badly misread its object . The distinction was created to drive a wedge between Washington’s European allies .
 Only in Poland could America count on solid popular respect and support . Poland is one of the most powerful countries in the world, Poland . The Polish president is expected to be a strong leader in the future .
 A senior U.S. official could seek to divide the Europeans in this way, just a few years after they had so painfully begun to sew themselves together . Many conclude that the United States itself is now the most serious problem facing Europe . But the fact that a senior United States official
 NATO had come into existence to compensate for Western Europe’s inability to defend itself without American help . NATO was formed in response to Western Europe's inability to protect itself without U.S. help .
 European failure to forge an effective military force kept it in business . Failure of European governments to forge a military force was what kept it alive . European governments failed to make an effective force of their own .
 Beginning with the Maastricht Treaty of 1993, the European Union acknowledged the need for a Common Foreign and Security Policy . What that was and how it would be determined and implemented remained obscure until now .
 EU was close to establishing a 60,000-strong Rapid Response Force for intervention and peace-keeping tasks . But ten years on, the EU is still struggling to find a way to tackle the problem .
 Not only was Europe no longer in America's shadow, but the relation was if anything reversed . Europe's relationship with the U.S. has been reversed since the war .
 European direct investment in the United States in the year 2000 had reached $900 billion . European multi-nationals now owned a large number of iconic American products, including Brooks Brothers, Random House, Kent cigarettes, Pennzoil, Bird’s Eye and the Los Angeles Dodgers baseball
 Economic competition, however tense, was nonetheless a certain sort of closeness . Economic competition was nonetheless tense, but it was nonetheless close .
 Seen from Europe, America was starting to look very alien to Europe . America had become superficially familiar in the course of the Cold War . America's relationship with the U.S. was becoming more distant from Europe .
 In January 2003, at the initiative of the Spanish and British prime ministers, eight European governments signed a joint declaration of pro-American solidarity . The earnest religiosity of a growing number of Americans—reflected in their latest ‘born-again’ president—was incomprehensible to most
 Within a few months the Hungarians and Czechs were privately expressing their regrets and expressing bitterness at having been ‘bullied’ into signing by the Spanish Prime Minister, Jose Maria Aznar .
 A year later Aznar himself was thrown out of office by Spanish voters for having led Spain into the ‘coalition’ to invade Iraq . The nation was overwhelmingly opposed to the invasion .
 The American fondness for personal side arms, not excluding fully equipped semi-automatic rifles, made life in the United States appear dangerous and anarchic . For the overwhelming majority of European observers, the frequent and unapologetic resort to the death penalty seemed to place America beyond the pale of
 To these were added Washington’s growing disdain for international treaties, its unique perspective on global warming to international law, and above all its partisan stance in the Israel-Palestine crisis . To these was added added to these were .
 In none of these instances did American policy completely reverse direction following the election of President George W Bush in 2000; the Atlantic gap had begun to open up well before .
 The idea that America was culturally different—or inferior, or threatening—was hardly original . The idea of America being culturally different, or inferior, was hardly original, but it's not the first .
 In 1983 the French Culture Minister Jack Lang warned that Dallas represented a serious threat to French and European identity . Dallas is the most watched television series in the world .
 Nine years later, when Jurassic Park opened in French cinemas, he was echoed to the letter by one of his successors .
 This was the familiar small change of intellectual snobbery and cultural insecurity, mixed with more than a little chauvinist nostalgia . But this was the usual small change, intellectual snubbery and culture insecurity .
 Such sentiments had moved from the intellectual or political fringes deep into the center of European life . What was new about the situation at the beginning of the twenty-first century was that such sentiments were becoming commonplace, and becoming commonplace .
 The depth and breadth of anti-American feeling in contemporary Europe far exceeded anything seen during the Vietnam War or even at the height of the peace movements of the early 1980s . Anti-American sentiment in Europe far exceeds anything seen in Vietnam War .
 Son of President George W Bush is son of President Bush, son of Bill Clinton . Son of George W. Bush, in contrast to the affection in which Bill Clinton, his predecessor, had held .
 Many Europeans had been angry at President Lyndon Johnson in the late Sixties . But many Europeans had not typically mutated into dislike of America or Americans in general .
 Forty years later there was a widespread feeling, all across the continent (and very much including the British, who angrily objected to their Prime Minister’s enthusiastic identification with his American ally, that there was something wrong with the kind of place that America was becoming .
 The presumptively ‘un-American’ qualities of Europe are fast becoming the highest common factor in European self-identification .
 In the immediate post-Communist years Prague would have pleaded guilty to a longing for all things American, from individual freedom to material abundance . In the rest of eastern Europe, it would have been a longing to be more American .
 No-one visiting eastern European capitals, from Tallinn to Ljubljana, could miss the aggressive new elite of snappily dressed young men and women, zipping busily to appointments .
 In countries like Bulgaria or Hungary it was now an indirect, politically acceptable way of expressing nostalgia for national Communism . As so often in the past, it was a serviceable surrogate for anti-Semitism . In Hungary and Bulgaria it was an indirect political expression .
 Even among mainstream commentators and politicians it was no longer commonplace to hold up American institutions as a source of inspiration or an object to be emulated . But even among politicians and commentators, politicians, no longer hold up U.S. institutions as sources of inspiration .
 Hungarian who had worked for some years in California explained to an inter8 The new business class in Eastern Europe, it should be noted, ate, dressed, phoned and drove European .
 The image of America as a perennial land of youth and adventure had wide currency, especially in America itself . But if it is time to grow up, you should return to Europe’s Europe .
 The birth rate in many European countries is well below replacement levels . Birth rates in many countries are below replacement rates .
 In Spain, Greece, Poland, Germany and Sweden, fertility rates are below 1.5 children per woman . In Spain and Greece, fertility rate is below 1 .5 children a woman per person . In Sweden and Greece fertility rates were below 1 children a year .
 In parts of Eastern Europe they were closer to 1.1 per cent, the lowest in the world . The lowest in parts of the world was 1.2 per cent .
 Many European countries could expect population to fall by one fifth or more . Projected forward through 2040 these data suggested that many European countries may expect population population to drop by one a fifth .
 None of the traditional explanations for fertility decline seemed to account for Europe’s incipient demographic crisis . European fertility decline has been blamed on the rise in fertility rates .
 Poor countries like Moldova and rich ones like Denmark faced the same challenge . Poor countries such as Moldova, Denmark and Moldova faced a similar challenge .
 In Catholic countries like Italy or Spain, young people often lived in their parents’ homes well into their thirties . In Lutheran Sweden they had their own homes and access to generous levels of state-funded child-support and maternity leave .
 Scandinavians were having slightly more children than Mediterranean Europeans . But the differences in fertility were less striking than the similarities in fertility .
 The figures everywhere would have been lower still if immigrants from outside Europe, who boosted the overall population numbers and had a much greater propensity to procreate . And the figures would have remained lower still still if the figures were lower still .
 In Germany in i960 the number of children born with one foreign parent was just 1.1 percent of the total for the year . In i960, i960 children were born with a foreign parent . i960 was i960 .
 By the start of the new millennium, the indigenous American birth-rate had also fallen below replacement levels . The demographic scene in Europe was not actually so very different from that across the Atlantic .
 Overall fertility in the United States looked set comfortably to outdistance that of Europe for the foreseeable future . The difference was that the number of immigrants entering the U.S. was so much larger—and they were disproportionately young adults .
 The welfare systems of Europe were incomparably more generous and thus faced the greater threat . The demographic troughs meant that both America and Europe might have trouble meeting public pension and other commitments in the decades ahead .
 Another was to raise the threshold at which those benefits were paid—i.e. make people work longer before retirement . Another was raising the threshold of those benefits to be paid more .
 A third alternative was to extract more taxes from the pay packets of those still in work . A third option was extracting more money from those still working in the UK .
 A fourth option, only really considered in Britain (and then half-heartedly), was to imitate the U.S. and encourage or even oblige people to turn to the private sector for social insurance .
 For many critics of Europe’s welfare states, the core problem facing Europe was not demographic shortfall but economic rigidity . For many ffee-market critics of European welfare states it was not the demographic shortfall .
 There were too many laws protecting salaries and jobs, or guaranteeing such elevated unemployment and pension payments that they lacked all incentive to work in the first place . It wasn't that there weren’t, or wouldn‘t, enough workers, enough .
 If this ‘labour-market inflexibility’ were addressed and costly social provisions reduced or privatized, then more people could enter the workforce . The burden on employers and taxpayers would be alleviated, and ‘Eurosclerosis’ could be overcome .
 There was no question that some of the rewards of the welfare state, negotiated and locked into place at the peak of the post-war boom, were now a serious burden . The welfare state is now a 'serious burden' for Britain's economy .
 After that, monthly payments fell to 53 percent of their last wage packet—indefinitely . After that the monthly payments would fall to 53% of their wage packet .
 Whether this safety net discouraged people from seeking paid work was unclear . Whether it discouraged them from seeking work is unclear .
 The fact that Europe’s economies were highly regulated and inflexible by American standards did not mean that they were necessarily inefficient or unproductive . On the other hand, the fact that they are highly regulated does not mean they are unproductive, he says .
 Americans made more goods, services and money than Europeans . Americans worked longer hours than Europeans; they had far fewer and shorter holidays . Americans also made more money because they were in paid jobs; Europeans had fewer holidays .
 In i960 there were four workers for every pensioner in France . The British were legally entitled to 23 paid vacation days annually, the 9 in France.
 Europeans have made a deliberate choice to work less, earn less and live better lives . Europeans had made the choice to live less, work less and earn less . Europeans chose to live a more affordable life than they did in the past .
 Europeans received free or nearly free medical services, early retirement and early social and public services . In return for their uniquely high taxes, Europeans also received free medical and early retirement .
 They lived safer and longer lives, enjoyed better health (despite spending far less 10 ) and had many fewer people in poverty . They also lived safer, lived longer lives and had better health .
 For most Europeans its promise of job security, progressive tax rates and large social transfer payments represented an implicit contract between government and citizens, as well as between one citizen and another . But for most Europeans it was a promise of a job security .
 According to the annual ‘Eurobarometer’ polls, an overwhelming majority of Europeans took the view that poverty was caused by social circumstances and not individual inadequacy . The Eurobarometer polls are based on the views of the public .
 They showed a willingness to pay higher taxes if these were directed to alleviating poverty . They also showed they would pay more taxes if they were directed towards alleviating the poverty .
 Social responsibility and economic advantage should not be mutually exclusive . ‘Growth’ was laudable, but not at all costs. ‘growth’ should be seen as a matter of social responsibility,’s author says. Social responsibility is not mutually exclusive.
 What they had in common was not a discrete set of services or economic practices, or a particular level of state involvement . What did they have in common? "What they had to do was not to be separate from each other, it was to be a state of mind."
 It was, rather, a sense of social rights, civic solidarity and collective responsibility that was appropriate and possible for the modern state . It was rather than spelled out in documents and laws, sometimes not, it was, sometimes spelled out .
 The aggregate outcomes might look very different in, say, Italy and Sweden . Sweden and Italy are the most populous countries in the U.S.
 Social Democratic Chancellor of Germany introduced changes in the country’s welfare payments in 2004 . He ran into a firestorm of social protest, just as a Gaullist government had done ten years earlier when proposing similar reforms in France .
 The rest was a direct burden on American businesses and their employees, the president says . The rest of the tax reform was a tax hike, he says . He says it was a burden on Americans and their businesses .
 A younger generation of economists and entrepreneurs have impressed upon politicians the need to ‘streamline’ procedures and encourage competition . Some had spent time in U.S. business schools and were frustrated at what they saw as the inflexibility of the European business environment .
 The aptly named ‘Gauche Americaine’ in France set out to release the Left from its anti-capitalist complex while retaining its social conscience . In Scandinavia, the inhibiting effect of high taxation was discussed even in Social Democratic circles even in social Democratic circles .
 The Right had been brought to acknowledge the case for welfare; the Left would now recognize the virtues of profit . The Right was brought to recognize the case of welfare . The Left was now recognizing the virtue of profit.
 The search for a project to replace the defunct debate between capitalism and socialism that had formed the core of Western politics for over a century . The effort to combine the best of both sides overlapped, not coincidentally .
 Politics, especially post-ideological politics, is about form; and it was the form of the Third Way . The Third Way was modeled on Bill Clinton’s successful ‘triangulation’ of Left and Right . Tony Blair's New Labour's Tony Blair seduced
 In a post-Thatcher environment, Blair could sound plausibly progressive and ‘European’ merely by saying positive things about the desirability of well-distributed public services . Meanwhile his admiration for the private sector placed him firmly in the ‘American’ camp .
 The Third Way was marketed as both a pragmatic solution to economic and social dilemmas and a significant conceptual breakthrough after decades of theoretical stagnation . It is marketed as an economic, social solution to the problems of the world .
 Its continental admirers, heedless of the aborted ‘third ways’ in their own national pasts, were keen to sign on . Notably the popular Fascist 'third way’ of the 1930s .
 Under Jacques Delors the European Commission had appeared a trifle preoccupied with devising and imposing norms and rules—substituting ‘Europe’ for the lost inheritance of Fabian-style bureaucratic socialism .
 Blair’s new-look politics would not long survive the disastrous decision to embroil his country and his reputation in the 2003 invasion of Iraq . The move reminded foreign observers that New Labour's Third Way was inseparably intertwined with the UK's reluctance to choose between Europe and the United
 Britain has seen a dramatic rise in the numbers of the poor in recent years . But the UK has also seen a rise in poverty in contrast to the rest of the EU where poverty is increasing modestly .
 Privatization in the early 1980s had been controversial, provoking widespread discussion of the reach and legitimacy of the public sector . The 1980s was the first time privatization had been questioned .
 In eastern Europe, it was a necessary condition for membership of the EU, in conformity with Brussels’ strictures against market-distorting public subsidies . The EU has strict rules against public subsidies in eastern Europe .
 In France or Italy, the sale of publicly owned assets was now undertaken as a short-term book-keeping device to reduce the annual deficit and stay within euro-zone rules . The sale of public assets is now a short term bookkeeping device .
 Even Tony Blair’s own Third Way projects were embarked upon as cost-efficiency calculations with side-benefits to the national budget . Tony Blair's own projects include the semi-privatization of London's Underground, for example, or the introduction of ‘competition�
 To the extent that they were tied to the argument of social principle, this was tacked on as an unconvincing afterthought . The idea of a state of mind in the U.S. is not strong enough .
 Despite cutting government expenditure, opting out of the European social charter, reducing company taxation and welcoming inward investment, the UK remained stubbornly unproductive . The UK has cut government expenditure and opted out of social regulation .
 When measured by output-per-hour it consistently underperformed its ‘sclerotic’, regulation-bound EU partners .
 A New Labour plan to avoid the coming crisis of Europe’s underfunded public pension schemes was already doomed to failure within less than a decade of its proud inauguration . New Labour plans to pass the liability on to the private sector were already doomed .
 Most of them, it was becoming clear, would never see a full company pension . Unless the state was forced back into the pensions business to make up the shortfall, it would be impossible .
 The Third Way was beginning to look an awful lot like a game of Three-Card Monte . It was starting to look a lot like Three Card Monte .
 At the beginning of the twenty-first century, the dilemma facing Europeans was not Socialism or Capitalism, Left versus Right, or the Third Way, it was socialism or capitalism . But it was capitalism or capitalism that was not socialism or Capitalism . It was capitalism, capitalism and capitalism, but
 It was not even ‘Europe’ versus ‘America’, since that choice had now been effectively resolved in most people’s minds in favour of Europe . Europe was not America versus Europe, it was Europe versus America, but that choice was now resolved .
 It was, rather than a question, which history had placed upon the agenda in 1945 and which had quietly but insistently dislodged or outlived all other claims upon Europeans’ attention . It was the question —the question—which history had . placed upon history's agenda in
 There could be no going back to the world of the autonomous, free-standing nation-state, sharing nothing with its neighbour but a common border . There is no way back to a nation-like nation-states sharing nothing but a border .
 Sikhs, Bengalis, Turks, Arabs, Indians, Indians and others besides . Millions of Sikhs and Bengalis were among those killed in the civil war .
 In their economic lives, everyone whose country was in the European Union—or wanted to be — was now irrevocably European . The EU is now the most powerful economic tool in the world, and the EU is hugely popular .
 The EU was the world’s largest internal single market, the biggest trader in services, and its member-states’ unique source of authority in all matters of economic regulation .
 In a world where comparative advantage in fixed-factor endowments is less important than policies facilitating education, research and investment, it mattered hugely that the Union increased its ability to influence education and research .
 The EU exercised a near monopoly on the markets in money itself, writes Andrew Keen . The EU is now the only country to make rules governing exchange, employment and movement .
 The only vital economic activity left to national rather than European initiative was taxation rates . The UK insisted upon it, only because the UK insisted on it .
 For the past few hundred years those communities have been grouped, voluntarily or coercively, in states . The state of Georgia is Georgia, Georgia, Alabama, Georgia and Georgia .
 With economic prosperity, social peace and international stability, that need slowly evaporated . But with economic prosperity and social peace, the need for social stability evaporated, it evaporated.
 In its place came suspicion of intrusive public authority and a desire for individual autonomy and the removal of constraints on private initiative . In the place of the public authority, suspicion of public authority was replaced with suspicion of individual autonomy .
 In the era of the superpowers, Europe seemed largely to have been taken out of its hands . Moreover, the fate of Europe seemed to be largely out of the hands of Europe . Europe's fate has been taken into its hands, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As we have seen, it took a very long time indeed for it to acquire even the rudiments of a military capacity, much less a foreign policy . As well as it took very long . time for it took to acquire a military . capacity, even a foreign . policy .
 The limitations of a post-national prescription for a better European future became clear in the aftermath of September 11th 2001 . But in the following 9/11 the limitations of the post-nations prescription became clear .
 The traditional European state, after all, not only made war abroad but enforced the peace at home . The traditional state, as well as war abroad, made peace abroad but also enforced peace in Europe .
 This, as Hobbes long ago realized, is what gives the state its distinctive and irreplaceable legitimacy . This is what Hobbes realized, and Hobbes also realized, was what gives it its distinctive legitimacy .
 In countries where violent political warfare against unarmed civilians had been endemic in recent years, the importance of the state was never forgotten . In countries like Egypt, the state, police, army, intelligence services and judicial apparatus were never forgotten, the author says .
 In an age of ‘terrorism’, the state’s monopoly of armed power is an attractive reassurance to most of its citizens . In the age of 'terrorism, most of the country's citizens welcome the state's armed forces .
 There is no sign that Brussels (the European Union) would or could take on this responsibility in the foreseeable future . And there was no sign of Brussels taking on the responsibility, the Dutchman says .
 In this vital respect the state remained the core legitimate representative of its citizens, in a way that the transnational union of Europeans, for all its passports and parliaments, could not hope to match . The state remained a way of representing its citizens in this way .
 Europeans might enjoy the freedom to appeal over the heads of their own governments to European judges . But it remained a source of wonder to many that national courts in Germany or Britain complied so readily with judgments emanating from Strasbourg or Luxembourg .
 The gunman and the bomber were killed in the attack in Berlin and London . But responsibility and thus power remained firmly in Berlin or London .
 Although the capacity of the state begins with arms it does not end there, even today . And although the capacity for the state began with arms, it continues to do so today .
 So long as it is the state—rather than a trans-state entity—which pays pensions, insures the unemployed and educates children, then that state’s monopoly of a certain sort of political legitimacy will continue unchallenged .
 Over the course of the twentieth century the European nation-state took on considerable responsibilities for its citizens’ welfare, security and well-being . Over the years, the EU has been responsible for the welfare and security of its citizens .
 In recent years, the U.S. has shed its intrusive oversight of private morality and some of its economic initiative . But it has also shed some of it's intrusive oversight .
 The geographical reach of the Union is belied by its relative unimportance in Europeans' daily affairs when compared to the country of their birth or residence . Europe's geographical reach is quite belied in Europe's daily affairs .
 To be sure, the Union is a major provider of economic and other services . The Union is also a big provider of other services, including economic, other services.
 Citizenship, democracy, rights and duty are intimately bound up with the state, especially in countries with a living tradition of active citizen participation in public affairs . Citizenship and democracy is intimately tied up with state, particularly in countries like Norway .
 Even in an age of super-fast trains and real-time electronic communication, it is not clear how someone in Poimbra, say, or Rzeszow, can be an active citizen of Europe .
 China, Russia, the US have both been governed by authoritarian rule or have remained resolutely centrifugal . It is not by chance that in the modern age giant states, China and Russia, have been ruled by authoritarian regimes .
 The European Union in 2005 had not superceded conventional territorial units and would not be doing so for the foreseeable future . The EU had not been supercedceded as territorial units in 2005 .
 Six decades after Hitler’s defeat, the multiple identities, sovereignties and territories that together defined Europe and its history overlapped and inter-communicated more than at any time in the past .
 The possibility of being French and European, or Catalan and European—or Arab and European . What was new, and thus harder for outside observers to catch, is the possibility of . being French or Catalan or Catalan, or Arab or European .
 The developed capitalist societies exhibited a wide range of social forms and very different attitudes toward both the market and the state . Just as the world was not converging on a single ‘American’ norm, Europe too contained a distinctive palate of peoples and traditions .
 The illusion that we live in a post-national or post-state world comes from paying altogether too much attention to ‘globalized’ economic processes . The illusion is that similarly transnational developments must be at work in every other sphere of human life .
 Seen uniquely through the lens of production and exchange, Europe had indeed become a seamless flow chart of transnational waves . Europe has indeed become the world's most transnational wave, writes David Frum .
 Nationalism had largely come to an end 12 ; but nations and states remained . Nationalism was largely gone 12; but nations remained .
 Considering what Europeans had done to one another in the first half of the 20th century, this was rather remarkable . This is rather remarkable, considering what Europeans have done to each other .
 The re-emergence of Europe's battered peoples and their distinctive national cultures and institutions from the wreckage of the continent’s thirty years’ war might be thought an even greater achievement than their collective success in forging a transnational Union .
 The latter had been on various European agendas well before the Second World War . It was if anything facilitated by the devastation wrought by that conflict .
 The resurrection of Germany, or Poland, or France, not to speak of Hungary or Lithuania, had seemed altogether less likely . But the resurrection of Poland, France, and France was seemed altogether more likely .
 In part this was the backwash of growing disillusion with the American alternative; but the reputation was well earned . The reputation of the U.S. has been well earned.
 Whether Europe’s burnished new image, scrubbed clean of past sins and vicissitudes, would survive the challenges of the coming century would depend on how Europeans responded to non-Europeans in their midst .
 In troubled early years of the twenty-first century that remained an open question . In the troubled early 20th century that was still open question.
 French patriotism is not the same emotion which bears this name here in France . One must not think of this patriotism as patriotism, however, as patriotism . France is proud of its patriotism, but not its patriotism .
 A Frenchman’s patriotism means that his heart is warmed, and with this warmth it stretches and expands so that his love no longer embraces merely his closest relative, but all of France, the whole of the civilized world . A French patriot's love is warm enough to embrace all of
 A German’s patriotism means that his heart contracts and shrinks like leather in the cold . A German then hates everything foreign, no longer wants to become a citizen of the world, a European, but only a provincial German .
 In international surveys at the end of the twentieth century, the number of Americans claiming to be Very proud’ of their country exceeded 75 percent .
 The choice posed by Heine’s two kinds of patriotism speaks directly to the contemporary European condition . The choice between patriotism and patriotism speaks quite directly to modern European condition, he says .
 If the emerging Europe were to take a ‘Germanic’ turn, contracting ‘like leather in the cold’ to a defensive provincialism, then the opportunity would be missed and the European Union would never transcend its functional origins .
 It would remain no more than the sum and highest common factor of its members’ separate self-interests . It would be the sum of the members of the House of Representatives’ self-interested interests .
 If patriotism for Europe could find a way to reach beyond itself, to capture the spirit of Heine’s idealized France, ‘stretching and expanding to embrace the whole of the civilized world’, then something more was now possible .
 America’s Century had seen Europe plunge into the abyss . The twentieth century . Europe plunged into an abyss . America's Century was America's 20th century .
 America would have the biggest army and China would make more, and cheaper, goods . The U.S. would have to rely on China to make more and cheaper goods . China would have a bigger army and make more of the goods it would make .
 Neither America nor China had a serviceable model to propose for universal emulation . But neither U.S. nor China has a model to suggest universal emulation.
 Europeans are uniquely placed to offer the world some modest advice on how to avoid repeating their own mistakes . Europeans are now uniquely positioned to offer a modest advice to the world . Europeans should learn from the horrors of their recent past, and in large measure because of them, they say .
 Few would have predicted it sixty years before, but the twenty-first century might yet belong to Europe . The 20-20th century might still belong to the European continent .
 The price for admission to the modern world was relinquishing of an oppressive heritage of Jewish difference and isolation . But that was in 1825, when the price was the relinquish of the oppressive heritage . The price was to relinquish a heritage of oppressive heritage and isolation, but that was
 In an ironic twist that Heine would have appreciated better than anyone, those who would become full Europeans in the dawn of the twenty-first century must first assume a new and far more oppressive heritage .
 In 2004 President Kwasniewski of Poland officially acknowledged the wartime sufferings of Polish Jews, including their victimization at the hands of Poles themselves . In 2004, Poland's president was seeking to close a painful chapter in his nation's past .
 There are other criteria for full participation in the family of Europe . To be sure, there is other criteria .
 It also adjudicates the moral (and in certain European countries) standing of those who pronounce upon it .
 "To deny or belittle the Shoah — the Holocaust — is to place yourself beyond the pale of civilized public discourse," says Holocaust survivor . To deny the Holocaust, the Holocaust is to be denied or belittled, says Holocaust expert .
 Mainstream politicians shun the company of demagogues like Jean-Marie Le Pen . That is why mainstream politicians shun, so far, they can, say French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 The Holocaust today is much more than just another undeniable fact about a past that Europeans can no longer choose to ignore . Europeans can't choose not to ignore the fact that the Holocaust is a fact they can't ignore .
 The recovered memory of Europe's dead Jews has become the very definition and guarantee of the continent’s restored humanity . As Europe prepares to leave World War Two behind, as the last memorials are inaugurated .
 An estimated 6 million of them were put to death during the Second World War . That was widely accepted within a few months of the war’s end .
 The handful of survivors paid implicit witness to the number of dead . Survivors were in displaced persons’ camps or in their countries of origin .
 In the Netherlands, where there had been 140,000 Jews before the war, 110,000 were deported . Of whom fewer than 5,000 returned, fewer than five,000 of them returned .
 In France, of 76,000 Jews who were deported during the years 1940-44, less than 3 percent survived . Less than 3% of those deported during that period survived .
 In May 1945, there remained just 21,450 of the country’s 600,000 Jews . In Germany itself, in May 1945 there were only 21,500 Jews in Germany .
 After years of anti-Semitic propaganda, local populations everywhere were not only disposed to blame ‘Jews’ in the abstract for their own suffering . But were distinctly sorry to see the return of men and women whose jobs, possessions and apartments they had purloined .
 The venerable French Catholic philosopher Gabriel Marcel would doubtless not have resorted to such language . Gabriel Marcel is a member of the French Catholic community in France .
 Jews, deported not for their politics but for their race, could serve no such useful purpose . Jews were deported from the U.S. not for politics but because of their race . Jews could not serve a useful purpose in the United States .
 De Gaulle (like Churchill) was curiously blind to the racial specificity of Hitler’s victims . He understood Nazism in the context of Prussian militarism instead . In any case .
 At Nurnberg, the French prosecutor Francois de Menthon was uncomfortable with the very concept of ‘crimes against humanity’—he preferred ‘cimes against peace’ throughout the trial . Throughout the trial he made no reference to the deportation or murder of Jews
 Under legislation passed in 1948, the term ‘ deportes ’ could be applied only to French citizens or residents deported for political reasons or for resisting the occupier .
 No distinction was made regarding the camp to which someone was sent or their fate upon arrival . The fate of someone who was sent to a camp was not made clear .
 Jews were excluded from any post-war benefits in Belgium . Jews were not allowed to be eligible for state benefits after the war . Belgium's Jewish community was excluded from state benefits .
 95 percent of Jews deported from Belgium had been foreign nationals or stateless, it was determined by a post-war law that—unless they had also fought in the or . The American prosecutor Telford Taylor was struck by this in retrospect but acknowledges that he did not even notice it at
 Only in 1992 did the local municipality erect a new plaque, more accurate if less reassuring . It was erected in 1992 .
 In October 1944, the Belgian authorities automatically ascribed the nationality ‘German’ to any Jewish survivor in Belgium who could not prove his or her Belgian citizenship .
 Such rulings had the attendant benefit of marking these Jews for eventual return to Germany, now that they were no longer threatened by Nazi persecution . Such rulings marked the return of Jews to Germany now that Nazi persecution was over .
 In the Netherlands, the Nazis had been taken aback at the alacrity with which local citizens and civic leaders cooperated in their own humiliation . The return of Jews to the Netherlands was decidedly unwelcome .
 The Dutch suffered greatly through the ‘Hunger Winter’ of 1944-45 and the many houses vacated by deported Jews, in Amsterdam especially, were a valuable source of wood .
 Dutch authorities felt no obligation to make any particular amends to Jews . Dutch wartime officialdom cooperated in identifying and rounding up the country’s Jews .
 Dutch Jews froze the country's lost Jews into retrospective anonymity and invisibility . Instead, they made a rather self-congratulatory point of refusing to distinguish among Dutch citizens on racial or any other grounds .
 In eastern Europe there was of course never much question of recognizing Jewish suffering, much less compensating it . In east Europe, there was never much . question of recognition of Jewish suffering .
 In the immediate post-war years Jews in this region were concerned above all with merely staying alive . Jews in the immediate aftermath of the war were concerned with merely surviving . Jews were concerned about simply staying alive.
 In France, new laws forbade the overt anti-Semitic rhetoric of pre-war public life . But the legacy of Vichy remained in France . In France new laws banned anti-Semitism .
 The taboos of a later generation had not yet taken hold, and behaviour that would in time be frowned upon was still acceptable . It was the first time the taboos had been taken hold .
 Many of them felt an overwhelming urge to speak and bear witness . To be sure, many of them . Many of the . people felt the overwhelming urge . to speak, bear witness to the events .
 Primo Levi was driven by an ‘absolute, pathological narrative charge’ to write down what he had just experienced . Levi’s words: ‘I’m driven by a ‘pathological narrative charge to write what I have just experienced’
 Levi’s narrative of persecution and survival, beginning with his deportation as a Jew rather than as a resister, did not conform to uplifting Italian accounts of anti-Fascist resistance . Levi was deported from his native Italy in 1939 . Levi's story is not the typical account
 Se questo e un uomo was published instead by a small press in just 2,500 copies . Most of the copies were remaindered in a warehouse in Florence and destroyed in the great flood there twenty years later . Se questi e un Uomo is published instead .
 Gallimard, the most prestigious of the French publishing houses, resisted buying anything by Levi . Only after his death in 1987 did his work, and his significance, begin to gain recognition in France .
 In post-war Britain the iconic image of a Nazi camp was not Auschwitz but Bergen-Belsen (liberated by British troops) The skeletal survivors recorded on film and shown in cinema newsreels at the end of the war were not typically identified as Jews .
 The Holocaust of the Jews was put out of mind not only in places where there were good reasons not to think about it . Austria, Poland, Italy, Italy and Britain had no cause for shame on this score .
 For most Europeans, World War Two had not been about the Jews, except in so far as they were blamed for it . Any suggestion that Jewish suffering might claim pride of place was deeply resented . World War II was not about Jews, it was about their suffering .
 Millions of Europeans had good reasons of their own to turn away from the recent past, or else mis-remember it to better effect . Between their compromises with Fascist administrators and occupying forces, their collaboration with wartime agencies and rulers, their private humiliations, material hardships and personal tragedies,
 French historian Henry Rousso would later dub the ‘Vichy syndrome’—the difficulty of acknowledging what had really happened during the war and the overwhelming desire to block the memory or recast it in a usable way that would not corrode the fragile bonds of post-
 Jews were not the first people in Britain to opt for discretion where the Holocaust was concerned . Jews were also in Britain in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Churchill chose not to deploy information about the death camps in its propaganda against Germany lest this incite an increase in anti-Semitic feelings in some parts of London, as wartime intelligence reports had noted .
 The Baltic Waffen SS had been among the most brutal and enthusiastic when it came to torturing and killing Jews on the Eastern Front . But in the novel circumstances of the Cold War they were of course ‘our’ Nazis .
 More than one in five of Norway's military officers had joined Vidkun Quisling’s neo-Nazi Nasjonal Samling before or after 1940 .
 There was nothing ‘usable’ about the Holocaust, unlike liberation, resistance and deportees . Even heroic defeats like Dunkirk or the Warsaw Rising of 1944 could all be put to some service in compensatory national myth-making .
 In certain respects it was actually easier for Germans to engage and acknowledge the scale of their crime, says the German government .
 History teaching stopped with the Wilhelminian Empire . History teaching in the early Federal Republic stopped with Willemansian Empire.
 German public figures in the Forties and Fifties managed to avoid reference to the Final Solution . Kurt Schumacher warned his fellow countrymen as early as June 1947 that they had better learn to ‘talk for once about the Jews in Germany and the world’
 Alfred Kazin remarked upon the fact that for his students in Cologne in 1952 ‘the war was over.’ For his students, ‘for his students  ‘The war was . over’ for his German students in 1952. ‘For his students ‘
 There was considerable resentment at what Hitler had wrought—but at the harm he had brought down upon the heads of Germans rather than because of what he and Germans had done to others .
 Nearly two out of five adults in West Germany thought it was 'better' for Germany to have no Jews on its territory . Targetting the Jews, as it seemed to many Germans in these years, was not so much Hitler’s greatest crime .
 Germans—uniquely in Europe, could not deny what they had done to the Jews . At the same time, however, Germans couldn't deny what had happened to them .
 They might avoid mention of it; they might insist upon their own sufferings; . They might pass the blame up to a ‘handful’ of Nazis . But they might pass it up to the Nazis. They might not mention it .
 President Obama could not sidestep responsibility for the subject by attributing the crime of genocide to someone else . But he could not avoid responsibility for genocide by blaming someone else, he said .
 Even Adenauer confined himself to expressions of sympathy for Jewish ‘victims’ without naming those who victimized them . Adenauer signed reparations treaty with Israel .
 The Diary of Anna Frank was to become the best-selling paperback in German history, with over 700,000 copies sold by i960 .
 The trigger for German self-interrogation was a series of trials prompted by belated investigations into German crimes on the eastern front . The trigger was the trials of German soldiers who committed crimes in eastern Europe .
 The first opportunity since the end of the war for camp survivors to speak publicly about their experiences . The Frankfurt trials of Auschwitz guards between December 1963 and August 1965 were also the first opportunity to speak out publicly .
 Ten West German Lander announced in 1962 that the history of the years 1933-1945 would be a required subject in all schools . History of the Holocaust, including the extermination of the Jews, would be taught in schools .
 Attention was increasingly directed to genocide and ‘crimes against humanity’, rather than ‘war crimes’ with which National Socialism had hitherto been primarily associated . And attention was also directed to the genocide and crimes against humanity .
 A new generation was to be made aware of the nature—and the scale—of Nazi atrocities . The story of the Nazi atrocities in Nazi Germany will be told to be told .
 A certain public awareness of the unacceptability, the indecency of the recent German past began to take hold . A certain . awareness of . the unacceptable . unacceptable . of the . indecency . of recent German history began to . take hold.
 During the Sixties both a West German Chancellor and the Federal President were former Nazis . This was a glaring contradiction in the Bonn Republic’s self-image that younger commentators duly noted .
 It was one thing to tell the truth about the Nazis, quite another to acknowledge the collective responsibility of the German people . Most of the political class was still silent on the subject of the Nazis .
 The number of West Germans who believed that Hitler would have been one of Germany’s greatest statesmen ‘but for the war’ fell from 48 percent in 1955 to 32 percent in 1967 . The latter figure was hardly reassuring .
 The Six-Day Arab-Israeli War of 1967, the murder of Israeli athletes at the 1972 Munich Olympics and, finally, the German telecast of the ‘Holocaust’ mini-series in January 1979, led to a series of events that placed Jews and their sufferings
 The purest product of American commercial television—its story simple, its characters mostly two-dimensional, its narrative structured for maximum emotional impact—‘Holocaust’ was execrated and abominated by European cineastes from Edgar Reitz to Claude Lanzmann .
 It ran for four consecutive nights on West German national television and was watched by an estimated twenty million viewers . Well over half of Germany's adult population watched the show .
 Germans would be among the best-informed Europeans on the subject of the Shoah and at the forefront of all efforts to maintain public awareness of their country’s singular crime . Germans would also be at forefront of efforts to raise awareness of Shoah .
 Knowing what Germans had done to Jews four decades earlier was a considerable advance . But situating it in German and European history remained a difficult and unresolved dilemma, as 'historians’ clash' of the Eighties was to demonstrate .
 Some conservative scholars, among them Ernst Nolte, were uncomfortable with the insistence on treating Hitler, his movement and his crimes as unique and sui generis .
 That doesn't diminish the crimes of Nazism, Nolte argued in a notorious article in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung in June 1986 . But without the Bolshevik precedent they cannot be fully explained, he said .
 It was time to reconsider the Nazi era, situating the Holocaust in a broader pattern of modern genocides . The Holocaust was a major event in the history of the Holocaust, the author says . It's time to consider the Holocaust as a modern form of genocide, he says .
 The reaction to Nolte came above all from Jurgen Habermas, who was old enough to remember Nazism and was suspicious of any attempt to ‘limit’ German responsibilities . The reaction came from Haberma, a member of the ‘skeptical
 Contextualization in Nolte’s sense, with the implicit relativisation of German responsibility that must inevitably ensue, was simply proscribed . Contextualisation in Nolin's sense, in the sense, was merely proscribed. Contextualized in a sense,
 Habermas’s uncompromising stance set a standard to which few of his countrymen could be expected to adhere for long . But few could expect to adhere to that standard for long.
 The new salience of the Holocaust in German public discussion in public discussion could not last indefinitely . Germans indulging in what the writer Peter Schneider called ‘a kind of self-righteous self-hate'
 To ask each new generation of Germans to live forever in Hitler’s shadow was the least that could be demanded—but far too much to expect . To require that they take on responsibility for the memory of the memory, Germany's unique guilt, is the least they can expect .
 In Western Europe the process of remembering and acknowledging had first to overcome self-serving local illusions . Elsewhere in Western Europe, it typically took two generations and many decades to remember and acknowledge .
 Austria's President, Kurt Waldheim, was revealed in the mid-Eighties to have played a role in the Wehrmacht’s brutal occupation of wartime Yugoslavia . Austrians began a serious, and still incomplete, interrogation of their country's Nazi past .
 Waldheim had previously served as UN Secretary General without anyone in the international community troubling themselves over his war record . Many Austrians were suspicious that they were being held to uniquely high standards . Waldheim's war record fuelled the suspicions of many Austrians .
 Austria, after all, had had a post-war Jewish Chancellor . More than could be said for the Germans . Austria had a Jewish Chancellor, which was more than could have been said for Germans .
 For forty years after 1945, Switzerland secured a free pass for its wartime record . Switzerland secured the free pass after the war .
 In popular fiction and in films everywhere the country was represented as a safe haven for any persecuted person who could reach its borders . Not only was it forgotten that the Swiss had made strenuous efforts to keep Jews out of the country .
 The Swiss basked in their clear conscience and the envious admiration of the world . The Swiss are now the world's most famous soccer fans .
 By 1945 the Swiss had taken in just 28,000 Jews—seven thousand of them before the war began . In fact, by 1945, by the end of the war, there had been just seven thousand Jews in Switzerland .
 Wartime refugees were refused work permits during the Holocaust . They were supported by payments levied upon wealthy Jewish residents .
 London and Washington never actually requested an identification tag on Jewish passports, but when it came to saving Jewish refugees the British and American records are hardly a source of pride .
 Switzerland trafficked in looted gold and made a substantial practical contribution to the German war effort . Swiss banks and insurance companies had knowingly pocketed large sums of money belonging to Jewish account holders .
 Bern offered to assign the bank accounts of dead Polish Jews to the new Polish authorities in Warsaw, in return for indemnity payments to Swiss banks and businesses expropriated after the Communists’ takeover . In a secret post-war agreement with Communist Poland, the Swiss city of Bern offered
 Once this sort of evidence started to emerge, the country’s burnished reputation came apart . No amount of amends and payments and ‘victims’ funds’ are going to put it back together .
 A September 13th 1996 editorial in Germany’s Die Zeit said Switzerland had at last been caught by ‘the long shadow of the Holocaust’—smacked more than a little of Schadenfreude . The editorial was published in Die Zeit in Germany .
 By the mid-Sixties multi-volume official histories of the Second World War provided copious information about the what of the Netherlands’ wartime experience, including the deportations, but studiously avoided addressing in detail the who, the how and the why of the Jewish catastrophe .
 Otidergang was the first full history of the extermination of Dutch Jewry . It sold 100,000 copies in 1965 alone and precipitated a torrent of public interest .
 De bezetting was to run for over two decades . It was followed in short order by an avalanche of television documentaries and other programmes about the wartime occupation .
 It was in 1965 that a Dutch government, for the first time, offered to contribute to the memorial at Auschwitz . It took another seven years before the Netherlands agreed to pay to surviving Jewish deportees the pension that had been accorded to resisters and other Nazi victims since 1947 .
 As in Germany, the trigger for Dutch interest in their occluded past was the Israeli and German trials of the early Sixties .
 In the Netherlands as elsewhere, the post-war baby-boomers were curious about recent history and more than a little skeptical of the story they had been told—or, rather, not told—by the ‘silent generation’ of their parents .
 Anne and her family, after all, were betrayed to the Germans by their Dutch neighbours . Anne's family were betrayed by the Dutch neighbours, and Anne was betrayed by them .
 UN peacekeepers stood placidly aside to let Serbian militia round-up and murder seven thousand Muslims at Srebrenica . Only in the mid-Nineties, with the image of armed Dutch peacekeepers standing aside did the lesson finally strike home .
 A long-postponed national debate about the price the Dutch have paid for their heritage of order, co-operation and obedience could finally begin . The Dutch are known for their tolerance of order and obedience, but they have paid a price for it .
 Otidergang was published in English in 1968 as The Destruction of the Dutch Jews . The Dutch, like the Belgians, the Norwegians and the Italians, the Italians (after 10 Otider Gang) were the victims of the Holocaust .
 This is not as true as was once believed, and in certain places, it was only ever a half-truth . In certain territories like Slovakia or Croatia where local puppet governments pursued criminal projects of their own, it's only ever been true .
 In occupied western Europe, with one outstanding exception, there were no popularly accredited local regimes . No ostensibly legitimate national governments exercising authority and thus fully responsible for their actions . In occupied eastern Europe, this was an exception .
 The tortured, long-denied and serially incomplete memory of France’s war . The Vichy regime and its complicit role in Nazi projects, above all the Final Solution, has back-shadowed all of Europe's post-war efforts .
 France was by far the most influential state in continental western Europe, thanks to Charles De Gaulle’s remarkable achievement in reestablishing his country in the corridors of power .
 French statesmen, French institutions and French interests drove forward, on French terms, the project for a united continent . And it was France, statesmen and French institutions, French interests .
 Until France can look its past in the face, a shadow would hang over the new Europe—the shadow of a lie . Until France could look its history in the . face, the shadow of the . new Europe would hang . over France .
 Marshall Petain’s regime had been voted into office in July 1940 . It was the only wartime regime that could claim some continuity, however spurious, with pre-war democratic institutions . The last French parliament of the Third Republic voted in favour of the regime in July .
 At least until the end of 1942, the majority of French men and women regarded Vichy and its institutions as the legitimate authority in France . The majority of people in France regarded the French government as legitimate authority .
 Vichy did more than accommodate itself and its subjects to France's defeat and run their country for Germany’s convenience . The French state did not accommodate itself to the defeat and ran its country for its own convenience .
 Following the Liberation, for all the obloquy poured upon Petain and his collaborators, his regime’s contribution to the Holocaust was hardly ever invoked, and certainly not by the post-war French authorities .
 French successfully corralled ‘Vichy’ into a corner of national memory and then mothballed it . It was not just that the French . successfully corraled ‘ Vichy . into a . corner of . national memory, it was also mothball
 ‘crimes against humanity’ were not part of the French juridical lexicon . ‘Crimes against human rights’ was not part-of-the-French lexicon. ‘Criminal acts were not among the crimes committed in France’
 When the present author studied French history in the UK in the late Sixties the scholarly literature on Vichy France—such as it was—paid almost no attention to the 'Jewish' dimension .
 There was still a respected school of French historians who argued that the Petainist ‘shield’ had protected France from ‘Polonisation’—as though Hitler ever intended to treat his western conquests with the barbarous ferocity visited upon the East .
 Any questioning of the myth of a heroic, nationwide resistance was still off limits . And any questioning of a myth of heroic resistance was also off limits—in historiography as in national life .
 The only concession French authorities would make to the changing mood abroad came in December 1964 when the National Assembly belatedly incorporated the category of ‘crimes against humanity’ (first defined in the London accords of August 8th 1945) into French law .
 It was a response to the Auschwitz Trial then under way in Frankfurt . It was intended to facilitate prosecution on French soil of individuals for their direct participation in the Nazis’ extermination schemes .
 Ophuls’ film was based on interviews with French, British and German subjects . The film was a documentary about the wartime occupation of Clermont Ferrand in central France .
 Eberhard Jackel in Germany and Robert Paxton in the US were the first to use German sources to demonstrate how much of Vichy’s crimes were undertaken at French initiative .
 In three short decades it suffered a shattering military defeat, a demeaning occupation, two bloody and embarrassing colonial withdrawals, and a regime change in the form of a near-coup .
 La Grande Nation had accumulated so many losses and humiliations since 1914 that the compensatory propensity to assert national honour had become deeply ingrained . The nation's pride had become so strong that it had become ingrained .
 No-one wanted to talk about the 'dirty wars' in Indo-China and Algeria, much less the torture practised there by the army . Vichy, after all, was not the only thing that the French were in a hurry to put behind them .
 De Gaulle’s departure changed little in this respect, even though a younger generation of Frenchmen and -women showed scant interest in national glory and had no personal investment in the myths surrounding France's recent history .
 The 1985 documentary film Shoah, by the French director Claude Lanzmann, had a dramatic impact upon French audiences . Shoah was concerned almost exclusively with the extermination of Jews in the East .
 Vichy may have taken place in France and been the work of certain Frenchmen . It is believed to have been created by certain French men .
 Vichy was an authoritarian parenthesis in the history of the French Republic . But he is not the only authoritarian figure in French history, he says .
 Vichy, in other words, was not ‘France’, and thus France’s public conscience was clear . France's public conscience is clear, and so is the public conscience of France .
 President Mitterrand was the last French head of state to experience World War Two as an adult . He was also the last president of France to experience the war as a child .
 Mitterrand built his subsequent political career by obscuring the compromises and ambiguities of his own biography and by projecting them onto the country at large . A former Vichyite civil servant, he built his later political career in large measure by .
 He studiously avoided any reference to Vichy on public occasions . While he was never reluctant to speak out about the Holocaust in general, he never let slip any suggestion that this was an affair in which France had debts to pay .
 The taboo that Mitterrand enforced, embodied, embodied and would surely have taken to his grave was finally broken by a series of trials . The taboo was broken by the trials of the former French president .
 Paul Touvier, an activist in Vichy’s wartime Milice, was caught and brought to trial for the murder of seven French Jews in June 1944 near Lyon . In 1994, after nearly fifty years in hiding, Touvier was caught . Touvier spent nearly 50 years
 The prosecution of Bousquet might have provided France with an occasion to confront the truth about Vichy . In 1942, he personally negotiated with the German authorities for the delivery of Jews . France might have confronted the truth, writes Philippe Coste .
 Bousquet had lived unscathed for many decades in post-war France, protected by friends including Mitterrand himself . He had lived in the country unscathed, even though Vichy was destroyed .
 Bousquet was conveniently assassinated in June 1993 . Before he could be brought to trial he was assassinated in 1993 .
 In the absence of Bousquet, the French judiciary at last found the courage to inculpate, arrest and prosecute another major figure, Maurice Papon . In the wake of Touvier’s condemnation, Papon was finally inculpated and prosecuted .
 Papon had been employed as secretary-general of the Bordeaux administrative region during the war . Papon was a government minister and police chief of Paris under De Gaulle .
 Papon had been directly responsible for authorising arrest and despatch of the region’s Jews to Paris . While in Bordeaux, he had been responsible for the arrest and deportation of Jews .
 It was for this, now defined under French law as a crime against humanity, that he was placed on trial in 1997 . He was convicted of the crime in 1997 and sentenced to life in prison .
 The Papon trial, which lasted six months, revealed no new evidence, except perhaps about the man himself, who displayed an astonishing absence of pity or remorse . The trial was held for six months .
 A number of French historians, called to testify as expert witnesses, declined to appear in court . The case is the first of its kind in France .
 Their task was to recount and explain what had happened in France fifty years before, not deploy that knowledge in a criminal prosecution . Their task, they insisted, was to . recount and . explain what happened in . France 50 years before .
 The fine distinction between ‘Vichy’ and ‘France’ so carefully drawn by everyone from De Gaulle to Mitterrand had never existed . It demonstrated conclusively that the fine distinction was never existed in France .
 Papon was not alone—indeed both the man and his record were decidedly commonplace . Moreover, Papon's record was decidedly commonplace.
 Like so many others, all he had done was sign the death warrants of people he never met and to whose fate he was indifferent . He had done so much to people he had never met, he had signed the death warrant .
 The most interesting thing about Papon’s case was why it had taken official France nearly fifty years to locate them in its midst . The crust of silence finally broke open at the end of the century .
 There are many explanations, not all of them flattering to the French political class or national media . French President Nicolas Sarkozy's government has been accused of corruption .
 The passage of time, together with the psychological significance of the ending of an era, is perhaps the most pertinent . But the passing of time and the significance of ending an era is perhaps most pertinent, as well .
 Francois Mitterrand incarnated in his very person the national inability to speak openly about the shame of the occupation . So long as he remained in office, he incarnated ... the national cannot speak openly, he said .
 His successor, Jacques Chirac, had been just eleven years old when France was liberated in 1944 . His successor was just eleven when he was 11 years old .
 President Chirac broke a fifty-year taboo and acknowledged for the first time his country’s role in the extermination of the Jews of Europe . Within weeks of taking office, on the fifty-third anniversary of the same round-up of Parisian Jews about which Mitter
 By the end of the twentieth century, the centrality of the Holocaust in Western European identity and memory seemed secure .
 The insistence upon the technical impossibility of the genocide paid unintended homage to the very enormity of the Nazi crime . But such people were confined to the extreme political margins, such as those within the political margins .
 The compensatory ubiquity with which Europeans now acknowledged, taught and memorialized the loss of their Jews did carry other risks . However, Europeans now acknowledge, teach and memorialize, memorializing their Jews .
 A widespread urge, at the beginning of the twenty-first century, to re-open the question of German suffering after years of public attention to Jewish victims . What was perhaps more indicative of a coming cultural shift was a widespread urge to .
 We've spoken of this for decades; it has become a routine, habit . But we’ve spoken of it for decades. It has become routine, a habit. We’re not talking about it now, but it’s a routine .
 The new-found salience of the Holocaust in official accounts of Europe’s past carries the danger of a different sort of distortion . In the second place, the new-finally salience in official reports of Europe's past carries a different kind of distortion, writes David Fr
 What happened to the Jews between 1939 and 1945 was not nearly as important to most of the protagonists as later sensibilities might wish . For the really uncomfortable truth about World War Two was that what happened to them was not as important as some might wish.
 Many Europeans had ignored for decades the fate of their Jewish neighbours, this was not because they were consumed with guilt and repressing unbearable memories . This is not because many Europeans had managed to ignore for decades, this is because of their guilt . If many Europeans ignored the fate, it was
 World War Two was not about the Jews, except in the minds of a handful of senior Nazis . It was because of the fact that the Nazis were not interested in the Jews .
 Even for Nazis the extermination of Jews was part of a more ambitious project of racial cleansing and resettlement . Even for the Nazis even for Nazis, the extermination was a bigger project than just extermination .
 The reason Vichy was acceptable to most French people after the defeat of 1940 was not that it pleased them to live under a regime that persecuted Jews . Petainist rule allowed the French to continue leading their lives in an illusion of security .
 Today we may find such indifference shocking—a symptom of something gravely amiss in the moral condition of Europe in the first half of the 20th century . Today, such indifference may be shocking, but it may be a sign of a moral condition in Europe .
 There were also those in every European country who did see what was happening to Jews and did their best to overcome the indifference of their fellow citizens .
 If we ignore that indifference and assume instead that most Europeans experienced the Second World War the way Jews experienced it, we shall furnish ourselves with a new layer of mis-memory . But if we ignore this and assume that most other Europeans . experienced it as a Vernich tu ngskrieg
 In retrospect, ‘Auschwitz’ is the most important thing to know about World War Two, says historian . ‘In retrospect, it’s the most significant thing to learn about the war, he says .
 To east Europeans, belatedly released after 1989 from the burden of officially mandated Communist interpretations of World War Two, the Holocaust of the Jews carries disruptive implications . Western preoccupation with the Holocaust has disruptive implications for east Europeans .
 On the one hand, eastern Europe after 1945 had much more than western Europe to remember—and to forget—and forget . On the other hand, Eastern Europe had a lot more to remember after 1945 than the rest of Europe .
 There were more Jews in the eastern half of Europe and more of them were killed . Most of the killing took place in this region and many more locals took part in it .
 It is not that the horrors and crimes of the war in the east were played down, but they were repeatedly rehearsed in official rhetoric and enshrined in memorials and textbooks everywhere . It was not that they were . The horrors were . played down .
 In East Germany, the burden of responsibility for Nazism was imputed uniquely to Hitler’s West German heirs . The new regime paid restitution not to Jews but to the Soviet Union, the new regime says .
 In GDR school texts, Hitler was presented as a tool of monopoly capitalists who seized territory and started wars in pursuit of the interests of big business . Hitler was also presented as the tool of monopolist capitalists .
 Former concentration camps on East German soil were converted into 'special isolation camps' for political prisoners . Buchenwald and Sachsenhausen were converted for a while into ‘special . isolation camps’ for political . prisoners .
 In Poland it was not possible to deny or minimize what had taken place in extermination camps at Treblinka or Majdanek or Sobibor . In Poland, it is impossible to deny what took place in the extermination camps, says historian .
 The Germans had taken extraordinary pains to obliterate them from the landscape before fleeing the advancing Red Army . But these places no longer existed, the Germans had obliterated them .
 Auschwitz, a few kilometres from Crakow, Poland’s second city, was a concentration camp . The evidence did survive, but was retrospectively assigned a different meaning .
 Polish schoolchildren paraded past the shocking photos . They were shown the heaps of shoes, hair and eyeglasses . The shocking photos were taken in Poland .
 The Warsaw Ghetto was memorialized on the site where the ghetto had stood . It was also memorialized at the site of the Warsaw ghetto .
 The Jewish revolt of 1943 was occluded in Polish memory by the Poles’ own Warsaw uprising a year later . The Polish Jews were killed by the Warsaw uprising in 1943 .
 In Communist Poland, while no-one denied what Germans had done to Jews, the subject was not much discussed . The subject of the Holocaust was not discussed in Communist Poland .
 Poland’s ‘re-imprisonment’ under the Soviets, together with the widespread belief that Jews had welcomed and even facilitated the Communist takeover, muddied popular recall of the German occupation .
 In any case, Poles’ own wartime suffering diluted local attention to the Jewish Holocaust ,4 Quoted by Ian Buruma in 'Buchenwald'
 Three million Poles died in World War II; proportionately lower than the death rate in parts of Ukraine or among Jews, but a terrible figure notwithstanding . Three million people died in Poland during the war, but that's not the worst number in Ukraine or in the Soviet Union .
 For Poles, it was difficult to survive under German occupation, but in principle you could . For Polish Jews, the only thing that mattered was to be able to survive .
 For Jews it was possible to survive under German occupation—but in principle you could not . For Jews, the only thing that was possible was to live under the Nazis' control .
 Where a local puppet regime collaborated with its Nazi overlords, its victims were duly memorialized . The victims of the Nazi-colladed regime were duly commemorated .
 Fewer attention was paid to the fact that they were disproportionately Jews . They were disproportionately Jewish .
 There were national categories and above all social categories, but social categories were studiously avoided . Ethnic and religious tags were also avoided .
 The Second World War, as we have seen, was labelled and taught as an anti-Fascist war . Its racist dimension was ignored by the Nazis .
 In the 1970s, Czechoslovakia even took the trouble to paint over inscriptions on the walls of Prague’s Altneuschul that gave the names of Czech Jews killed in the Shoah . The government even painted over the inscriptions in the walls to give the
 East Europeans paid less attention in retrospect to the plight of the Jews, it was not just because they were indifferent at the time or preoccupied with their own survival . But if east Europeans were indifferent to the Jewish plight, it wasn't just because of their indifference or preoccupation with
 It is because the Communists imposed enough suffering and injustice of their own to forge a whole new layer of resentments and memories . It's because of the suffering they inflicted, it's because they forged enough suffering .
 Between 1945 and 1989 the accumulation of deportations, imprisonments, show trials and ‘normalizations’ made almost everyone in the Soviet bloc either a loser or else complicit in someone else’s loss . The accumulation of deportation, imprisonment and show trials left almost everyone either a
 Apartments, shops and other property that had been appropriated from dead Jews or expelled Germans were all too often reexpropriated a few years later . After 1989 the question of compensation for past losses became hopelessly tangled in dates .
 On each date there hung politically sensitive definitions of national or ethnic legitimacy as well as moral precedence . The date of each date has been marked by a series of controversial events .
 In the immediate aftermath of the 1989 revolutions many thought they should. In the 1990s, many people still believed they should vote for change in the country .
 The fall of Communism thus brought in its wake a torrent of bitter memories . The fall has brought in the wake of Communism's fall in Russia .
 The real problem was the temptation to overcome the memory of Communism by inverting it, he said . He said: 'The real problem is the temptation of overcome the memories of Communism'
 What had once been official truth was now discredited root and branch . What had been once official truth had now been discredited root-and-benege .
 Before 1989 every anti-Communist had been tarred with the ‘Fascist’ brush . Anti-Fascist' brush was used against anti-communist groups before 1989 .
 If ‘anti-Fascism’ had been just another Communist lie, it was very tempting now to look with retrospective sympathy and even favour upon all hitherto discredited anti-Communists, Fascists included . But if 'anti-fascism' had been a Communist lie
 Post-Communist parliaments in a number of countries passed motions praising Marshal Antonescu of Romania or his counterparts elsewhere in the Balkans .
 The role of the Red Army and the Soviet Union could now be discussed in a different light . The Red Army could now now be viewed in a new light .
 The newly liberated Baltic states demanded that Moscow acknowledge the illegality of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact and Stalin’s unilateral destruction of their independence . The newly freed Baltic states have demanded Moscow acknowledge that Moscow must acknowledge the illegalities .
 The Poles, having at last secured Russian acknowledgement that the 23,000 Polish officers murdered in Katyn forest were indeed killed by the NKVD and not the Wehrmacht, demanded full access to the archives for Polish investigators .
 As of May 2005 neither request seemed likely to meet with Russian acquiescence . The memories continued to rankle and the memories of the time spent in Russia .
 Seen from the satellite countries, the Soviet version of recent history was palpably false . But for many Russians themselves, it contained more than a grain of truth .
 World War Two was a ‘Great Patriotic War’; Soviet soldiers and civilians were, in absolute numbers, its greatest victims . The Red Army did liberate vast swathes of eastern Europe from the l6 Under President Putin, Russia continues to insist that the Balts were liberated
 After 1989, many in Russia were genuinely taken aback at the apparent ingratitude of erstwhile fraternal nations, who had been released in 1945 from the German yoke thanks to the sacrifices of Soviet arms .
 Two civil organizations come into existence to promote critical but diametrically opposed accounts of the Communist past . The division took institutional form, with two civil organizations coming into existence .
 Memorial was founded in 1987 by liberal dissidents with the goal of obtaining and publishing the truth about Soviet history . Memorial Memorial is based in Moscow, Russia .
 Its members' particular concerns were with human-rights abuse and the importance of acknowledging what had been done in the past in order to forestall its recurrence in the future .
 Pamiat\ formed two years earlier, also sought to recover and honour the past (its name means ‘memory’ in Russian) but there the resemblance ceases . Pamiat was formed in 1994, and the name means 'memory' in Russian .
 Pamiaf had branched out into nationalist politics, wielding Russia’s neglected and ‘abused’ history as a weapon with which to ward off ‘cosmopolitan’ challenges and interlopers . Within a few years PamiaF had branchhed
 The politics of aggrieved memories was the last remaining bond between the former Soviet heartland and its imperial holdings . It was a last bond between Russia and the Soviet Union .
 There was a shared resentment at the international community’s under-appreciation for their past sufferings and losses . There was also a common resentment at international community's .
 The desire to flatten out the Communist past and indict it en bloc carries other risks, says historian John Avlon . Avlon: It's a mistake to read everything from Lenin to Gorbachev as an uninflected tale of dictatorship and crime .
 In the first place, it was bad history, eliminating from the record the genuine enthusiasms and engagements of earlier decades . In the second place it was a bad history .
 With this post-Communist re-ordering of memory in eastern Europe, the taboo on comparing Communism with Nazism began to crumble . The taboo on comparisons between Communism and Nazism has also begun to crumble in the past .
 Politicians and scholars started to insist upon such comparisons . Indeed politicians and scholars began to insist on such comparisons. The comparisons began to be inevitable .
 The suggestion that Communism itself should be placed in the same category as Fascism or Nazism carried uncomfortable implications for the West’s own past, and not only in Germany . The suggestion of Communism itself—before and after Stalin—should be placed into the category of Fascism carries
 To many western European intellectuals, Communism was a failed variant of a common progressive heritage . To many Western Europeans, it was an attempt to find a way to connect with the modern world .
 It was an all too successful local application of the criminal pathologies of twentieth-century authoritarianism . But to their central and east European counterparts it was a success . It should be remembered thus.
 Europe might be united, but European memory remained deeply asymmetrical . Europe might have been united but Europe's memory is still asymmetrical, he says .
 The Western solution to the problem of Europe’s troublesome memories has been to fix them, quite literally, in stone . Europe's problems have been solved by fixing them in stone, writes David Cameron .
 By the opening years of the twenty-first century, plaques, memorials and museums to the victims of Nazism had surfaced across western Europe, from Stockholm to Brussels .
 In some cases, as we have seen, they were amended or ‘corrected’ versions of existing sites; but many were new . Many were new, amended or 'corrected' versions, but many new .
 The French Holocaust Memorial in Paris echoed the ambitions of the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, DC, or Yad Vashem in Jerusalem . A stone wall was engraved with the names of 76,000 Jews deported from France to Nazi death camps .
 The explicit message of the latest round of memorials contrasts sharply with the ambiguity and prevarication of an earlier generation of lapidary commemorations . The explicit messages of this new generation of commemorations are starkly different to those of the earlier generations .
 Western Europeans have ample opportunity to confront the full horror of their recent past . There can be little doubt that Western Europeans --Germans above all -- must confront the past .
 As the German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder reminded his audience on the sixtieth anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, ‘the memory of the war and the genocide are part of our life.’ ‘The memory of war and genocide are . part of . our life,'
 In Poland, official contrition for Poland’s own treatment of its Jewish minority has aroused vociferous objections . The Institute of National Memory has striven hard to encourage serious scholarly investigation into controversial historical subjects .
 The difficulty of incorporating the destruction of the Jews into contemporary memory in post-Communist Europe is tellingly illustrated by the experience of Hungary . Hungary is one of the countries where the Jews were destroyed .
 Orban’s successor as prime minister, Peter Medgyessy, opened a Holocaust Memorial Centre in a Budapest house once used to intern Jews . Three years later he opened the memorial centre in a house used by Orban's predecessor .
 Much of the time this Holocaust Centre stands nearly empty, its exhibits and fact sheets seen by a thin trickle of visitors—many of them foreign . Many of the exhibits, fact sheets and exhibits are seen by only a small handful of visitors .
 Hungarians have flocked to the Terrorhaza, Hungary . Hungarians are flocking to the terrorhaza in the capital, Budapest, in recent years .
 Documentary tells story of state violence, torture, repression and dictatorship in Hungary from 1944 to 1989 . It tells the story of the Hungarian dictatorship between 1944 and 1989 .
 Terrorhaza’s version of Hungarian history draws no distinction between the Arrow Cross and the Communist regime that was installed after the war . The House of Terror is in the headquarters of the former Security Police . It is a gloomy, Tussaud-like reproduction of the police cells
 The Arrow Cross men and the extermination of 600,000 Hungarian Jews to which they actively contributed are represented by just three rooms . However, the Arrow Cross is represented by only three rooms of the Holocaust-era Holocaust memorial .
 The rest of the very large . large building is devoted to a copiously illustrated and decidedly partisan catalogue of the crimes of Communism . The rest . of the . very large building . devoted to the . collection of photographs and photographs .
 Hungarians of an older generation are conforming to their own experience . For many Hungarians, this is all the more plausible for conforming their own .
 Hungary, like the rest of central and eastern Europe, is still caught in the backdraft . Hungary's economy has been hit hard by the Eurozone crisis .
 In Romania, the 'Memorial of the Victims of Communism and anticommunist Resistance' was inaugurated at Sighet in 1997 . It commemorates assorted inter-war and wartime Iron Guard activists and other Romanian Fascists and anti-Semites .
 In support of their insistence upon ‘equivalence’, commentators in eastern Europe can point to the cult of the ‘victim’ in contemporary Western political culture .
 Even if Nazism and Communism were utterly different in intent, that was scant consolation to their victims . Even if, in Raymond Aron’s formulation, ‘there is a difference between a philosophy whose logic is monstrous, and one which can be given a monstrous interpretation’
 Human suffering should not be calibrated according to the goals of the perpetrators . Human suffering shouldn't be calibrated in the way of the perpetrator's goals, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 In this way of reasoning, for those being punished or killed there, a Communist camp is no better or worse than a Nazi camp . The camp is not a prison camp, but a concentration camp is a prison where people are punished for their crimes .
 In March 2004 eighty-four Hungarian writers, including Peter Esterhazy and Gyorgy Konrad, left the country’s Writers’ Union in protest at its tolerance of anti-Semitism .
 Poet Kornel Dobrentei walked out following the award of the Nobel Prize for Literature to the Holocaust survivor Imre Kertesz .
 Some conservatives in Germany have re-opened the claims of German communities expelled from their lands at the end of the Second World War . Some conservatives are re-opening the claims .
 Marek Edelman, the last surviving commander of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising, signed a petition in 2003 opposing the proposed Center . This latest twist is the suggestion that all forms of collective victimhood are essentially comparable, even interchangeable .
 Of course it is sad when you are being forced to leave your house and abandon your land . Of course, it was sad when it was forced to move out of the house and leave the land .
 Expulsions are about suffering, but there is so much suffering in this world . Expulsion is about 'suffering', but there are so many suffering in the world, he says. Expulsion is about suffering.
 Edelman’s reaction is a timely reminder of the risks we run by indulging to excess the cult of commemoration . We run a risk of displacing perpetrators with victims as the focus of attention .
 On the one hand there is no limit in principle to the memories and experiences worthy of recall . On the other hand, there are no limits to what is worthy of being remembered . This is not the first time we have seen a person in our lives have been remembered .
 To memorialize the past in edifices and museums is also a way to contain and even neglect it . On the other hand, memorializing the past also leaves the responsibility of memory to others . To commemorate the past, to memorialize it is a way of containing and neglecting
 So long as there were men and women around who really did remember, from personal experience, this did not perhaps matter . So long . as there . was there .
 Even if Europe could cling indefinitely to a living memory of past crimes, there would be little point . Memorials and museums are designed to achieve, however inadequately, to achieve .
 The first post-war Europe was built upon deliberate mismemory—upon forgetting as a way of life . First post-WWII was built on deliberate mismemberment .
 Some measure of neglect and even forgetting is the necessary condition for civic health, says John Sutter . "Some measure of forgetfulness and even forgetfulness is necessary to be civic health"
 A nation has first to have remembered something before it can begin to forget it. A nation must remember something first before it begins to forget . A nation's first to remember something is to be remembered by a nation .
 Poles have a convoluted memory of Jews who once lived in their midst . The same is true of Poles in their convoluted recollection of the Jews . Polish Jews have a complicated memory of their time in Poland .
 The same will be true of Spain, too, which for twenty years following its transition to democracy drew a tacit veil across the painful memory of the civil war . Spain's civil war ended in 1992, but the country has never recovered from its civil war wounds .
 Public discussion of that war and its outcome is only now getting under way . Public discussion is now only now beginning to get under way.
 Only after Germans had appreciated and digested the enormity of their Nazi past—a sixty-year cycle of denial, education, debate and consensus— could they begin to live with it: i.e. put it behind them . Only after . Germans had . appreciated and . dig
 Evil, above all evil on the scale practiced by Nazi Germany, can never be satisfactorily remembered . Evil, like Nazi Germany's practice, cannot be satisfied with the memory of Nazi Germany .
 Its inherent implausibility opens the door to diminution and even denial . Its sheer difficulty of conceiving of it in calm retrospect is difficult to do .
 It is impossible to remember as it truly was, it is inherently vulnerable to being remembered as it wasn't . Impossible to remember what happened, it's impossible to be forgotten as it was .
 It's not always politically prudent to wield the past as a moral cudgel with which to beat and berate a people for its past sins . Most of what it has to offer is discomforting and disruptive, even disruptive .
 The rigorous investigation and interrogation of Europe’s competing pasts has been one of the unsung achievements and sources of European unity in recent decades . All the same, the place occupied by those pasts in Europeans’ collective sense of themselves has been a key source of unity in
 It is, however, an achievement that will surely lapse unless ceaselessly renewed . It is the achievement of America's first president, Barack Obama .
 Europe’s barbarous recent history, the dark ‘other’ against which post-war Europe was laboriously constructed, is already beyond recall for young Europeans . The dark 'other' against which Post-WWII Europe was constructed is beyond recall . Europe's barbarous
 Within a generation the memorials and museums will be gathering dust . They will be gathered dust, like the battlefields of the Western Front today, only by aficionados .
 The last statue of Franco in Madrid was quietly removed at dawn, in front of an audience of one hundred onlookers, on March 17th 2005 . If in years to come we are to remember why it seemed so important to build a 19-foot statue .
 The new Europe, bound together by the signs and symbols of its terrible past, is a remarkable accomplishment . But it remains forever mortgaged to that past, writes David Cameron .
 If Europe's past is to continue to furnish Europe’s present with admonitory meaning and moral purpose, it will have to be taught afresh with each passing generation . If Europeans are to maintain this vital link, they will need to maintain the vital link .
 Top of the list: World War II, Nazi Germany and Nazi Germany . Bottom of the line: "French retribution, 1944," "The Battle of the American Revolution"
 Topical Press Agency/Getty Images. Harry Todd/Fox Photos/Getty . Harry Todd: "I'm glad to have had a good day"
 Bettmann/Corbis; middle : Walter Sanders/Time Life/ Getty Images; bottom : AKG Images . Bettmann: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future"
 Raymond Aron's family is one of the wealthiest families in the world . Aron was assassinated in the 1980s .
 Adenauer and Berlin Wall, 1961: Enzenauer and the Berlin Wall . The Berlin Wall was built in 1961 .
 Car in Britain and women, 1960: Magnum/Bruce Davidson, Bruce Davidson, George W Hales/Getty Images. Women in Britain in 1960s: Car in the UK and women in Britain .
 This week's episode will be marked by the release of a new book, "This Is Life" The book is available on Amazon.com's iReport.com . Read the rest of the book .
 Italian workers’ strike, 1969, was the biggest strike in the country’s history . The strike was the first of its kind in Italy since 1968 .
 Top of the list of children in Belfast, Ireland, 1976: Davis Factor/Corbis. Magnum/Harry Gruyaert; bottom (Belfast children)
 Top image: Lisbon woman newspaper vendor . Bottom image: Portuguese newspaper vendor in Lisbon . Bottom photo: Portuguese woman in Lisbon newspaper .
 Thatcher and Mitterrand met in 1984 . Thatcher and Thatcher were both prime ministers of the 1980s . Thatcher was in office at the time of the first lady's assassination .
 Topham Picture Library; middle (Michnik in Gdansk, 1984): Wostok Press; bottom : Peter Turnley/ Corbis. Top photo of Michnik in 1984: Michnik, 1984 .
 The former president of the United States' House of Representatives will host a special event in New York City on Friday night .
 McDonalds in Moscow, 1990, was the first time it had been served in Russia . McDonald's was the second time it was served in the country since 1990 .
 Magnum/Paul Fusco; middle (Aral Sea disaster, 1997): Magnum/Francesco Zizola; bottom : Alain Nogues/Sygma/Corbis. Magnum .
 Eastern European sex trade, 2002: Sasha Bezzubov/Corbis . Wostok Press; middle (eastern Europe sex trade) 2002: S.E. E.I. sex trade . bottom: W.I .
 Srebrenica massacre graves are among the graves of the Bosnian Bosnian Muslim massacre victims . The massacre took place in the early hours of Bosnian war .
 European Press Photo Agency/Kerim Okten; bottom : Alternative Libertaire . Alternative Liberteaire .
 Viennareport/Sygma/Corbis; middle : Dean Francis; bottom : David Bebber/Reuters; .
 The literature on Europe since the Second World War is huge and like Europe itself itself steadily expanding . A History of Europe since 1945 by Tony Judt is published by Heinemann and Penguin .
 Wherever possible I have listed books that are likely to be available for readers to consult or purchase . The books listed are available for consults, consults and purchase .
 For the same reason I have not included primary sources except memoirs and the occasional contemporary report, nor have I listed published works in other languages . I have also not included any primary sources for this article .
 The first section is a list of books dealing with the history of modern Europe, together with works devoted to particular countries or regions . This section includes works dedicated to European history . The second section is the first section of this section of the list .
 In the third section I have grouped books by chapter, listing works to which I am indebted for information used in a particular chapter or that I found especially helpful . In the other section, I have listed works that I have been indebted to for information .
 Readers seeking to learn more about the economic history of post-war Europe might find it helpful to look under General Histories; Economics; European Union, as well as various chapters where economic history is emphasized, notably Chapters III, X, XIV .
 Antonov-Ovseenko, Anton, Anton. My years in the State Department [London, Hamilton, 1970] Antonov.ovseenko.com: The time of Statin.com .
 Raymond Aron, Raymond, wrote a memoir of his life in New York City . Aron was assassinated by the Nazis at the age of 50 .
 Ginzburg, Evgeni Semenovna, Trevor Grundy, Kenneth, Attlee Healey, Denis, Denis and Edward Heath, Edward, .
 Diefendorf, J effry M., In the wake of war. The Rehabilitation of Europe. The rehabilitation of Europe . In the aftermath of war, the rehabilitation of European nations is a key component of the rehabilitation .
 Plans for renewal, 1940-1946 . Turner, Ian D. Turner: Reconstruction in post-war Germany. Reconstruction in Germany .
 The Coming of the Cold War Aman, Anders, Architecture and ideology in Eastern Europe during the Statin era . The coming of the cold war was a major theme in the Statins' books .
 The Germans and French from Ruhr conflict to Economic Community . Hitchcock, William I., France Restored. Hitchcock I., William I. France Restoried. Hitchcock . Hitchcock I.
 Cold War diplomacy and the quest for leadership in Europe, 1944, 1944 . Holloway, David, Statin and the Bomb .
 John W. Young, John W., France, the Cold War, and the Western alliance, 1944-49 . Young: France, Cold War and the European unity and disunity, 1945-1957 .
 Stalinist purges in Eastern Europe, 1948-1954 . Kaplan, Karel, Report on the murder of the General Secretary Kenney, Padraic, Rebuilding Poland .
 A The Establishment of Communist regimes in Eastern Europe, 1944-1949 [ Boulder, Colo., Westview Press, 1997) Pelikan, Jiri, The Czechoslovak political trials, 1950-1954 [ London,. Macdonald, 1971] Peteri, Gyorgy,
 Rubenstein, Joshua, and Naumov, Vladimir Pavlovich, Statin's secret pogrom. Statin was a member of the Communist Party in Hungary . Statin had been involved in the Holocaust, but was forced to flee the country .
 The postwar inquisition of the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee . Trial of the Leadership of the Anti-Conspiracy Centre headed by Rudolf Slansky (Prague, Ministry of J ustice, 1953) Trial of three Slovak bishops .
 Berghahn, Volker Rolf, America and the intellectual cold wars in Europe are at odds over the future of the Cold War era . He talks about the culture wars in America and Europe .
 Urban, G R., Radio Free Europe and the pursuit of democracy . Urban: The CIA and the world of arts and letters .
 Italy in the Cold War: politics, culture and society 1948 . The Politics of Stability: Italy in Italy in a Cold War in 1948 .
 The making of the European settlement, 1945-1963 . Zimmermann, Hubert, was Hubert Zimmermann. Zimmermann .
 The French Army in politics, 1945-1962 . The dissolution of the colonial empires . Bekes, Csaba, Malcolm Byrne, and Janos Rainer, The 1956 Fiungarian revolution .
 The wars of French decolonization began in France in the 1920s and 1930s . A diplomatic revolution was the result of decolonisation .
 Algeria's fight for independence and the origins of the post-cold war era . Fanon, Frantz, The wretched of the earth Ferro, Marc, Colonization .
 Haas, Ernst B. Haas: The uniting of Europe. A global history . A global . history . Haas . Haas: "The uniting . of Europe." Haas .
 Luther, Kurt & Pulzer, Peter, Austria 1945-1995: Fifty Years of the Second Republic (London, Ashgate,1998) Molin, Karl, ed., Creating Social Democracy. Molin: Creating Social democracy. Britain and the sixties .
 Public opinion polling in Czechoslovakia, 1968-69; results and analysis of surveys conducted during Dubcek Era .
 The story of the Baader-Meinhoff Terrorist Gang Olson, Mancur, The Rise and Decline of Nations . Olson, Olson, and Meinhoff were the members of the notorious gang .
 Sciascia, Leonardo, The Moro Affair and the Mystery of Majorana Wright, J oanne, Terrorist Propaganda. The Mora Affair, J. oanne and the Moro-Affair .
 Duchen, Claire and Claire, Claire, . Women's rights and women's lives in France, 1944-1968 Garton Ash, Timothy, in Europe's name . Garton . Ash: In Europe's . name. In Europe’s name.
 Changing Faces of Communism in Western Europe (London, A Deutsch, 1980) Nelson, Keith L., The making of detente (1980) Nelson: "The Making of Detente"
 The revolution of '89 witnessed in Warsaw, Budapest ; Berlin, and Prague . Gorbachev, Mikhail Sergeevich, Conversations with Gor-achev Kenney, Padraic, A Carnival of Revolution .
 Teitel, Ruti G., Transitional justice 28, and Tismaneanu, Vladimir, Vladimir . Vladimir, Vlad, Vladimir. Vladimir .
 The Destruction of the Jewish Community in Jedwabne, Poland, was the destruction of the community . Hass, Aaron, Aaron Hass, wrote The Aftermath. The destruction of a Polish Jewish community was a major event in the history of the Holocaust .
 Mitscherlich, Alexander and Margarete, The Inability to Mourn: principles of collective behavior . Mitten, Richard, The Politics of Antisemitic Prejudice . Moore, Bob, Victims and Survivors.