 B\ )ale L Smith Dale Committee Member M Ljubisa S Adamovich Committee Member . Committee member: L. Jubisa . Adamovich . Committee Member: Smith Dale, Adamovich, Smith Dale .
 Socialist Protectionism 33 Conventional or Unconventional Measures 38 ExComm Split 40 Escalation 47 . 3. ExComm split 40. 3. Conventional measures 38. Excomm split 40 . Excomm Split 40. Escalated 47. Socialist protectionism 33 .
 53 Soviet Conventional Forces 57 Number and Type of Weapons 63 . Number and type of weapons 63 4. 4. Priority Information Requirements 53 .
 Command and Control 70 First Strike 71 Force Command 71 Missile Control 74 Missile Control 77 Spy Plane Incident 79 Spy Plane incident 79 5.5 .
 Russian and East European Studies major Professor: Dr. Jon Andrew Errickson . Russian and Eastern Studies major at University of Latvia .
 New information has created a renewed interest in the Caribbean crisis . Five history conferences have been held in recent years .
 Soviet Glasnost and Perestroika have disclosed revealing new facts that have aided in resolving questions that have perplexed scholars for over thirty years . Also, Soviet Glasost and . Perestoika have revealed revealing new . facts that helped resolve questions .
 Most notable of the newfound information was the discovery that the United States had not done a very good job in gathering and analyzing intelligence information . The U.S. did not do the best in gathering intelligence information, according to the report .
 The U.S. failed to recognize the purpose for the Soviet Union's involvement with Cuba . The United States also failed to acknowledge the purpose of its involvement in Cuba .
 These two miscalculations brought the world extremely close to nuclear war; closer than ever before or ever since . The world was very close to a nuclear war when it happened .
 Both sides experienced their share of miscalculations and outright policy blunders . From issues such as diplomacy and trade to military proliferation, both sides experienced miscalculation . The U.S. and South Korea have been at odds for decades .
 With the advent of weapons of mass destruction, the need for calm and concise handling of Cold War discord became all important . The advent of nuclear weapons became important .
 As the crisis unfolded, fear and apprehension were felt throughout the U.S. and the world in general .
 Many of the American officials present during the crisis have labeled it in ominous terms . While the majority of Soviet citizens were unaware of the conflict, many of the . American officials .
 Kennedy administration's diplomatic adeptness has kept accolades pouring in for the Kennedy administration . This fact has had a hand in .
 For Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., it was ""the finest hour"" for President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Even Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev expressed admiration for Kennedy and the panache Kennedy exhibited during the crisis . Kennedy's panache was displayed in the face of the crisis in 1960s .
 Arthur Schlesinger recalled Kennedy's resolve and tenacity by stating that, ""It was this combination of toughness and restraint, of will, nerve and wisdom, so brilliantly controlled, that dazzled the world. That combination of . will, . nerve and . wisdom, that brilliantly controlled
 Before the missile crisis people might have feared that we would use our power extravagantly or not use it at all . The missile crisis was the first time the U.S. government has used its power in such a crisis .
 Looking back at the Caribbean conflict conjures up images of diplomatic maneuvering at its best . Looking back to the Caribbean conflicts conjures images of diplomacy at its finest .
 The world watched in stunned silence as a duel between a young, charming and popular capitalist president and a wily communist head of state unfolded . The world was stunned by the duel between the young, popular and powerful .
 At issue is a standoff of monumental consequence which developed out of mistrust of one another . At issue was a standoff which developed from mistrust of each other .
 It was a time when many throughout the world held their collective breath in both fear and anticipation for what would undoubtedly be a superpower showdown of unparalleled proportion .
 History has never before pitted two nations against one another that had the capability for total human annihilation . The U.S. has the capability to wipe out the world's population with total annihilation .
 Not only was the stability of the post-World War II international system called into question, but also the very future of all mankind . The future of the world's post-WWII international system was also questioned .
 The potential for egos to clash over personality differences was there, yet these two superpower leaders were able to navigate their way through this encounter without loss of life, and with little bruising .
 Americans believed that the United States had stood-up to the communist attempt to intrude into the Western Hemisphere . Americans believed the U.S. had dealt with the aggression the same way someone would respond to a would-be burglar . The United States responded the same as someone would
 Kennedy controlled events in Cuba so skillfully that Khrushchev was forced into an embarrassing retreat, signalling a victory for capitalism throughout the world . To this day, most Americans are adamant in their belief that John Fitzgerald Kennedy controlled the events .
 Historians are now beginning to understand how real the danger was during the crucial thirteen days in October 1962 . Historians have been trying to find out what happened in the days leading up to the September 11 attacks .
 Historians are just now able to study this crisis from all angles due to the recent political changes that have swept through Eastern Europe since 1989 . Historians have been studying the crisis in Eastern Europe for the past 30 years .
 Russia and the U.S. are releasing important data from their respective governments . The data is being made available by both Russia and U.K. Russia is releasing previously unreleased documents to the public .
 Glasnost enabled Soviet historians and those directly involved in the conflict to collaborate with their American counterparts to uncover the deepest secrets of the crisis . The Soviet-U.S. history of the Cold War helped uncover the truth of the conflict in the Soviet Union .
 In addition to memoirs, a mind-boggling amount of documentation has been released concerning the events of 1962 .
 The final piece of the puzzle needed for an even more accurate view of the crisis had been Cuban data . The Cuban data was the final piece in the puzzle to find out how the crisis unfolded .
 In the book Anadyr, published in the Spring of 1994, Generals Gribkov and Smith collaborate in an effort to clarify key points of confusion about the crisis .
 Cuba has become available in large part due to the collapse of the Soviet Union and the subsequent change in relations between Cuba and Russia . Edition Q Inc. Inc., 1994). Edition Q was published in 1994 .
 Even Fidel Castro is eager to become part of writing the history of the conflict in which he played such an integral role . Fidel Castro has played a key role in the Cuban revolution .
 In 1987 they began to bring together former high officials from all three countries who were influential in policy making or implementation during the crisis . They began to meet in 1987 .
 Organizers were interested in bringing together only the actual leaders, so that the validity of this ""oral history"" would be unquestionable . Organizers wanted to bring together only those who were involved in the event .
 The discussions uncovered many misunderstandings and solved some of the riddles which had up to this point remained unsolved . The discussions uncovered many of the misunderstandings .
 Havana conference in 1992 showcased a stunning assortment of high-officials from all three states . The Havana conference was far and away the most productive of the five conferences .
 The participation of these principle players made it more likely that an accurate depiction of the actual events of the crisis would emerge, says CNN.com .
 The conference aims to settle unresolved historical differences brought about by the absence of key individuals at the prior oral historical discussions . The conference was held in conjunction with the previous conferences, 120 years ago .
 Declassified documents reveal accuracy of intelligence gathered by U.S. in days leading up to October 1962 . Intelligence gathered by the United States in the days before October 1962, documents reveal .
 The ExComm was a group of specialists President Kennedy drew on to ensure that the embarrassments of prior foreign policy blunders would not again occur . President Kennedy used the ExComm to help ensure that prior embarrassments such as the Bay of Pigs would not happen again .
 Thousands of photos and other bits of information were gathered and analyzed within a two week period during the crisis . Thousands of photographs and other . bits of . information gathered and . analyzed within two weeks .
 Scholars are now able to see hidden dangers that were undetected during the crisis . Through Soviet participation in the oral history conferences, scholars are able to .
 The Kennedy administration received the information it received was questionable and incomplete at best . From new sources, we now know that the information received by the Kennedy administration .
 Some U.S. scholars still believe we were no closer to a nuclear confrontation in 1962 than at any other time during the Cold War . On the other hand, some United States scholars say we were not closer to an actual nuclear confrontation .
 In his article, Cline disputed interpretations of the first three joint panel discussions . Cline disputes interpretations of those discussions .
 Cline contended that the Soviets participants stood to gain stature by duping the U.S. participants into thinking that the confrontation was more volatile than originally believed . Cline: The Soviets hoped to gain a reputation for their actions .
 To imply that McNamara and Bundy, who were held in high regard by John and Robert Kennedy, could be persuaded to accept scenarios that contradicted their experiences is hard to accept . McNamara, Bundy, were both held in good regard by the Kennedys .
 McNamara was quite vocal in his criticism of Soviet and American tactics during the crisis . McNamara criticized the Soviet and U.S. tactics in Cuba .
 McNamara's emphasis was always focused on separating hearsay from fact, regardless of fault . Bundy and McNamara were focused on fact-finding, not fault-finding .
 These men combined their own experiences with those of their Soviet and Cuban counterparts to conclude that the situation was more volatile than they originally thought . These men were not guided down memory lane and persuaded they were a part of saving all humanity, but rather they combined their . humanity .
 In many cases, intricate details were intensely scrutinized by all sides until the issue was either solved or left unresolved . In many of these cases, the details were either left unresolved or not resolved .
 Many of these issues, such as troop strength and force composition, could not have been skewed by either side due to the accurate post-crisis data both had . Many of the issues could not be skewed due to either side having the accurate data .
 There was simply too much data and too many experts from both sides to allow poor information to go unquestioned . The participant selection criteria for the conferences and the openness of discussion during the conferences greatly reduce the chance for deliberate misrepresentation .
 Castro and Cuban officials present at the Havana conference were totally candid and truthful . Castro and the Cuban officials need to do everything possible possible to make themselves look heroic to their people, he says .
 Experts who believe that war was near see the real issue as not whether nuclear war was narrowly averted but rather how it was that the two superpowers came so close to launching missiles in the first place .
 The overwhelming evidence surfacing over the past several years points toward United States misperceptions as being the key reason for the close call . U.S. misperception is a key factor in the outcome of the 2016 presidential election .
 The inability of the U.S. intelligence system to properly gather and interpret critical information, crucial in determining Soviet intent, caused President Kennedy to make improper assumptions . President Kennedy's misperceptions brought the world perilously close to nuclear war . The world was at risk of nuclear war when
 The high level advisors to President Kennedy quickly dismissed the possibility that the defense of Cuba was a key and critical part of the Soviet rationale for shipping the nuclear warheads to Cuba was critical blunder .
 The five oral history conferences were instrumental in developing this idea . This sort of attitude was prevalent and it was a result of the Cold War, says author .
 Kennedy never seriously considered the possibility that Khrushchev may have been content to negotiate an end to the conflict at the beginning on the basis of a non-aggression pact protecting Cuba . This notion proved to be so strong that Kennedy never considered a deal being made with Russia .
 There was clearly a problem in understanding the purpose for the emplacement of the weapons, an equally important problem was in the numerous inaccuracies in gathering the priority information requirements during the crisis .
 Almost all intelligence data made available to the ExComm was based on aerial photography . Very little, if any, collaboration or verification backed-up any of the photography .
 The most critical mistakes dealt specifically with three areas, including the question of how many missiles, specifically the nuclear warheads that made the missiles so deadly, were physically located within Cuba starting on 16 October 1962 . The Soviet command and control structure on Cuba was also at fault .
 The possibility of all-out nuclear confrontation was much closer than anyone at the time perceived . These three aspects were so grossly misunderstood by the Kennedy administration that they were much closer to nuclear confrontation .
 Were it not for the level-headed and prompt decisions on the part of Khrushchev, the events of October may have escalated beyond anyone's control . The events may have been beyond anyone else's control, says historian Peter Bergen .
 President Kennedy avoided nuclear war through a universal fear of this kind of warfare, not by his superlative diplomatic performance . Kennedy avoided war through fear of war and not by diplomatic performance, experts say .
 From the American Revolution to the Gulf War, America has prided itself on understanding the tactical and strategic situation of the enemy . America prided on understanding and understanding the enemy's situation .
 Further analysis proves this is much too shortsighted an interpretation . However, further analysis proves that this is not the only interpretation .
 The difference between assuming a strategic aim over a defensive aim could very well have led to the Soviet Union opting for a different course of action, one that may have paved the way for total nuclear confrontation .
 In considering the question of why the Soviet Union chose to covertly deploy nuclear weapons to Cuba in 1962, it is necessary to consider two points . The Soviet Union deployed nuclear weapons in Cuba in the 1960s .
 The second point deals with why the decision to deploy these weapons of mass destruction was made over a more conventional support effort which may have achieved the same goal .
 By 1962 Castro was feeling the pinch of isolation in the Caribbean . Castro's Isolationism was a form of isolation .
 Castro had a right to be concerned for the preservation of not only his own rule, but for that of the government that the Cuban Revolution had created . The Cuban Revolution was created by the Castro government in 1959 .
 The events leading up to the 1959 overthrow of the Batista regime indicate that Castro had reason to be uneasy with his neighbors . Castro was uneasy with the neighbors of his native Cuba .
 Many of the OAS leadership saw this new political change as a genuine threat to their current method of governing . OAS leaders saw this as a real threat to the current system of government .
 Rostow wrote that there was a definite threat of ""Castroism"" in other Latin American States . Rostow also wrote that the threat of 'Castroismo' in Latin America was a real threat of communism .
 Rostow stated, ""The roots of this idea assume a much larger eventual Soviet conventional force buildup" Rostow said, ""This idea assumes a much . larger eventual . Soviet conventional forces buildup" The roots of Rostow's theory are still unclear .
 This action occurred during a session convened in Punta del Este, Uruguay in January 1962, was unprecedented . This action was unprecedented. This action, which occurred in Uruguay in 1962 .
 It was the first time in OAS history the members were forced to turn on a fellow member-nation of similar origin for reasons based on individual rule . OAS member nations are forced to take action against each other based on their origin .
 For many years Cuba had played an important economic role among OAS nations . Cuba has played a key role among the OAS countries .
 Cuba's chief economic export then, still today, was sugar . Private investment in Cuba by the United States alone accounted for well over one billion dollars by 1958 .
 The Cuban government relied heavily on this commodity for bringing in the needed capital to sustain their economic growth . The government relies heavily on the commodity to sustain its economic growth.
 President Eisenhower cut sugar imports by ninety-five percent in response to Castro's nationalization policy . Cuba's sugar exports were reduced by eighty percent in 1960 .
 Havana-Moscow alliance would last for three full decades and lead to polarization of past hemispheric partners . This incident triggered the alliance between Havana and Moscow which would eventually last for decades .
 Castro turned to Moscow in a last ditch effort to stabilize the Cuban economy . Castro is seeking to stabilize his country's economy .
 The Soviets, seizing the opportunity to gain a friend so geographically close to the United States, quickly announced to the world that they would replace the U.S. as Cuba's primary trading partner . The Soviets seized the chance to gain the opportunity .
 The Cuban and Soviet relationship actually transpired as a result of a visit by Khrushchev's close confidant, Anastas Mikoyan, who happened to be attempting to improve relations with Washington .
 Fidel Castro was somewhat more reluctant to adopt a new but already established political platform . Che Guevara and Raul Castro were staunch communists, but Fidel was reluctant to follow them .
 Cuba abandoned its past partners in the Americas and the Caribbean . She moved into untested waters with regard to self preservation . Cuba is now looking for a new partner in the region .
 Never before, even when under Spanish rule, had Cuba been surrounded by so many unfriendly countries . Never before had Cuba had been in such a large group of countries .
 The Soviets considered Castro Castro to be an ideological brother in a hostile location . Castro was considered to be a brother in the Soviet Union .
 This, of course, leads to the question of how strong was Moscow's support for Cuba, and how far were they willing to go to protect this new found socialist state .
 There are two entirely different facets of the problem of why the Soviets chose to emplace nuclear weapons on Cuba . Intent and intent are very different aspects of the reason for the decision .
 On the one hand facts must be presented that show a stated Soviet concern over Cuba's defense . On the other hand facts show that the Soviet Union is concerned about Cuba's security .
 There has to be shown proof that the Soviet stated objective is indeed plausible. Secondly, there must be proof that it is plausible. There has also been shown proof of the Soviet objective is true .
 An important source to help isolate the stated Soviet objective is to consider the testimony of those involved in the decision . The testimony should be taken into account the reasons for the Soviet objective .
 In his memoirs, Nikita Khrushchev states that he and other members of the Presidium were concerned with keeping American troops off Cuban soil . In his autobiography, Khrushchchev says he and others were concerned about keeping American forces off Cuba soil .
 The Kennedy Executive Committee was concerned about not using Cuba as a bargaining chip for Berlin or project Soviet power at the U.S. doorstep . Their first concern was not to use Cuba as bargaining chips for Berlin, it was to protect the United States .
 Khrushchev pointed out that defending Cuba was his strategic goal . A combination of tactical factors and strategic factors proved to be important in the final deployment decision .
 The installation of missiles in Cuba would, I thought, restrain the United States from the precipitous military action against Castro's government . He said the installation of our missiles would restrain the U.S. from the . precipitous . military action .
 "Our missiles would have equalized what the West likes to call the balance of power. In addition to protecting Cuba, our missiles would also equalize," says President Obama . "In addition to the protection of Cuba," says Obama .
 Khrushchev: "Now they would learn just what it feels like to have enemy missiles pointing at you" Talbott: "We'd be doing nothing more than giving them a little of their own" Khrushov: "The Americans had surrounded us with military bases and threatened us
 At the Havana conference, McNamara questioned Castro on the specifics of the military build-up on Cuba during the Fall of 1962 . McNamara: "It's not surprising that the Cuban government built up the military in the fall of 1962"
 Castro contended that Khrushchev perhaps made an error in deciding to send strategic nuclear weapons . Castro contended he made a mistake in sending strategic weapons as opposed to only tactical weapons .
 Castro: "If it was a matter of defending Cuba without creating an international problem, the presence of tactical weapons would not have created the same problem that the strategic weapons did. As Castro concluded, "I also think that if it was . a matter . of defending Cuban citizens without creating
 Castro acknowledges potential international political ramifications certain choices would provoke in the context of defending Cuba . Castro simply acknowledges potential political ramifications of certain choices .
 Castro finished this statement by saying that if the intent was simply to defend Cuba, a number of tactical weapons for the mechanized units would have been more 30 Talbott, Khrushchev, 494 .
 Castro's words reflect his understanding that the missiles would project Soviet power in the region . Castro's choice of words in this statement reflects his understanding of his understanding .
 Khrushchev and Castro share a common theme that of defending Cuba being the primary strategic aim . Khrushches and Castro's statements were made in the wake of the Cuban Revolution .
 Both leaders subordinate these benefits to defending Cuba . While both leaders talk about other benefits, both subordinate them to defending the country .
 During the Havana conference, the debate over Soviet intent was heated . The debate was heated in Havana .
 Khrushchev's memoirs state that he was only looking out for Cuba's defense . Those who argued that Khrushchev was looking out to Cuba's interests supported their arguments with their memoirs .
 Khrushchev was not only content to defend Cuba but, by virtue of this show of force, also expected to reap advantages in the ongoing disputes over Berlin and the arms race . Others speculate that this was intended to help the Soviet Union .
 On 4 March 1960, a French merchant ship named the La Coubre unexplainably exploded in Havana harbor, causing a great number of casualties . Hostilities between the U.S. and Cuba increased when the ship exploded . The ship was named the Le Coubre .
 The ship was in the process of unloading very volatile explosives at the time of the explosion . The explosion happened in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 In all likelihood carelessness on the part of the Cuban stevedores was the reason for the loss of lives . Carelessness is likely to blame for the deaths, writes CNN.com .
 Castro seized this opportunity to increase anti-American sentiment within Cuba . Castro seized the opportunity to boost anti-U.S. sentiment within the country .
 In a defiant anti-American speech that immediately followed the La Coubre incident, Castro called for the complete severance of ties with the United States . The incident may not qualify as overwhelming evidence for Cuba's invasion phobia, it began a chain of events that produced by 1962 Cuba's
 President Eisenhower was convinced by the CIA to begin covert actions to oust Castro from power . Following the Guatemalan success of 1954, President Eisenhower began covert actions .
 Eisenhower convinced that Castro was an unpopular ruler who could be toppled easily . Eisenhower was convinced that the U.S. could topple him easily .
 Castro may not have enjoyed total support shortly after Batista's overthrow . Most Cubans preferred him over what would be perceived as a pro-American replacement government .
 Eisenhower convinced that a small, covert action would be more than sufficient to topple Castro . Eisenhower was convinced that the small-scale action would topple the Castro regime .
 Richard Bissell, CIA's most highly regarded operations planner, was able to convince Kennedy upon taking office that a more aggressive action would be necessary to achieve success . Bissell: Kennedy convinced himself that a 'more aggressive action' was necessary .
 Bissell sent the Kennedy administration into a frenzy of decision making sessions to determine the specifics of the proposed action against Castro . The Kennedy administration was in a frenzy over the proposal .
 The proposals went from a small-scale covert action, to a full-scale U.S. led invasion, back to a smaller covert action . The proposals were rejected by the U.N. for more than a decade .
 By the end, it is clear that Kennedy had misgivings about the eventual plan, but he went ahead with it based upon Bissell's recommendation . Kennedy had the concurrence of all the top leaders in Kennedy's Executive Committee .
 Kennedy's advisors lacked one critical element military expertise . Unfortunately for Kennedy, the concurrence of his advisors lacked a critical element .
 The White House staff had not relied heavily enough on the Pentagon during the planning stages of the operation, the White House says .
 There was disagreement immediately following this debacle between the White House and the Pentagon leadership over CIA and military coordination . The White House, Pentagon leadership disagreed immediately following the debacle .
 The Bay of Pigs created a rift between the military and President Kennedy . President Kennedy was forced to step down from the military after the incident . The military responded to the problem with the help of President John Kennedy .
 General Maxwell Taylor, then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, wrote in his memoirs about the Kennedy White House prior to his inclusion on the Executive Committee . As an old military type, he was accustomed to the support of a highly professional staff trained to prepare careful analysis of issues in
 I was shocked at the disorderly and careless ways of the new White House staff, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . "I was shocked by the disorderly ... careless ways," he says .
 There was little perceptible method in the assignment of duties within the staff, although I had to admit the work got done, largely through the individual initiative .
 Kennedy recognized the importance of having military expertise when considering strategic and tactical courses of action . Kennedy was very cautious when considering a purely military point of view .
 "It was a fiasco from the standpoint of the U.S. and their desire to rid the region of an anti-American regime," says President Obama .
 It sent a clear signal for the first time that Cuba was an important part of U.S. foreign policy . The Cuban government is a key ally of the United States .
 This was the turning point for Soviet foreign policy with regard to Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: This was a turning point in the Soviet policy toward Cuba .
 Khrushchev: "The invasion of Cuba was the work of aggressive American forces. The invasion of Cuban territory was the result of an invasion by American forces"
 Nobody believes that the invasion was paid for by the counterrevolutionary Cubans . Nobody believes it was funded by the Cuban government .
 "No, it was supported by the aggressive forces of the United States and the taxpayers, who were not told about it," says President Obama . "No. No, it's supported by ... the aggressor forces," he says .
 Castro found the fuel he wanted to fan the fires of anti-American sentiment in Cuba . Castro was earlier searching and struggling for ways to prove to the Cuban people that the Americans were evil and he was their savior .
 After the Bay of Pigs, Cubans rallied behind Castro and supported his hatred of the capitalist west . Castro's government was overthrown by the West in 1961 .
 He had to swallow a bitter pill in the failure of the guerilla led invasion, while at the same time displaying continued resolve against Castro .
 The Bay of Pigs proved to bring out the competitive nature of Kennedy and prompted him to formulate a new strategy to fight Castro . Ironically, while Castro strengthened Castro, it also brought out the competitiveness of Kennedy .
 The new strategy, code named ""MONGOOSE", was designed to covertly and passively oust Castro from Cuba . The strategy was developed by the U.S. government in the 1980s .
 On November 30, 1961, President Kennedy sent a memorandum to Secretary of State Dean Rusk which approved a plan to use American assets to overthrow Castro . The plan was approved by President Kennedy .
 The aim of operation MONGOOSE was spelled out by Brigadier General Edward Lansdale . Lansdale is an expert in counterinsurgency and guerilla operations .
 Its stated purpose was to sabotage Castro in an attempt to rid Cuba of a pro-communist regime . The Cuban government was overthrown by the Castro regime in Cuba .
 The Soviets were not aware of any specific covert actions, such as JM WAVE, by the United States to topple socialism on Cuba . Instead they assumed the potential for U.S. aggression was a given .
 As Nikita Khrushchev stated, "I'm not saying we had any documentary proof that the Americans were preparing a second invasion; we didn't need documentary proof. We didn't have documentary proof," he said .
 The teams were specifically instructed to target bridges, communication links, production plants, sugar mills, oil facilities, and other targets that could potentially affect commerce .
 Lansdale believed that by disrupting any economic stability Cuba had achieved by the end of the Cuban revolution, the U.S. stood a reasonably high chance of succeeding in displacing Castro, he said . Lansdale: By disrupting economic stability, the United States could succeed .
 Sergo Mikoyan said in 1988 there really was no reason to go directly after Castro because if assassinated Castro would have surely been followed by the ever-popular Che Guevera . Yet, as a Latin-American specialist and the son of politburo member Anastas
 Mikoyan correctly identified the 48 Talbott, Last Testament, 511 . Instead of Talbott the author correctly identified Talbott as the author of the Bible .
 Castro assassination was a real possibility following a Castro assassination as having been a follow-on invasion by the U.S. The assassination was one of the most likely events in the Castro-era .
 This assumption further demonstrates the fear both the Cubans and Soviets felt for a potential U.S. led invasion of Cuba .
 The United States announced a plan for a large-scale military exercise, called Philbriglex-62, to take place close to Cuba in the fall of 1962 . The U.S. military exercise was a provocative act of provocation .
 The scenario called for the deployment of some 7,500 marines, four aircraft carriers, twenty destroyers, and fifteen troop carriers . The scenario was called for deployment of 7,000 marines, 4 aircraft carriers and 20 destroyers .
 This massive operation had the proclaimed purpose of simulating an invasionary overthrow of a ruthless dictator on the fictitious island of Vieques . The operation was intended to simulate the overthrow of the dictator on a fictitious island .
 The Pentagon disclosed the name of the fictitious dictator as Ortsac which spelled backwards is of course Castro Castro .
 With the fear of invasion came an almost frantic chain of events by Cuba to discourage such a possibility . Cuba has been trying to discourage the possibility of invasion .
 Khrushchev recounted his feelings just before the failed Bay of Pigs operation, "there were no longer any forces left which could be organized to fight on America's behalf in Cuba"
 M51: "After Castro's victory over the counterrevolutionaries, we intensified our military aid to Cuba" He further backed the contention that the true concern was for defending their socialist brother .
 McNamara spoke to a number of high level Cuban and Soviet officials at the Havana conference . McNamara stated that because of the Bay of Pigs, the numerous clandestine operations against Castro that followed, he too would have been convinced that an invasion was imminent .
 This revelation by Mr McNamara is significant when trying to depict the general attitude of the U.S. policy makers during the crisis . This revelation is significant in trying to portray the American policy makers .
 As previously stated McNamara was a key figure in the ExComm task force which was formed to deal with the Soviet action . McNamara is a key member of the task force formed in response to the Soviet attack .
 For him to admit that at the time of the crisis he, along with the other members of the ExComm, were somewhat short-sighted in their assumptions is extremely pertinent . For him, he also admitted that he and others were "short-sighted"
 McNamara also stated at the Havana Conference that while the appearance of invasion was there, the U.S. had no plans to go forward with any invasion, already planned or otherwise .
 The Cuban and Soviet leaders had no other information to work with other than that which pointed toward an imminent invasion . This fact was of course lost on the Cuban leaders at the time of the crisis .
 Even U.S. documents show that the Soviets were correct in identifying Kennedy's emphasis on ousting Castro and changing Cuba's government . After all, the Soviets knew that Kennedy wanted to change the Cuban government .
 Castro felt the impending doom of a possible U.S. invasion, but probable, probable . With a hostile, great power located only ninety miles off Cuba's shores, it is not only plausible that Castro felt doom .
 These events fully shaped Soviet policy concerning Cuba and influenced the eventual decision to send nuclear weapons to the island . These events influenced the Soviet policy regarding Cuba .
 He was also sent a number of memorandums and action plans dealing with possible solutions to overthrowing the Castro regime .
 Both Cuba and the Soviet Union were concerned about the defense of the Cuban homeland . A second reason for the missiles was the desire to project a powerful presence in the Caribbean region .
 This is not entirely the same as equalling the global balance of forces, as was suspected by the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration was suspected of equaling the balance of world's forces .
 The Soviets were determined not to let the U.S. intimidate other countries in the region into refraining from adopting a socialist government . Instead, they were determined to not let the United States intimidate other . countries into refining their own socialist governments .
 The U.S.R. was instead pursuing a much more focused foreign policy, while the United States was blaming them for having much larger scale goals . The United States blamed the U.N. for having a larger focus on foreign policy .
 Khrushchev: "If Cuba fell, other Latin American countries would reject us, claiming that for all our might the Soviet Union hadn't been able to do anything for Cuba except to make empty protests to the U.N. The missile option was considered .
 "We had to think up some way of confronting America with more than words," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "We had to establish a tangible and effective deterrent to American interference in the Caribbean," says President Obama . President Obama said the U.S. had a "vigorous deterrent" to the Caribbean .
 Schecter, Glasnost, was of great importance to the Soviets not to challenge their super-power rival, but rather unwaveringly . In this respect, the Soviets did not challenge the Soviet Union in the war of the century .
 While the Kennedy administration dealt with the Soviet military involvement in Cuba as simply communist aggression, there were other key factors which were overlooked in the process . All this leads to the confusion that while the Kennedy . administration dealt . with the . Soviet involvement as simply . simply communist . aggression, due
 Kennedy treated Soviet military involvement and Soviet aggression as being one-in-the-same . Kennedy treated the situation as one of the same as Soviet aggression .
 Khrushchev wanted to defend Cuba, but not at the expense of mobilizing a major portion of the military and deploying them some 11,000 miles from Russia . The U.S. military was deployed to Cuba in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev was also concerned about the tremendous burden it would place on the Soviet economy . The Soviet leader was worried about the risks of deploying a large force .
 For the Soviets, nuclear weapons proved to be a less expensive, more powerful option than a conventional deployment . The Soviets chose nuclear weapons over conventional ones . The U.S. nuclear weapons were a less costly option than conventional weapons .
 The Soviet Union did stand to gain much from having missile locations in the Caribbean . Aside from their stated goal of defending Cuba, the Soviet Union stood to gain little from the move .
 Kennedy considered the overall military support, not just nuclear missiles, by the Soviet Union as 59 Talbott, 512. 34 being aggressive . Talbott: The Soviet Union was aggressive .
 This evaluation was much too simplistic and lacked clear understanding of the situation . This evaluation is much more than simplistic and lacks clear understanding, the author says .
 The notion among many Americans was that Khrushchev's decision to base intermediate range ballistic missiles on Cuba was meant solely to project Soviet power in the Western Hemisphere . Many Americans, including the Kennedy administration, believed the decision was meant to project power .
 Kennedy refused to entertain the notion that the Soviets could have any reason for the missiles (equipped with nuclear warheads) other than offensive because earlier he had defined ground-to-ground missiles as ""offensive" He said offensive weapons against the United States could not be tolerated .
 In an ironic twist, had Kennedy's ""chest-pounding"" waited another month or so, the entire crisis would have possibly been averted . Kennedy's "chest pounding" would have saved the crisis .
 ExComm was adamant in their belief that the United States held the upper hand in nuclear superiority . The ExComm believed the U.S. held the advantage .
 Neither they, nor Kennedy, were anxious to start a war with the Soviet Union and would have more than likely accepted some sort of compromise with the U.S.R. had the ""line in the sand" not already been drawn .
 Kennedy stated that with hindsight he should have implied to the Soviets a month earlier that the U.S. did not care about Soviet missiles on Cuba, but once the statement was made there was no turning back . Kennedy said in an ExComm meeting on 16 October 1962, with hindsight,
 Khrushchev's gambit was strictly strategic, according to historian Tom Morganthau . Both sides knew the United States was far superior to the Soviets in all aspects of nuclear ability .
 Newsweek: 36. 36 deep within her borders, and a policy that could turn the tables on the U.S. was attractive .
 This interpretation, no doubt fueled by the fear of the red tide sweeping across the planet, not only won support of the American public at large, but was the premise by which the Kennedy administration developed their strategy to combat the Soviet missile deployment .
 During oral history conferences, this interpretation has come under fire . The interpretation of oral history has been criticised .
 Castro's comments show that placing missiles in Cuba was meant to secure Cuba from the United States threat, with a subsequent, and lesser, purpose of equalizing global nuclear advantage the U.S. may have achieved over the preceding decade .
 The Soviets were also guided by a sense of solidarity toward their newfound political brethren . While Cuba was a geographically important location, it was also important to the Soviet Union .
 It is important to understand that although the crisis is most often viewed as an East-West confrontation, it did involve Cuba and Cuban views toward perceived United States aggression did impact on Soviet decision making .
 Fidel Castro gave his audience an explanation of exactly how the idea of a Soviet nuclear deployment came about . Fidel Castro: The idea of nuclear deployment in the Soviet Union came to Cuba .
 As Castro stated in May 1962, a Soviet diplomat, Sharaf Rashidov, came to meet with Castro in Havana . The Soviet diplomat came to Havana in 1962, Castro said in May .
 The topic of Cuban protection surfaced and Castro was asked directly by Rashidov what could be done to help Cuba . Castro was also asked directly what he could do to help the country .
 Castro, with Russian corroboration, set the record straight . Castro: "For this question, we need to know what happened in the past"
 During the Havana Conference of 1992, he elaborated at great length about a series of discussions he had with a Soviet delegation headed by Mr Rashidov during the Spring of 1962 .
 Soviets asked Cuba for approval to send nuclear warheads to Cuba . These discussions led to the Soviets asking Cuba for permission to send warheads .
 Castro understood that a mere Soviet presence would cause the U.S. to think twice before making a decision to invade . Castro, after all, understood that the United States would consider a Soviet presence .
 Oleg Troyanovsky was a junior advisor to Khrushchev for foreign matters . He was a prominent Soviet official during the Cuban crisis . Oleg was a senior Soviet official .
 Mr Troyanovsky called into question the accuracy of the United States' assertion that the missiles were a clever Soviet ploy to begin the dominoes toppling .
 He maintained that the reason behind the missile deployment was first and foremost defense .
 At the conference, Mr Troyanovsky stated that his government had numerous reasons to believe that Cuba was ripe for a second U.S. backed invasion . The actual nuclear option was first formulated, he said .
 Khrushchev was willing to gamble that his actions would suppress U.S. aggression toward Cuba . Though it seems likely he did not intend to risk Soviet security for the defense of Cuba .
 The obvious benefit of having a nuclear outpost at the doorstep of the enemy did not escape Khrushchev . At the same time, the obvious benefits of having such an outpost didn't escape the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy and his ExComm downplayed the danger of the weapons themselves . ExComm assumed once again that the missiles were offensive in nature .
 He concentrated his policy regarding Cuba on the belief that the maintenance of credibility within the OAS depended on a strong U.S. response to the missiles, he said .
 Kennedy's real concern was that following the Bay of Pigs, his perceived ability to project U.S. power and stability in the region had been reduced . Kennedy was concerned that his perceived U.K. power had been diminished .
 Had Kennedy pushed the OAS into believing the Soviet intent was anything other than aggression, he would not have been as successful in garnishing support .
 Kennedy continually referred to OAS representation in the resolution of the crisis . At one point he had his special counsel, Theodore Sorenson, draft a list of potential courses of action . The list stipulates in all that certain Latin nations would be notified in the event of any military solution
 Many on Kennedy's staff did not see the missiles as altering the balance of power . The missiles did not alter the balance-power balance .
 This led to a split within the ExComm based on how strongly they perceived the need to counter any Soviet aggression in Cuba . The ExComm split was based on the need for a counter-attack on the Soviet Union in Cuba.
 The split created two groups commonly referred to as the ""hawks" who were in the minority and supported aggressive military action to counter the Soviets . The ""doves" wanted a more guarded opposition based on their belief that Soviet missiles in Cuba would not greatly alter the United States' nuclear superiority
 A third group dubbed the ""owls"" developed out of the aforementioned groups . The group was formed from a group of three groups .
 It was this group that would eventually capture the attention of the president . The group captured the president's attention .
 The owls believed, as did the hawks, that the U.S. held the upper hand in the nuclear arena . The hawks and owls thought, as well as the owls, the United States .
 Similar to the doves, they thought that the risk of stumbling into nuclear war was a risk that had to be avoided at all cost . The doves were also concerned that a nuclear war risk was avoided .
 Robert McNamara reflected the position of this group when he stated, ""The 71 Chang and Kornbluh, Cuban, 114. Chang and 114. Kornlluh" The group was formed in 1959 in Cuba .
 While the owls were adamant in their concern over escalation, they were at the same time staunch in their support for increasing the pressure gradually on the Soviet Union . The owls allowed them an opportunity to gracefully back out of the situation without losing too much credibility .
 Of the three groups, the hawks were certainly the most significant in terms of using nationalistic fervor to increase conflict potential . The hawks are the most likely to use nationalistic sentiment to increase potential conflict potential, experts say .
 Some forty nuclear missiles in Cuba could not possibly alter the balance of power, the hawks rebutted by stating that the location of these medium range missiles was extremely important to national security .
 The Soviets could only expect to destroy a tiny fraction of U.S. strategic forces via long range missiles located on Soviet soil prior to the crisis . Once the forty missiles were in place on Cuba, they could expect to damage or destroy as much as forty percent of the Strategic Air Command
 The hawks did not believe there was any risk of the Soviets retaliating . They did not think there would be a risk of Soviet retaliation .
 In fact, to the hawks it was just a question of how long it would take for the enemy to capitulate . The hawks say the enemy would capitulate if it did .
 You have written in your retrospective in The Washington Post on October 5, '82, as I remember the 20th year that you don't recall any concern about the strategic balance, or any fear of nuclear exchange in this period .
 The Soviets don't accept our demand; there follows an airstrike . The Soviets then feel impelled to strike the missiles in Turkey . The Turks call on NATO for support; the Turks call for support . We feel we have to do something in Europe; the Soviets then launch a nuclear exchange
 A major importance of the missiles was the possibility they presented for further Soviet influence through power projection within the Latin American region . The missiles were actually the nuclear warheads for the missiles .
 Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon wrote in a memorandum for President Kennedy that he saw the missiles as a deliberate public trial for the U.S. on how they intended to act in future world matters .
 Unless the U.S. stood its ground and resisted an incursion by the Soviet Union, all of Latin America would soon fall to communism . The will to resist the communist propaganda would deteriorate, he wrote .
 A Central Intelligence Agency document outlining the major consequences of certain U.S. courses of action on Cuba further emphasized the idea . The document was published by the CIA in the 1950s .
 The CIA incorrectly warned that the Soviets were aware that the world balance of forces had shifted so far in their favor that there was no stopping their movement into the U.S.'s region of influence .
 It went on to state that if they were not stopped immediately, the Soviet intrusion into Latin America would have been catastrophic . Chang and Kornbluh, Cuban, 114.
 Kennedy administration disregarded the possibility of the Soviets helping defend Cuba . ExComm looked toward the East to bolster their ideas .
 ExComm explanations ranged from the Soviet desire to counter United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey, to the Soviets using Cuba as a bargaining tool to gain full control over Berlin, to an assertion that the missiles were an attempt to solidify .
 ExComm deliberations over Soviet intent touched upon numerous possibilities without ever advancing the defense option . ExComm deliberated on numerous possibilities of defense without advancing the option . Defense option was never advanced .
 An example of this is seen in the transcript of the first ExComm meeting on 16 October 1962 .
 In one section of the transcript, the question of Soviet intent is bounced back and forth by ExComm members without anyone ever raising the possibility of real Cuban concern over U.S. invasion . The question is asked in one section, "Soviet intent"
 The New Republic, , 17. 46 wonder whether maybe maybe Mr Khrushchev was entirely rational about Berlin . 46 wonder if maybe maybe he was rational about it .
 They may be thinking that they can either bargain Berlin or Cuba against each other, or that they could provoke us into a kind of action in Cuba which would give them an umbrella for them to take action with respect to Berlin . But, uh, they may be ... thinking that, uh
 In essence, the United States chose to go to battle only half-armed . The U.S. chose to do so by factoring in that factoring out this notion .
 Unlike Secretary Rusk's post-crisis statement that, ""the other fellow just blinked,""81 the conflict was never as simple as bullying the foe into submission . Unlike Rusk, the conflict in Afghanistan was never easy .
 The debate over nuclear launch authority continues after the Havana conference .
 Much of the testimony from Soviet officers backs the contention that local commanders did not have permission from Moscow to use nuclear weapons at their discretion .
 Moscow chose to decide when and where the missiles would be used . Moscow chose not to use the missiles, but to decide where and where they would be deployed .
 This is much more in line with a very centralized control structure, which the Soviets are known to have used before before . This is more than a Soviet-style centralized control system .
 Moscow was firm in its desire to defend and protect its forces on Cuba . While there continues to be debate on whether using nuclear weapons were an option for Soviet commanders on Cuba, the fact remains that Moscow wanted to defend its forces .
 If the Soviets were willing to escalate the crisis to a military confrontation based on this contingency, it is reasonable to assume that escalation could have occurred had the U.S. provoked the Soviets .
 There are numerous tell-tale signs that telegraph an invasion by an opposing force, such as a sign of invasion by the enemy .
 Pre-invasion plans normally call for surgical airstrikes to cut and disorganize the enemy's lines of communication, logistical support, and defenses . The U.S. has been in the Middle East since 2001 .
 The Soviets would have undoubtedly viewed airstrikes against their forces as provocative . With that, it would have been a provocative move .
 Castro saw the U-2 overflights as a prelude to an impending U.S. attack, Castro said . Castro said the overflights were a precursor to an attack on the United States . Castro: The overflights and the low-level reconnaissance aircraft were pre-empted
 The essence of initial U.S. planning for the missile crisis encompassed military action . Initial planning included military action against North Korea .
 The ExComm found itself split into groups labeled hawks, owls, and doves . Initial consensus was that a military attack, namely tactical airstrikes, was necessary to end the conflict .
 President Kennedy's initial reaction, which was shared by the majority within the ExComm, was to attempt some sort of air attack on the newly constructed missile sights . The majority of ExComm members believed the attack would be an air strike .
 The only question during the earliest hours of the conflict seemed to be the timing of the airstrikes . The timing of airstrikes was the only question in the early hours .
 "At least we're going to do that, so it seems to me we don't have to wait very long," he says . "I'm going to be able to get my hands on the wheel," he adds .
 The details of several military actions were written and planned several days into the crisis . In a recently de-classified document submitted to the president by General Maxwell Taylor, the details were revealed .
 The three OPLANs, 312, 314, and 316, all concerned some degree of bombing . The three of them concerned some of the bombing .
 The final OPLAN option, 316, was an abbreviated or quick-reaction variant of 314 . The final option was 316, a quick reaction variant of the 314 option .
 It called for five days of continuos bombing followed by a invasion and removal of Castro . The plan was called for a five-day bombing campaign followed by an invasion .
 The idea of a quarantine or blockade was proposed by General Taylor simply as a sub-mission to aid in one of the invasion plans . General Taylor proposed the quarantine as part of his plans to aid the invasion .
 Kennedy requested written recommendations by his key ExComm members asking for their approval or disapproval for the airstrike option . Kennedy asked for written recommendations on 17 October 1962, 50 . Kennedy requested the recommendations from ExComm in October 1962 .
 Not asking the members to consider any of the other four options at that point shows that his inclination at the time was to favor airstrike as a front-running course of action . Not asking to consider other options shows that he favors airstrike as front-runner .
 The only reason Kennedy did not immediately approve the airstrike option was because of the U.S. Air Forces' insistence that any airstrike would have to be massive rather than ""surgical"", and that at best such a massive airstrike could only be sure of eliminating approximately ninety percent of the
 Had the prognosis for success been closer to one hundred percent, and had the Air Force not insisted that ""surgical"" airstrikes would have to give way to ""massive"" ones to raise the odds .
 With the Soviets determined to defend against airstrikes, it seems plausible that had the U.S. acted upon their first instinct to neutralize the missile sights, based upon the notion that Soviet intent was not linked to Cuba's defense, and had the Soviets reacted by doing everything .
 "If there had been instructions spelled-out, escalation would have almost certainly occurred," author says .
 The events of October 1962 could have ended much differently . Had circumstances been slightly different, or had the Kennedy administration not chosen to reevaluate a first-strike policy, the events of that month could have been different .
 The U.S. must assume blame for leading the world to the brink of nuclear confrontation . The United States must take responsibility for the world's nuclear crisis, author says .
 The United States had not predicted the missile deployment in advance and were scrambling to gain information as soon as it was discovered . The U.S. was scrambling to find out what had happened in advance .
 The difficulty in getting the information was that the deployment was not at all a typical operation for the Soviets . The difficulty was that it was not a typical Soviet operation .
 The Soviets planned their deployment operation to be covert, but were not concerned over the possibility of U.S. detection . The Soviets were not worried about the possibility that the United States would find them .
 The U.S. was sending missiles to Cuba for defense purposes . They were prepared to defend their actions if discovered .
 The reason for any secrecy at all can be best understood when into account the high state of Cold War tension at the time . The reason behind any secrecy can be explained by the state of the Cold War .
 The political situation was so volatile that the normal time lapse in a standard military operation was condensed into some 13 days, between 16 October and 28 October 1962 . The time lapse was between intelligence gathering, data recovery, analysis, and military action .
 The United States attempted to retrieve as much intelligence information as possible 94 Schecter, Glasnost, 172. 53 through aerial reconnaissance to further clarify the picture . The U.S. tried to retrieve information from the area by flying over .
 U2 sorties were flown almost non-stop, and low level reconnaissance missions continually buzzed the island at an altitude of under two hundred feet .
 Castro himself addressed the provocative nature of the U.S. overflights when he stated that the almost constant U2 overflights and the ever increasing low-level flights convinced all in Cuba that the United States invasion was beginning . Castro himself said that the constant overflights convinced everyone in Cuba
 It is clear that the United States was forced to rely on these flights to further develop their understanding of the situation in Syria .
 The U2 photographic imaging was so clear it was as if the U.S. had a photographer on Cuban soil . The United States had no personnel directly involved in spying at the time of the crisis .
 At times, photo analyzers could clearly see minute details such as palm leaves on trees, or guards smoking cigarettes while on duty .
 The interesting point to make about relying on photographs as the primary means of intelligence interpretation is that while they are helpful, there is the problem of corroborating the data, which in turn means that the photos oftentimes did not tell the whole story .
 One of the missile sites located in west central Cuba on the southern edge of Sierra del Rosario did not have any fencing surrounding it . The President was able to convince the President that one of the sites had no fencing .
 This led the Kennedy staff to conclude that there were no nuclear warheads at that location, because had there been it would have obviously had better security . Had there been there been any nuclear warheads, the staff would have had a better security system .
 Many sights were guarded by Soviet soldiers equipped with mobile launchers capable of nuclear strike . As was later revealed, many of these sights guarded by . Soviet soldiers .
 The majority of equipment identified by the U.S. was correctly identified . Some scholars have questioned the accuracy of the numbers .
 The main flaw in the data regarding nuclear capable launchers was that there was never any mention of mobile launchers . There was also no mention of the fact that mobile launchers were available .
 As stated previously, the assumption, based on photos showing no fencing around several launch sites, that the Soviet nuclear missiles were not yet at those sights was incorrect . The assumption was incorrect.
 General Gribkov, a key military planner during the crisis, stated at the Havana Conference, along with the thirty-six already confirmed IRBM nuclear launchers on Cuban soil, there were six mobile missile launchers potentially equipped with nine nuclear warheads .
 The lack of precise information did not cause earth shattering diplomatic consequences . Once the United States assumed there was already one nuclear missile on Cuba, any increase to that number became nothing more than a tactical consideration .
 This was a critical mistake which helped to mislead the U.S. into thinking that Soviet aggression was the purpose for the considerable force build-up on Cuba . This was the mistake which led to the United States thinking that the Soviet invasion was the reason for the build up .
 Intelligence analysts missed the fact that there was a combined arms force massing on Cuban soil . While concentrating on the missiles, intelligence analysts .
 It was assumed early on that the Soviet soldiers on Cuba were meant to protect and operate the launchers . The launchers were used by Soviet soldiers in Cuba .
 The CIA estimated that the entire Soviet contingent on Cuba throughout the crisis was somewhere in the area of 20,000 . The CIA estimates that the whole Soviet contingent in Cuba was somewhere around the area in the vicinity .
 Had intelligence estimate revealed that the force contained more of a conventional combat composition, the administration's view on Soviet intent may have been altered . Now known to have totalled around 42,000,102,102 .
 The 10th and 11th antiaircraft divisions were both subdivided into three surface-to-air missile regiments of four launch complexes each . Air and Antiaircraft is the 10th, 11th and 10th air and 12th anti-air divisions .
 The 10th was augmented by a 40-plane regiment of MiG-21 fighter-interceptors . In addition to the 72 missile launchers in each division, the 10th also had 40 MiGs-21 fighters . The U.S. has a total of 7,000
 Luna launchers are both nuclear and conventional capable . This raises the question of air defense versus ground defense intent . Although there were missile detachment assigned to the infantry regiments, the Luna launchers were both nuclear .
 Air defense batteries are made up of antiaircraft guns and surface-to-air missile launchers . Motorized rifle regiments promote offensive or defensive combat operations . Air defense regiments are made of an extremely maneuverable force mix .
 An infantry regiment could, within its mission essential task list, be prepared to defend a missile launch site . But this seems highly unlikely in the Cuban situation .
 Some 42,000 soldiers are deployed in the area to carry out a secret operation . The operation is being carried out under the name of Operation Delta Delta . It is not the first time the U.S. military has flooded the area .
 This sort of deployment falls much more within the parameters of a ""show of force"" than a covert air defense mission . The U.S. military says the deployment is not a show of force .
 The real reason for the four regiments deployed to Cuba, according to Soviet officials and corroborated by the Cubans, was for defense from invasion . Soviet officials say the real reason was for the regiments to be deployed was to protect Cuba from invasion.
 It is true that the infantry regiments also defended the missile locations, but this is common practice within combined arms forces . It is not the first time this has happened .
 Each unit had a dual role, the missile units were in Cuba to defend U.S. aggression while at the same time providing a safeguard for the infantry troops . The infantry troops were on Cuba to help defend against the United States .
 Some twenty launchers with eighty cruise missiles were attached to the ground forces, yet undetected by the U.S.,106 . There is no way such a mass conventional stockpile of surface-to-surface missiles would be used to defend missile sights . This notion is backed-up by new
 There is the possibility that Kennedy chose not to make the distinction between maneuver forces and nuclear missile/anti-air forces in order to ensure popular support .
 There is no question that Kennedy chose to ignore the possibility of the defensive nature of the forces . As Raymond Garthoff correctly states, it would have been much more difficult to argue that conventional forces, in this case defensive, would pose a threat to the United States .
 Documents have been recently uncovered that show Kennedy was at the very least exposed to the possibility of a Soviet defensive strategy brought on by the U.S.R. build-up .
 Rostow: "On the basis of existing intelligence the Soviet military deliveries to Cuba do not constitute a substantial threat to United States security. Rostow quite clearly spells this out to the president"
 By tying conventional forces to nuclear weapons, Kennedy avoided facing domestic opposition . Kennedy was able to avoid having to confront domestic opposition, which helped strengthen his international reputation .
 The Kennedy administration was sure it had identified enough detail to pursue the conflict to its conclusion . This is the one area that the Kennedy administration had identified .
 The answer to this question is that there never was any ""hard"" intelligence data to back the idea that the U.S.S.,R.R. had done anything more than to erect several potential missile launch sites . The answer is that the United States did not have any hard
 As early as 20 October 1962, the ExComm decided to ""assume"" there were nuclear warheads at the storage bunkers located by reconnaissance flights the day before . The ExComm. decided to "assume" there were . nuclear warheads located by . reconnaissance flights .
 Kennedy too adopted this assumption when briefing other domestic and international leaders despite any conclusive evidence to back the claim . Kennedy too adopt this assumption despite no conclusive evidence of the claims .
 French President Charles de Gaulle was notified of the Soviet missile deployment in Cuba .
 The missiles were of relatively little threat to the United States or any other country in the Americas . Due to the numbers of known conventional missiles, they were of little threat . The U.S. and any other member of the Americas is of little risk .
 Kennedy was forced to use the nuclear warheads as a means to rally public support . This known, Kennedy used the nuclear weapons as a way of rallying public support for his government .
 Any loss of focus concerning the intent of the U.S.R. to eventually surround the free world with her military might would have been fatal to JFK's attempts to make this crisis a moral fight . As stated previously with the conventional forces on Cuba argument, any loss of . focus
 The CIA carefully monitored the dismantling operation following the end of the crisis . No evidence surfaced to support earlier claims that the Soviets already had a number of offensive, tactical nuclear warheads on-site .
 Kennedy's anti-Soviet rhetoric would have most assuredly been less tolerated internationally and probably domestically too .
 Richard Lebow makes an interesting point when he stated that the warheads were more than likely located somewhere between the U.S. and Cuba at the time of Kennedy's quarantine order .
 Lebow argued that the Soviet transport ship Poltava could not have made the needed trips to transport the entire quantity of both missiles and warheads . One explanation that follows from this analysis is that Khrushchev merely meant to plant a seed in the minds of the Americans about the nuclear weapons
 "I never had any positive information that they were on the island. First of all, I had no positive information," she says . "I'm not sure what happened to them," she adds .
 Knowing the psychology of N. Khrushchev, I think it hardly likely that he would immediately throw all his cards on the table. Then, knowing . knowing . that he was hardly likely to immediately throw his cards out the table, he said. Then .
 The Poltava and her sister ship the Omsk were used to transport thirty-six medium range R-12 missiles prior to mid-September . Anatoli Gribkov explained that the ships were used in the September bombing of Syria .
 By mid-October, the Poltava returned to Cuba with twenty-four intermediate-range R-14s . Then the aircraft made a return trip and returned with more than 24 more .
 Many analysts concluded that she was the nuclear transport ship, largely due to her size and appearance (missile and warhead transport cones on deck) and that the warheads were in-place by October .
 Lebow and Burlatsky's theory falls short by assuming that the U.S. had collaborative sources on Cuba, or even in the Soviet Union, that could give detailed information about the warheads at the time of the crisis .
 The only known U.S. spy who was in a position to alert the United States of the nuclear threat was a Soviet officer by the name of Colonel Penkovsky . In fact, the only known American spy who knew about the threat was the Soviet officer of the day .
 Penkovsky inadvertently sent the second code but it was luckily ignored by the CIA . This example is evidence that the CIA was at a loss for good information regarding the warhead question .
 The Indigirka and Alexandrovsk missiles were on Cuba by October, but not the Poltava or Omsk . As it turns out, the missiles were actually in Russia, not Ukraine .
 The U.S. could not accurately determine if missiles were or not present on Cuba by October . Once again, it is not as important that the missiles were not present by October as it is that the United States could not determine this .
 In essence, the ExComm made their recommendations to the president based on flawed information and outright guessing . The ExComm says the recommendations were made by flawed information .
 Had the world known that missile sights, sans warheads, were the only things known on Cuba by 16 October, it is highly unlikely such an outcry of international denunciation as well as support for Kennedy .
 As the crisis progressed, anti-Americanism began to develop, especially in Latin America . Anti-U.S. anti-Americaism has also developed in Latin American countries, the author says .
 Anti-U.S. demonstrations broke out in several Latin American capitals, including Buenos Aire, Caracas, and La Paz . Reports that anti-US protests broke 1,7 Nye, Cuban, 18.67 out in Havana .
 Kennedy's assumption of Soviet warheads on Cuba would have led to increased demonstrations . Kennedy assumed Soviet warheads were on Cuba in 1962 .
 Some scholars and officials, like Ray Cline, claim that these issues were unimportant and that, "While it is exciting to speculate on how brilliantly we escaped the nuclear holocaust, none of the informed officials I talked with at the time thought the chances of war were high"
 They ignore signs that tensions escalated due to the numerous miscalculations, they ignore signs tensions are escalating . The U.S. has been in a state of war with Russia since 2003 .
 The United States assumed from the beginning of the crisis that the Soviets were using Cuba to further their aims . The U.S. assumed that Cuba was being used to further its aims .
 The idea that the Soviet Union had ulterior motives with regard to Cuba was introduced in one of the very first Kennedy cabinet meetings convened to discuss the crisis .
 U.S. Undersecretary of State, George Ball said when discussing Soviet reasons for using Cuba, "That here is Cuba armed against the United States, or possibly use it to try to trade something in Berlin"
 Oral histories of the five conferences depict a far different situation . Command and control policy seemed clear-cut to the United States, but oral histories show otherwise .
 Khrushchev's memoirs show he viewed Castro as a man who had no real concept of the power of nuclear weaponry . Castro was viewed as having no concept of nuclear weapons, he said in his memoir .
 Khrushchev said of a letter received from Castro, commonly known as the ""First Strike Letter"", commonly referred to as the 'First Strike' Letter . Castro suggested that in order to prevent nuclear missiles from being destroyed, we should launch a preemptive strike against the United States.
 In other words, we needed immediately deliver a nuclear missile strike against the United States. In other . words, the U.S. needed to deliver a missile strike immediately .
 Castro's proposal shook the Soviet leader severely, and led to Khrushchev's reversal of trust in Castro . While it is impossible to know what Castro really wanted to do with the nuclear warheads, it is difficult to say .
 The exact text of Castro's letter, received by Khrushchev on the evening of 26 October 1962, read, "If... the imperialists invade Cuba with the goal of occupying it, the danger that that aggressive policy poses for humanity is so great that following that event, the Soviet
 Castro reacted this way to the escalating crisis proved several things to the planners in Moscow . The Castro reaction to the crisis proved a surprise to the Kremlin planners .
 Castro was conjuring-up more militaristic solutions, based on his emotional leadership style . Castro was making an attempt to resolve the crisis diplomatically, he says . The first thing it showed them was that while they were trying to resolve it diplomatically .
 Soviet planners left a lasting impression on the Soviet planners who attended the Havana conference . This left them with lasting impressions on Soviet planners .
 The second issue was that Castro was too far from the Kremlin control . Castro was not in control of the Kremlin, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There was no real safeguard to prevent the Cuban leader from following his own course of action . Unlike other Soviet peripheries in Eastern and Central Europe, the distance between the two countries prevented any real safeguards .
 The warheads had no ""locks" to prevent Castro from seizing the launchers and firing the missiles . Castro had a larger military force on Cuba than did the Soviets .
 General Issa Aleksandrovich Pliyev to command all forces, both Soviet and Cuban, during the crisis raises several perplexing command and control questions . The selection raises several questions about the command of forces in the crisis .
 The most obvious question to those knowledgeable in military planning pertains to Pliyev's qualifications, or lack thereof . The question is whether he has any qualifications or lack of .
 The second interesting point to bring out centers around Pliyev's apparent lack of diplomatic ability, especially with high-level Cuban officials .
 For Castro, there seems to be no question that he understood the command and control structure as dictated by Moscow . Castro understood the structure of the Soviet Union, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He also claimed that any combined operational decisions would be made by the Soviet Union due to their experience in dealing with global matters .
 A strong, experienced, combined arms general would have almost assuredly kept Castro in line, but instead General Pliyev was the choice of Moscow . A strong and experienced combined arms chief would have been the choice .
 Pliyev was selected to lead the combined forces for several reasons that would later be considered questionable . He was chosen to lead a combined force for the first time in the history of Russia .
 Pliyev was selected because he was a highly decorated, and well known (even in the West) cavalry officer . Most importantly, he was chosen because of his decorated military career .
 The fact that he was widely recognized as being a combat-arms officer would, in the eyes of the Soviets, focus attention away from the possibility of nuclear forces being present . Pliyev's inexperience in this type of military operation was the direct result of his inexperience .
 He knew relatively little about ballistic missiles much less about air defense and concealment from aerial reconnaissance . He knew little about missile defense .
 His claim to fame revolved around his cavalry exploits in Mongolia from 1936-1938 and then in Manchuria where he led the last cavalry charge in history that crossed the Gobi Desert and the Greater Khingin Range . These credentials were hardly the leadership skills necessary to lead the
 Pliyev would have benefited from surrounding himself by senior officers used to combined arms operations in Cuba, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 Pliyev certainly does not seem to be the type of military expert that would be selected to use technical as well as tactical skills to mesh together a combined forces group assigned the enormous task it was eventually given . Instead of a staff of all rocket forces officers who added to the inexperience
 General Issa Pliyev lacked another needed skill in dealing with the crisis diplomatic expertise . He lacked a diplomatic skill needed to deal with the situation in Syria .
 Pliyev lacked the type of personality necessary in working within diplomatic parameters, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says he lacks experience and lacks the personality necessary for diplomatic success .
 Castro was known to Moscow as being somewhat strong-willed and adamant in his nationalistic aims . Castro needed to be held in check and controlled during this diplomatically volatile situation, he says . Castro, who was known as being known for being adamant in nationalistic .
 As a result of Pliyev's command assignment, the Soviet Union found themselves in a situation that was militarily weak as well as diplomatically fragile . The Soviet Union was in a position that was military and diplomatically weak .
 Mark Kramer sees Gribkov's account as nothing more than a way for an overzealous conference participant to grab some publicity . Kramer: "Gribkov is a little bit of a victim of a bad publicity grab-and-grab"
 Other scholars like James Blight and Robert McNamara were eager to take Gribkov's testimony at face value . Other scholars of the Soviet-era Soviet Union was eager to believe Gribkkov's story .
 Khrushchev and his colleagues agreed on measures to reduce the risk that conflict over Cuba might lead to general war, Gribkov writes .
 Moscow time reached us in Havana some thirty minutes before the U.S. President began his broadcast . Moscow time was Moscow time that reached Havana some 30 minutes before his broadcast.
 The message contained both a call to arms and a prohibition on the use of atomic arms . Addressed to Trostnik Comrade Pavlov (code for Soviet headquarters on Cuba), signed by Defense Minister Rodian Y Malinovsky as Director .
 If planners and strategists can misunderstand the orders in a combined arms operation, commanders can also be expected to perceive confusion by these incomplete and ambiguous orders .
 If there was this distinction made between tactical and strategic control, who is to say that tactical usage at the local level would not have precipitated a large-scale nuclear escalation? Also, who would say that such use would have occurred at local level?
 The best example of confused command and control during the missile crisis can be seen in the shooting down of an American U2 spy plane over Cuban territory .
 This act was the turning point of the crisis in Cuba, writes David Frum . It succeeded in showing both super-power leaders that the situation in Cuba had almost reached the point of no return .
 The control issue was key in avoiding nuclear confrontation . It also proved to both sides that the control issue is key to avoiding nuclear conflict .
 Speculation runs the spectrum from it being a purely Soviet initiated action to suggestion that Castro himself pulled the trigger . Speculation is rife on whether the shooting was Soviet initiated .
 The Havana conference shed much light on the subject when it was discovered that once Castro had ordered his own air defense batteries into action, the Soviet commanders too upped their readiness . Castro's air defense was the subject of the Havana conference .
 Soviet commanders then apparently interpreted self defense orders and decided that U.S. reconnaissance aircraft were posing a threat to their safety . Still, neither the Russians nor the Cubans seem to confirm the details .
 Khrushchev said Castro was behind the decision to shoot at the aircraft, further solidifying his distrust of the Cuban leader . Regardless of the truth, from the point of view of the . point of . view, the truth is that Castro was . behind the shooting of the aircraft .
 In his memoirs, Khrushchev stated that it was Castro, and not Moscow, that authorized the firing . This account is now widely disputed by both the Cuban and Soviet camps . The fact that this account was true shows that he understood the C2 question was very volatile and quickly
 The U2 incident had an unnerving effect on Khrushchev during the waning hours of the conflict . The incident occurred during the late 1960s .
 Kennedy better understood the command and control problems on Cuba, he may have elected to change to a different policy . Kennedy may have changed his policy on Cuba .
 Staff recommended taking out some of the surface-to-air missile sites to protect future U.S. pilots . This policy was preempted by the resolution to the conflict .
 Khrushchev was clearly skeptical about letting this most dangerous situation further escalate . He was skeptical of letting the situation further escalator further .
 Castro pointed out that he always understood the command and control question to be very straightforward . Castro: "Command and control is very straightforward. It's a very simple question"
 To Castro, his soldiers were to fall under the command of Cuban commanders, and Soviet soldiers under their leadership . Castro's soldiers would be under Cuban commanders and under Soviet leadership .
 He also claimed that any combined operational decisions would be made by the Soviet Union due to their experience in global matters .
 Castro said in 1992: "We were very confident in the experience of the Soviet Union. As Castro said, ""We are very confident"
 We had practically just won against the Batista army it was just two years after the end of our war . We were in the midst of a war that had practically won against Batista .
 The Soviets, on the other hand, had decades of experience in diplomatic, international, and military matters . The Soviets had the most experience in diplomacy and international matters .
 It appears that the Soviet leader was willing to do anything, including negotiating an end to the crisis without the participation of Cuba, to quickly bring to a halt the spiralling turn of events .
 Had Kennedy realized Soviet control of the situation was as tenuous as it actually was, he may not have pushed as hard as he did for the humiliating terms of the resolution .
 The mis-diagnosis of the C2 situation turned out to work to the U.S.'s favor in light of the fact that Khrushchev was prepared to do anything in his power to prevent being pushed into an all out nuclear confrontation, a no win confrontation .
 The most important question about the crisis, that of how close the world was to all-out nuclear war, continues to be debated . Now, those studying the crisis have access to much more information than ever before .
 New information from the Russian side shows that mistakes in information analysis on the part of the Americans during the crisis could have very easily changed the eventual outcome . This new information, especially from Russia, shows that .
 During the Havana conference, General Gribkov brought into question the absolute control over the nuclear warheads . The talks were held in Havana, Cuba .
 I did not believe that either Khrushchev or Kennedy, looking foursquare at the prospect of nuclear confrontation, would plunge the world into Armageddon . I didn't believe Khrushvic or Kennedy would plunge world into nuclear confrontation .
 The Soviets were right in contending that there were other alternatives in resolving the dispute . The U.S. should have learned from the opportunity for confrontation, the author says .
 As Nikita Khrushchev said when he later talked of how he wanted to end the conflict, "Our preference was for talks around a table and for all countries to remove their troops"
 Historian Raymond Garthoff best sums up the crisis saying, "The most important lesson of the Cuban missile episode is that many elements of the superpower crises are likely to go beyond the control of parties"
 Khrushchev thought they were more justified because Cuba was much more at risk from a United States invasion than Western Europe was from a U.S. invasion . In fact, the Cuban invasion was more likely than a Western invasion of Western Europe .
 As Khrushchev said on 12 December 1962, "Cuba needed weapons as a means of containing the aggressors, and not as a . means of attack" The Cuban government was defeated by the Soviet Union .
 Robert McNamara best explains the complexity of superpower crises by stating, ""I don't think the Cuban missile crisis was unique," he said .
 No doubt the debate will continue over how close the world really was to total devastation . The debate will likely continue over the impact of the earthquake .
 The lessons learned, and still being learned, will go a long way in preventing future nuclear hostilities . Hopefully, the lessons learned will help prevent future nuclear war .
 His father, a career army officer, was reassigned numerous times throughout the U.S. and the world . He is the son of a former Army officer who served in Afghanistan .
 Following graduation, he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the United States Army . He was assigned to Fort Benning, Georgia .
 After attending Ranger training, Errickson's assignments included tours to Washington, Korea, Hawaii, Florida, and California .
 Jon Errickson was sent to the Defense Language Institute to complete Russian language training . After commanding a company and achieving the rank of captain, he was sent abroad to complete language training.