 In any case it was a U.S. funded and orchestrated violent overthrow of a democratically elected president in 2014 .
 If it looks like a war, smells like war and kills, it’s probably a war . War in Ukraine started in 2014 even if western mainstream media does not wish to report it to conceal its own complicity in it .
 The armed conflict in Ukraine really began in February 2014 with an American orchestrated coup that resulted in the killing of more than 13,000 innocent people in the Donbass region of Ukraine by the Ukrainian military supplemented by neo-Nazi forces .
 So-called ‘Peaceful Ukraine’ was anything but peaceful in that region . The citizenry did not accept the American appointed presidents following the American orchestrated coup overthrowing former President Viktor Yanukovych .
 There are two exceptions to the right of individual or collective self-defence under Article 51 and the collective enforcement by the Security Council on the basis of Chapter VII of the Charter which deals with threats to the peace and breaches of the peace .
 The inherent right of self-defence exists so long as the Security Council has not taken measures to “maintain international peace and security,” and thus President Putin’s armed intervention in Ukraine is protected by international law . The right to self defence in Ukraine exists so
 Western nations should place a moratorium on weapons to Ukraine to provide a face-saving reason for President Zelensky and Biden to begin to negotiate with President Putin . NATO should back off Russian borders to pre-1991 positions, says Julian Zelenski . NATO must back off Russia borders to
 All sanctions should be dropped against Russia as a Confidence Building Measure to help return friendly relations between nations, as stated in the original UN Charter . Likewise, all sanctions should also be dropped as a confidence building measure .
 This is the second illegal war in which Joseph Biden played a key role in igniting, with the first being the Iraq War . This — not incidentally — is not incidentally, this is the first illegal war . Biden was key to igniting the first war, starting in 2003 .
 This case is substantially different because of the threat of nuclear war and potential containment breeches in the 30+ U.S. BSL-3/4 laboratories located in Ukraine . This is not the case of a nuclear war, but a potential containment breach .
 Since 2015 the number of Angels has increased hugely and in the four days before President Putin’s humanitarian intervention, even more. Since 2015, the number has increased significantly .
 Not if you didn’t want to accept the overthrow of the democratically elected president and subsequent U.S. nominated puppet presidents . The United States funded overthrow of President Obama and subsequent . United States nominated .
 The US/Ukrainian government then silently launched a war against them characterized by indiscriminate bombings . U.S. and Ukraine have been fighting each other for years .
 For the victims and surviving family members of that war, it’s been a long horror filled road since 2014 . For the surviving family, it has been a difficult year for them .
 Did You, Mr President play a key role in starting the Iraq War?............:ee 45 2.2.45 2.45. 45.45 .
 Given the following information, does your role in the attack on Iraq potentially implicate You, Mr President as a war criminal, or at minimum culpable? Mr President has been accused of war crimes .
 Cesscececsssseeeessteeeeeeenaes 46 7. 7. What year did that relationship begin? What year it began?
 Did any U.S. government funded or affiliated organization including NED and USAID give any form of material or logistic support including money, to the November 2013 “wave of large-scale protests” called “Euromaidan,” by some and
 Is interfering in the domestic affairs of a foreign nation a violation of international law as enshrined in the UN Charter? The U.S. should intervene in its own country's domestic affairs, the author asks .
 Did conditions of the EU loan former President Viktor Yanukovych refused to accept contain “austerity” measures that would have been extremely unpopular with the people of Ukraine?
 Have You, Mr President, or any of your family members or close friends attempted to undermine Russia’s energy exports in any other Way? .......c0000e 48 14.c0000E 48 14 .
 Would completion of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline project compete with American fracking oil exports and benefit Russian-EU relations?...........c.c.cccccccceeee 48 15.
 Do You, Mr President or . either Hunter or James Biden have business Cealing with JP MOrgan?...........ccccccsesssscececeeceeecessssseaeeeceeeesseeseaeaeeeeeescesseeeaeseeeesesseee
 Wills cosas, saec Aicesonceaeacn tsa vas tut auseecanna eto td tec cule aad ucaceian Satan sanetes eigen .
 Does the U.S. Department of State have undue influence within the government of Ukraine, while lacing the government N@O-NaZiS?............ssscececeeeeees 50 “News” reports about Russians attacking hospitals and SCHOOIS........
 Wal 2c ces. 55 21. 21. Ces. iis. iia earaaieceies det ats staltenwaueaee .
 When You, Mr President were sworn in to become the President of the United States, did you swear an oath to uphold the U.S. Constitution? 55 22.
 Did You, Mr President ever hear of First Amendment rights?................:006 55 23.23 .
 Wal"" savcescazcecesancdoassteecow tans exniduceceveasteieatacdcupaeents 68 24. 24.
 Reports suggest Putin was provoked into that humanitarian intervention at that time by a rapid escalation of killing of innocents in Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics by Ukrainian forces .
 The above report states that those murderous attacks upon the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics were called false flag incidents by U.S. and British officials . Such claims were not credible, according to the report .
 Was that claim another lie to cover Ukrainian intentional provocation designed to intentionally lure Russia into the humanitarian intervention it finally PUPSUEA?...........:ccccccCCcccccececsssessnsececeeeeeesssessaeseeeeeens 74 27.
 Robert Pope’s Admission of United States violation of BWC in Ukraine... cccssssssssteceeeeeees 84 28. United States WMD in Ukraine .......ccccceeseeeseeeeees . 84 .
 Did it ever occur to You, Mr President that provoking a war in a nation with 30+ U.S. biological “research” labs could lead to release of biological pathogens that could . lead to a pandemic far worse than COVID-19? Mr President .
 Are there ever or often leaks from those BSL-3 & 4 labs? ..... eee eeeecceceeseeeeees 90 Ms. 90 . Ms. Kelly asked if there were leaks from the labs?
 Wintrol’s published confession quoted above makes two of the top three U.S. officials admitting to and confirming Russian allegations about Ukraine having biological pathogens that could be WeaPONIZed . The confession is published in the Washington Post .
 Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaDpns cic s-ctcacettirccszeveceradascits sotrvcinatihaa tesaectxaduweteasbncrixa ten quik cos teieannes
 President Biden has called the Russian invasion “unprovoked,” but that is far from the truth . President Biden called it “an unprovoked invasion’s”
 In the four days leading up to the invasion, ceasefire monitors documented a dangerous increase in ceasefire violations . 5,667 violations and 4,093 explosions were recorded in Eastern Ukraine, monitors say .
 A biological research facility with Anthrax, plague, cholera, and other highly contagious pathogens is a clear and present danger to all around . Those pathogens could be used as weapons, say for example in a false flag operation, or accidentally leak out in a containment breech .
 An explanation must be offered for what was really going on in Ukrainian laboratories working with highly dangerous pathogens, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Ukrainian laboratories must offer an explanation .
 Alt-news review of the Ukraine War and Questions for President Biden . President Putin ordered his army into Ukraine February 24, 2022 . President Biden was shocked when Russia invaded Ukraine .
 President Biden had predicted he would, President Putin had said he would not, and consequently was very surprised and disappointed when President Putin did order an invasion of Ukraine . President Biden was very disappointed when Putin ordered an invasion .
 Putin's motivation to launch that invasion was not to be explained by mainstream media, CNN and NYT . That’s when | decided to study the situation a lot more closely than . previously had to figure out what was really going on there .
 There is a lot about the roots of the conflict in Ukraine, U.S. mainstream news conveniently “forgot’t to mention’ to mention . Very quickly | realized there was a lot of the . roots of Ukraine, American mainstream news "forgot to mention
 A great deal of relevant detail about President Putin’s motivation to launch that invasion . Likewise a great detail about the motivation behind that invasion. Likewise a good detail about Russia's motivation to invade .
 The U.S. funded and organized the overthrow of the legitimately and democratically elected president of Ukraine in 2014, and imposed a United States selected “president” Putin says . Then, he says, “I started to change my mind about President Putin”
 Videos of the devastation Kiev had caused in Donbass region of Ukraine starting in 2014, and a monument to the child victims of Kiev’s eight-year war (that could arguably be called a genocide according to the legal definition of that term) against that region .
 U.S. intentionally provoked President Putin with a massive eight year killing spree in Donbass that hugely accelerated in the days leading up to President Putin’s intervention . MSM “news” was and is instead only acting as a mouthpiece for United States government expansionism,
 President Biden and his son Hunter Biden were up to their eyeballs in corrupt business in Ukraine as well, including a huge expansion of biological “research” labs . In the simplest possible terms, it wasn’t President Putin that was crazy, it was and is the CIA
 In other words, American mainstream news not only doesn’t report most of the facts, but also tells a large number lies, again, and again . The American mainstream media doesn't report the facts but also lies about them, again and again, again .
 That is chronology of how this book came to be written, and the meaning of the title of this book . The title of the book is the name of a book written by the author of the same author .
 My full-time occupation is | edit mostly medical research articles for doctors and medical professors in some of the Asia’s top hospitals and medical universities .
 Check references, organization, the quality of their summaries of other research, the kinds of statistics they use, and how well they integrate their results within the larger body of medical research relating to their topic of study .
 In other words, | edit and assess the quality of research studies and how well they interpret the data . In other . words, assess and assess how well the data is interpreted .
 Alt-news has been, and continues to do vastly more authentic investigative journalism in regards to the causes of this war and probable outcomes .
 Number 1 alone shreds the entire UN Charter and all international laws . Number 1 above alone alone alone . The UN Charter is a violation of all international law .
 Number 1 above is the foundation reason why WWIII may start in the near future . Number 1 is the reason why it may be possible to begin WWIII . Number 2 is the main reason why World War III may start .
 Students of U.S. history will recognize Number 1 above as a natural extension of the American principle of “Manifest Destiny,” which is believed to be, by true American zealots, a divinely ordained right of the United States to rule other nations .
 That deluded belief is solid evidence of psychopathology on the part of U.S. leadership going back to 1845, says historian .
 Mark Twain and Henry David Thoreau didn’t like it, neither does this writer . Neither did or do the surviving victims of American foreign aggression in Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Latin America, most African nations, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Ukraine .
 The flow chart does not mention a lot too, for example United States biological research labs in Ukraine which were hugely expanded by President Biden’s son Hunter Biden . Some of those labs do contain bioweapons as admitted by Robert Pope, the director of the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program in
 Since then, various U.S. officials have stated they are now destroying those pathogens, in, one can presume an effort to hide the evidence . Since then the United States has stated it is now destroying the pathogens .
 All wars are crimes in this writer’s opinion, and in the case of the Ukraine War, the CIA guides U.S. foreign policies . Politicians that profit from war in the United States government are the perpetrators of the crimes against humanity, he says .
 War is, in my opinion, a pathological twist in human nature, as I consider human nature to be basically good . As mentioned above | approached this quagmire as | would any medical pathology, and war is, I think war is war . War is a pathology of human nature
 Putin has proven himself courageous enough to put his country’s future and his own life on the line to save and protect innocents in his neighboring state of Donbass . Putin has the added perk of helping defend his own nation from attack by the United States funded Ukraine military that is
 The psychological pathologies here in my opinion stem from Wall Street’s large corporations’ leadership, CIA headquarters in Langly Virginia, Washington DC . Mainstream Media sells all these wars to the tax paying voting public that only years later finds out all those wars were all based on
 Finland and Sweden which have been neutral countries, are deciding if they too want to throw their country’s future in with the United States as well . At the time of this writing, the U.S. is still deciding whether to throw its country in with its future in the
 There is little doubt all those who align with the United States will justifiably become targets for Russia’s thermonuclear arsenal . The United States certainly appears willing to start a war in order to hang on to its Narcissistic fantasy of being the sole global superpower for the
 The United States of course isn’t the first nation to think they can conquer the entire world, and all former nations that have attempted such sick endeavors failed in horrific ways .
 Russia’s leadership from the beginning of the last Cold War knew perfectly well this day would come, and have no doubt built underground cities to survive a thermonuclear war . Possibly unbeknownst to most readers most readers knew this would come .
 It is highly unlikely the U.S. or Western Europe is in any way prepared for the apocalypse they are about to bring down upon themselves . The United States and Western Europe are not likely to be prepared for this apocalypse .
 Tragically, given the mass and momentum of the U.S. push for launching WWIII to assert its “hegemony in perpetuity” by initiating and relentlessly escalating a war with Russia, it does not appear there is any way to prevent it .
 Don't especially like reading and researching medical pathologies . Likewise, | don’t especially like to read and research medical pathology .
 'Knowing my work can possibly help protect life and prevent some really bad things from happening to mostly good people does keep me motivated. On the other hand, | have always enjoyed investigative work," says author .
 There still is still time to back off this madness now, before it is too late . Time is running out very, very quickly. There still still is time to . Back off now .
 The situation in the current phase of the military conflict in Ukraine as portrayed by the majority of western mainstream media “news” appears quite simple . The “Situation” in Ukraine appears to be quite simple.
 That is the line relentlessly sold on MSM versions of news 24/7 around the world . The line is relentlessly sold by the media around the globe .
 A closer examination of the facts leading to this current escalated state of armed conflict in Ukraine reveals an altogether different set circumstance involving a degree of United States duplicitous treachery most people with a moral mind would find nearly impossible to believe .
 America’s Deadliest Export: Democracy is Democracy, and Killing Hope: United States Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II . Democracy is America's Deadliest export: Democracy . America's foreign policy is based on Machiavellian style friendships .
 This time the U.S. moved in as a friend to Ukraine, and then worked very hard to pick a fight between Ukraine and Russia . The United States is trying to pick up a fight launched by a coup against Ukraine's former president Viktor Yanukovych .
 "Go about murdering your brothers and sisters, nieces and nephews, sons and daughters that object to the activities of this ultimately horrid guest. Adding insult to injury those “guests” then go about murdering them,’s brother and sister . Adding insult
 To describe the role of the U.S. in the current escalated military violence in Ukraine as “duplicitous treachery” is not an overstatement at all, but rather the shortest, simplest and most accurate description possible .
 The U.S. has a great deal of experience at setting up these bloody and destructive “color revolutions,” which in all cases are profitable only to EuroAmerican “defense” industries . The United States then determines who will be the next leaders of those countries .
 Goodbye dad, welcome American puppet president, and increased “austerity” — which means poverty, degradation and brutal suppression of any dissent . Goodbye dad and welcome increased ‘austerity,” says the president .
 While dad is off in another country nursing his broken heart and wounds, the American puppet president is then free to play ‘foot-loose and fancy free” with the local citizenry, while murdering off any of them .
 Donbass region, Donetsk and Luhansk are where the violent military conflict really began back in 2014 . In the case of Ukraine, those objecting were and still are scattered around the country, but mainly concentrated in the Donbass .
 Russia attacked “peaceful Ukraine” is as far from the truth as “far from the . truth” can possibly be because thirteen thousand men, women and children is a lot of people to kill . Russia attacked Ukraine’s ‘peaceful’ Ukraine
 Many children in Donbass, Donetsk and Luhansk towns especially grew up entirely living in underground bomb shelters . Nobody knew when or where the next missiles and bombs would hit . Many are children in Donetsk and Donetsk towns especially .
 They were the ‘lucky ones as they survived though many or most are refugees now . Many or most of the refugees now are refugees . They are the "lucky" ones .
 The U.S. went about vastly expanding its biological “research” centers in Ukraine, some of which contained some of the world’s deadliest pathogens including Anthrax and plague . Also, during those eight horrifically long and bloody years .
 U.S. biological research centers are located in Ukraine . Much of that work is so dangerous due to the possibility of leaks . The United States didn't want it done at home but rather some far away, "ally" country .
 Russia didn't want large quantities of the world’s deadliest pathogens right across its border in Ukraine especially given they can pass through any border undetected making them as or more dangerous as a nuclear bomb .
 There are “biological research facilities” in Ukraine and the United States “is concerned” Russian forces might seize them . The U.S. is concerned’s concerns that Russian forces may seize them, the State Department says .
 Nuland wasn’t the only U.S. official to admit the United States had, and probably still has, deadly, highly infectious pathogens that could be used as biological weapons . The U.N. State Department of State Department said the pathogens could be deadly, infectious
 The Bulletin’s Board of Sponsors was established in December 1948 by Albert Einstein . J Robert Oppenheimer was the first chair of the board . The Bulletin was established by Einstein in 1948 .
 Russian military claims to have identified 30 such facilities . Russian military says it has identified 30 facilities in its arsenal . The facilities are located in Russia .
 Hunter Biden helped secure millions of dollars in funding for U.S. contractors in Ukraine specializing in deadly pathogen research, his laptop emails revealed . Hunter Biden is the son of then vice president Biden .
 The United States and United States alone stonewalled inspection requirements for the Biological Weapons Convention . Also interesting is that it was the U.S. alone that stonewalling inspection requirements .
 Victoria Nuland, U.S. President Barack Obama’s central agent overseeing the coup, at least during the month of February 2014 when it climaxed, was crucial in overthrowing the existing Ukrainian Government, and installing its rabidly anti-Russian replacement .
 The 27 January 2014 phone conversation between her and America’s Ambassador in Ukraine, Jeffrey Pyatt was uploaded to YouTube on 4 February 2014 .
 Nuland famously said, on that call ‘Fuck the EU,” she instructed Pyatt to choose instead of the rabidly anti-Russian, and far-right, Arseniy Yatsenyuk . Nulands said she wanted a still democratic but less corrupt
 Both Ashton and Paet were shocked at this finding, but they proceeded immediately to ignore that matter, and to discuss only the prospects for Europe’s investors in Ukraine, to be able to get their money back . Their obsession was Ukraine”s corruption, and their obsession was
 EU was unhappy that this had been a coup, they were far more concerned to protect their investors . So, though they were unhappy that it had been an EU coup, the EU was more concerned about protecting their investors.
 Hillary Clinton’s chief person tasked to plan ‘popular movements’ to overthrow both Yanukovych in Ukraine, and Assad in Syria . Eric Schmidt of Google and Jared Cohen of Google, also now of Google but still continuing though unofficially as U.S Secretary of State Hillary
 Bubenchik claims that the Yanukovich regime started the fire in the Trade Union House . The fire prompted the Maidan’s next reaction, he says .
 CIA secretly trained in Poland the Right Sector founder/leader Dmitriy Yarosh . Yarosh headed Ukraine’s snipers . The CIA trained Yarosh in Poland shortly before the coup .
 Georgian snipers say Saakashvili hired them in Tbilisi for a U.S. backed operation . Two snipers say they were hired by the Georgian president to carry out the operation . The snipers say the operation was part of an anti-terror operation .
 They each got $1000 for the operation and flew to Kiev on 15 January and were promised $5000 on return . The operation was carried out in Kiev, Ukraine, and they were given $1000 each .
 Brian Christopher Boyenger is a former sniper for the 101st Airborne Division . After Maidan he went to Donbass to fight in the “Georgian Legion” Andriy “Parubiy came very often,” and “Brian always accompanied him�
 The snipers were told not to aim but just to kill people randomly, to create chaos . They were told to kill randomly and create chaos in order to make chaos . The snipers told not aim but to kill random people randomly .
 Some went down from the Ukraine Hotel to the second floor of the Conservatory Building, balcony, balcony . Some went to the Ukraine hotel and balcony .
 Gordon Hahn hasn’t been able to verify any firing in February 2014 by the Yanukovych government . Hahn has been unable to confirm any firing by the government .
 Even UK propaganda now commonly acknowledges that a more overtly fascist takeover of Ukraine’s Government is what mainly threatens the people of Ukraine . Even UK media now acknowledge that a fascist takeover is what main threatens the country .
 The anti-Russia nazis took over America’s Government, which has taken over Ukraine’�s. Government . U.S. President Barack Obama was elected to the White House in 2008, but not to the U.N. State Department .
 Roberta Flack: These are certainly “tryin’ times,” as noted by bluesy R&B singer Roberta .
 The reader is invited to read the rest of this document and appreciate the cleverness, deadliness and ultimate selfishness of U.S. foreign policy . Without being suckered into the grandiose overly simplistic illusions corporate owned mainstream “news” media has created to hood
 As a nation it deserves recognition by other states, self-determination and security including safe borders . It is a nation that needs recognition from other states . As a country it should be recognized as a nation, it must be recognized by other countries .
 The same is true for Russia, and based on its historical uniqueness and current political situation, Donbass as well, as well . Donbass has a unique history and unique political situation . The region is unique and unique in its own way .
 Searching for the titles of the funded projects listed in the last “intact” web capture yields no results . Search for titles of funded projects in last ‘intact' web capture yield no results.
 Current database search criteria have been restricted, previously funding from 2014 to present could be searched . Currently only 2017 to present is searchable per the drop-down menus .
 The questions that follow a document substantiate those beliefs and also prove motive, intent, methods, and opportunities for President Biden to essentially start another war , this time in Ukraine . The questions follow .
 European leaders are invited to consider the questions for President Biden listed on this document, the referenced evidence supporting those questions, and President Biden’s answers, should he have the courage to try to answer any of them .
 Lugansk and Donetsk were on the losing side of a civil war initiated by Kiev . Lugansk residents objected to an American backed coup against Ukraine’s former President Viktor Yanukovych .
 War is so profitable for the U.S. and western Europe’s ultra-rich corporate capitalists and politicians they can so easily afford to put in office . But, alas, this will probably never happen because war is profitable for corporate capitalists .
 U.S. and relevant international prosecutors should start the process to prosecute the real progenitors of this war . NATO, NATO, Former President Obama, President Biden, and other politicians that vote to prolong the war by adding fuel to the fire .
 Then Senator Biden’s key role in starting the Iraq War . Biden was chair of the Senate committee on foreign relations . He was a key member of the Foreign Relations Committee .
 The invasion of Iraq was neither in self-defense against armed attack nor sanctioned by UN Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force by member states, according to the International Commission of Jurists in Geneva .
 His role in bringing about that war remains mostly unknown or misunderstood by the public . Yet his role in that war is mostly unknown, misunderstood or misunderstood .
 Biden was chair of the Senate committee on foreign relations when the war was debated and authorized by the U.S. Congress in 2002 . Democrats controlled the Senate and Biden was chairman of the committee . Biden was in charge of the debate and authorized the war .
 The vast majority of Americans and people worldwide have no idea how much their news is illegally censored by the U.S. government, and downstream government funded related organizations . People worldwide are unaware of the extent of this censorship .
 NATO jets conducted 2,300 sorties, dropping 420,000 missiles and bombs, including cluster munitions and depleted uranium rounds, in 78 days . In 78 days, NATO jets carried out more than 2,000 sorties in Iraq .
 Hunter Biden’s Ukraine salary was cut two months after Joe Biden left office . The energy company that was paying him $1 million cut his monthly compensation in half .
 On might consider concealing or destroying evidence, a form of obstruction of justice . On might . consider this concealing . evidence, he said .
 US-NATO Installed a Neo-Nazi Government in Ukraine by Prof Michel Chossudovsky Global Research, March 23, 2022, First published Global Research 6 March 2014 at the very outset of the Ukraine crisis .
 What is a stake is a US-EU-NATO sponsored coup d’etat in blatant violation of international law . The coup d'etat is a U.S.-EU, NATO-EU and EU-NATo sponsored coup . What is at stake is
 The forbidden truth is that the West has engineered —-through a carefully staged covert operation— the formation of a proxy regime integrated by Neo-Nazis . The West has staged a carefully-staged covert operation, the author says .
 Journalists have been instructed not to use the term ‘Neo-Nazi’ to designate Svoboda and the Right Sector . Journalists have also been instructed to avoid using the term 'Neo Nazi' to refer to Svobododa .
 NeoNazi elements integrate the fringe of the coalition, formally led by the Fatherland party . We are not dealing with a transitional government in which NeoNazis elements integrate . The Fatherland Party is the main party in the government .
 He is referred to by the Western media as the “kommandant” of the EuroMaidan movement . The Western media refers to him as the leader of the movement .
 Dmytro Bulatov known for alleged kidnapping by police, but also with UNA-UNSO connections, appointed minister of youth and sports . Known for his alleged kidnapping, he was also known for his connections to UNA and UNSO .
 Neo-Nazis in Control of Armed Forces, National Security, Economy, Justice and Education, Global Research, March 02, 2014 / The Lustration Committee is to organize the Neo-Nazi witch-hunt against all opponents of the new neo-Nazi regime .
 The targets of the lustration campaign are people in positions of authority within the civil service, regional and municipal governments, education, research, etc. They include people in authority in government, education and research .
 It will in all likelihood be directed against Communists, Russians and members of the Jewish community . It will be all likely be directed towards Communists, Russian and Jewish .
 Neo-Nazis do not ultimately call the shots, but they don't ultimately call it all . Neo-Nazi sympathizers are not ultimately called the shots in the U.S.
 It would call on States to ensure that education systems develop the necessary content to provide accurate accounts of history, as well as promote tolerance .
 EU bans state-owned Russia Today and Sputnik, and their subsidiaries, from February 27 . European Union president Ursula von der Leyen tweeted that the outlets will no longer be able to spread lies to justify Putin’s war .
 Multiple tech platforms have complied with the E.U.’s media ban and deplatformed, demonetized, or blocked RT and Sputnik from their services . The ban has been imposed by the European Union and Russia .
 RT America, the U.S. cable branch of the Russia-owned news network, is effectively shutting down . CNN Business reported Thursday that RT America is effectively closing down .
 The CIA and the media are part of the same criminal conspiracy, wrote Douglas Valentine in his important book, The CIA As Organized Crime . Opening the CIA’s Can of Worms by Edward Curtin, Global Research .
 The corporate mainstream media are stenographers for the national security state’s ongoing psychological operations aimed at the American people . They have done the same for an international audience, as well as the U.S.
 It is shocking only to those who don’t do their homework and see what is happening today outside a broad historical context, says CNN.com .
 The elite corporate media are now leading the charge for increased censorship and the denial of free speech to those they deem dangerous . It therefore should come as no surprise that the same elite media is now leading a charge for censorship and censorship .
 Media giants have already banned critics from writing in their pages and or talking on their screens . Media giants want to make the quieting of dissenting voices complete .
 It is a perfect piece of propaganda posing as reporting, since it accuses Kennedy, a brilliant and honorable man, of falsity and stupidity . It is an inducement to further censorship of Mr Kennedy by Facebook that owns Instagram, which owns Instagram .
 What was once done under the cover of omission is now done openly and brazenly, cheered on by those who, in an act of bad faith, claim to be upholders of the First Amendment and the importance of free debate .
 Since the digitization of news, their new business models are geared to these separate audiences since they are highly lucrative choices . Since the digital age of media, their business models have been geared towards these audiences .
 Its business driven since electronic media have replaced paper as advertising revenues have shifted . People’s ability to focus on complicated issues has diminished drastically .
 Greenwald and Taibbi and Chris Hedges have taken their work to the internet to escape such restrictive categories and the accompanying censorship . Old school journalism is suffering as aresult and thus writers such as Greenwald have moved to internet .
 The censorship is not being driven by power hungry reporters at the Times or CNN or any media outlet, it's not just power hungry journalists . CNN and the Times are not the only media outlets to be censured for censuring .
 All these media and their employees are but the outer layer of the onion, the author says . Media is the means by which messages are sent and people controlled, he says .
 If they do not play their part in this twisted and intricate propaganda game, they will suffer . If they don't play their role, they'll suffer, says the BBC . "They will suffer," says BBC presenter David Cameron .
 Those who dare peel the onion to its core will be eliminated . The onion will be removed from the U.S. government .
 These companies are deeply connected to U.S. intelligence agencies, as are the NYTimes, CNN, NBC, etc. etc. The NY Times, CNN and NBC have been deeply involved in intelligence operations .
 Operation Mockingbird, the CIA’s program to control, use, and infiltrate the media, was once called Operation Mockedbird . The CIA's program is part of what is now known as Operation Mockockbird .
 Google and other search engines have silenced virtually all facts and opinions contrary to the U.S. government narrative regarding the 2014 American backed coup in Ukraine, and February 2022 acceleration of the Ukraine War . In addition to Google, other search sites have silenced almost all facts contrary to United States government
 Ukraine War and body count escalates daily . U.S. and EU continues to agitate and advocates sending more and more weapons of mass destruction to Ukraine .
 Even the ordinarily very diplomatic UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres has warned this conflict can end in nuclear war . Even the normally diplomatic U.N. Secretary General has warned that this conflict could end in nuke war .
 In the United States, “The Great War” led to unprecedented efforts by the federal government to control and restrict “unpatriotic’s speech . In the U.S. ‘The Great World War’ was the result of unprecedented efforts to control
 The boundary between speech that undermined the government and legitimate criticism was often unclear . But the boundaries between speech undermining the government were often unclear.
 This law, which is still largely in effect, makes it a crime to do three things . This law also makes it illegal to commit three things, including committing suicide .
 First, convey false information in order to interfere with the American military, or promote the success of America’s enemies . First, communicate false information to interfere in the U.S. military or promote success of the enemies, he says .
 Phil Donahue was fired from his prime-time MSNBC talk show during the run-up to the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003 . The legendary television host was fired by the liberal network .
 The United States occupation there now is illegal as the Iraqi government has asked them to leave, but they won’t . The U.S. occupation there is illegal .
 No weapons of mass destruction were found, and the whole thing casually dismissed as a mistake . The whole thing was casually dismissed by the U.S. government .
 Phil Donahue was never “rehabilitated” for disagreeing with the U.S. government’s decision to start the Iraq war in Iraq . Phil was never rehabilitated from the Iraq War War .
 William Blum, Killing Hope, United States Military and CIA Interventions since World War II, 15, 15 . American censorship has gotten much more extreme than when Bill Blum wrote the above referenced book . Blum's book Killing Hope: The United States has been involved in World War
 UK govt claimed that RT has propagated pro-Kremlin narratives around invasion of Ukraine, including neo-Nazis and that Ukrainian soldiers have committed war crimes, according to UK Foreign Ministry .
 On Thursday, 14 people and entities were sanctioned, including a senior Russian military planner . Sergey Brilev, a well-known Russian TV anchor, was sanctioned .
 Censorship is not helping, and probably the primary reason those scoundrels keep getting reelected . The censors are not helping. It's not helping .
 RT was banned in Ukraine in 2014 after Russia's annexation of Crimea; Latvia and Lithuania implemented similar bans in 2020 . RT was also banned in Latvia, Lithuania and Latvia .
 African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights e Declaration of principles on freedom of expression in Africa . Amsterdam Recommendations. e Amsterdam Recommendation. e Declaration on principles of freedom of . expression .
 Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe e Bishkek Declaration . Organization for . Security and . Co.O.E. e BISHkek declaration . Declaration. Organization for security and Co.operation in . Europe .
 Kiev government has amassed up to 125,000 troops along the contact line with the Donbass republics . By December 2021, the Kiev government had amassed 125,00 troops . The Kiev government is expected to have up to 250,000 soldiers along the border .
 OSCE reported more frequent use of heavy weapons, prohibited under the Minsk Agreements, by the Ukrainian Armed Forces against the breakaway regions . At the same time, OSCE also reported increased use of weapons banned under the agreement . OSCE said heavy weapons were used against breakaway
 Western smoke-and-mirrors media campaign speculating about Russia's ‘imminent invasion’ began in spring 2021, according to the investigative journalist . Western smoke and mirrors media campaign began in 2021, he says .
 Published satellite images show Russian army on bases over a day's travel away . Satellite images of Russian army positions show the Russian army in the region . The Russian army is believed to be at least a day away from its bases .
 The Western mainstream media have kept silence for years about the Donetsk and Lugansk Republics by the Ukrainian government forces and neo-Nazi battalions . Censored War in Donbass starting in 2014 .
 Only a limited number of independent American and European journalists and freelance photographers have been working in the Donbass region .
 Donetsk and LPR leaders launch evacuation of children and elderly people to Russia . Over the past several weeks the Ukrainian military had intensified bombardment of Donbass region .
 ‘Ukrainian spec ops groups have been targeting evacuees leaving to Russia with mines and shells,’ says Eliason .
 The United States openly dismissed Russia's warnings about the ongoing genocide of Russian-speakers and crimes against humanity in Eastern Ukraine . The U.S. openly dismissed the warnings .
 Olaf Scholz claimed at the annual Munich Security Conference that it is ""really ridiculous"" to say that ""there is something like genocide"" in Donbass . For his part, the German Chancellor said that it was "really ridiculous"
 Coming this from the German chancellor is ""scandalous but expected,"" says Eliason . Eliason says the chancellor is expected to make a public apology .
 By turning a blind eye to crimes committed by Ukrainian military and neo-Nazi militias in Eastern Ukraine, the Scholz-led coalition is indirectly supporting "second generation 1930s-40s political Nazi thought" in Ukraine, according to the investigative journalist .
 Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov stated that Russia started a military operation to protect Donbass in order to clear the country of Nazis . Peskov said Russia started the operation to clear Donbass from Nazis . Russia has been conducting an operation in Donbass to protect the region .
 In the wake of the 2014 Maidan coup, anumber of corporate media sources questioned the role of Ukraine neo-Nazi groups in the nation's political life . But very then it was largely scratched from the Western mainstream narrative .
 The Azov Battalion, an official component of Kiev’s armed forces, has a pro-Nazi ideology . The professor continued that the mainstream media has overlooked the fact that the Azov battalion is an official part of Kiev's armed forces . Professor continued that mainstream media have overlooked the
 The rehabilitation of neo-Nazism in Ukraine has been tolerated by successive U.S. administrations since the time of the 2005 ""Orange Revolution"" and continued to thrive, according to Cohen .
 The administration of Joseph Biden, who used to be Obama’s appointee in Ukraine, went even further by providing tonnes of weapons and training to the Ukrainian military as the latter concentrated along the line of contact .
 On 16 December 2021, the UN General Assembly discussed a resolution that called for combating the glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices fuelling racism and xenophobia . The resolution was discussed by the UN in December 2021 .
 Eastern Europe became communist because Hitler, with the approval of the West, used it as a highway to reach the Soviet Union to wipe out Bolshevism once and for all . The Russians in World Wars | and II lost about 40 million people because the West had twice invaded Russia .
 It should not be surprising that after World War II the Soviets were determined to close down the highway . The highway was closed by the Soviets after the war .
 In the case of Ukraine mainstream news has “left out’s important facts like how the United States overthrew the government, the war really started in 2014 as the result of that . The United States has loaded it with Nazis, and weapons of mass destruction up to and including
 Russia’s need to de-Nazify and de-militarize Ukraine is essential for understanding the basis for understanding Russia's need for Ukraine to be de-naked . Russia is trying to "de-Nazified" Ukraine, but not "militarily"
 In a break with the past, United States is using intel to fight an info war with Russia, even when the intel isn't rock solid . “It doesn’t have to be solid intelligence,” one U.S. official said .
 U.S. officials say indications suggest Russia might be preparing to use chemical agents in Ukraine . United States officials said they had indications suggesting Russia might use such agents . Russia has been accused of using chemical agents against Ukraine .
 Three U.S. officials tell NBC News there is no evidence Russia has brought any chemical weapons near Ukraine . But three United States officials told NBC News this week that no evidence has been found of chemical weapons .
 The Biden administration put that out as a warning to China not to do so, they said . Biden administration officials say the Biden administration was putting that out .
 The Biden administration ushered in 'a new era of info ops' with intelligence releases designed not to tell the truth but to influence Putin's decisions . Professional war slut Max Boot said via The Council on Foreign Relations think tank in February that the Biden administration had ushered in a "new era of
 Former MI6 chief John Sawers told The Atlantic Council think tank in February that the Biden administration's ""intelligence"" releases were designed to manipulate rather than to inform .
 One of the article's authors is Ken Dilanian, who in 2014 was revealed to have worked as a literal CIA asset while writing for The LA Times .
 If you see Dilanian's name in a byline, you may be certain that you are reading exactly what the managers of the U.S. empire want you to read . Dilanian: "I'm sure that you're not reading what you're reading"
 The only plausible reason | I can think of that they would want the public to know about it is that they are confident the public will consent to being lied to . And the only reason | can’t think | can think that they . would want to . know about . it
 Moskalkova says she personally spoke with several refugees, all of whom claimed they specifically wanted to seek refuge in Russia . She says she spoke with refugees who said they wanted to take refuge in the Russian capital .
 The ombudswoman claims all refugees are being provided with the necessary food, clothes and medication . She says refugees are also provided with medication and clothing .
 Officials from The Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions should visit temporary accommodation points in Russia to confirm the wellbeing of asylum seekers .
 Acting head of U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees in Russia visited temporary accommodation center in Rostov region . Karim Atassi gave a positive assessment of Russia’s efforts in aiding refugees .
 Ukrainian human rights commissioner Lyudmila Denisova has been calling on international organizations such as the U.N. International Children's Emergency Fund to intervene in what she claims to be the forceful abduction of children from Ukraine .
 Denisova claims that over 121,000 children, including orphans and children with parents, have been forcefully sent to Russia . Denisova says the Kremlin is planning to simplify adoption procedures for these kids .
 UNICEF provided some alarming numbers on the number of children affected by the military conflict . The children affected include children who have been killed and injured in the conflict .
 Half of the 3 million children that remain in Ukraine "may be at risk of not having enough food," group says . Those in besieged cities like Mariupol face the most dire situation, group warns .
 UNICEF has previously claimed that over 4. million people have fled Ukraine since the start of the military conflict . 7. million are now internally displaced, according to the agency . Over 4 million people are believed to have fled the country since the conflict began .
 One NED-sponsored journalist even fights with the neo-Nazi Azov Battalion and openly advocates for the commission of war crimes . NED Finances Key Ukrainian Propaganda Organ, the Kyiv Independent, April 13, 2022 .
 Kyiv Independent has been one of the most prolific voices in Ukraine's civil war . Throughout this war, the Kyiv independent has been a voice of voice in Ukraine .
 Despite never offering even a scrap of evidence, it exploded from a few thousand followers before the war to several million now . Millions more follow its individual reporters .
 It is routinely promoted by some of the biggest names in media, such as CNN and Fox News .
 No evidence was given that the strikes were Russian and the Red Cross did not comment on it . The warehouse was abandoned for more than two weeks by that time and all aid was distributed .
 The only source for the claim that the attacks were Russian is the Azov Battalion, putting the credibility of the statement into serious doubt . The Azov battalion is one of the only sources for the statement .
 This means that all you will see is dead Russians, burning Russian tanks and the wreckage of Russian aircraft . This is not the first time you have seen dead Russians in Russia since the fall of communism .
 Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Victoria Nuland admitted to U.S. research on deadly pathogens in Ukraine . U.N. research also found to be conducted in Ukraine by the United States in Ukraine, Ukraine .
 Russian Ministry of Defence presented new evidence that Ukraine was involved in bioweapons research . Hunter Biden’s son, Hunter, funded the Pentagon’�s military biological programme in Ukraine via the investment fund Rosemont Seneca .
 Karen Kwiatkowski is a former analyst for the U.S. Department of Defence . She says she is disappointed at the lack of support for the military in the world .
 Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Victoria Nuland told U.S. senators that ""bioresearch facilities"" in Ukraine actually exist . However, a 2010 BioPrepWatch article preserved in web archives said that America had maintained bioresearch cooperation with Kiev since 2005 .
 At least 31 laboratories across 14 settlements are suspected of being involved in US-funded military biological activities . The laboratories are suspected to be involved in the US military's biological weapons program .
 Metabiota and Black & Veatch are known as major supplies of equipment for Pentagon biolaboratories around the world .
 Ties shown to Lugar Center in Georgia, Ukrainian Ministry of Health and associated centers and institutes, and the Ukrainian Defence Ministry's epidemiological departments . Ties also shown to the Lugar center in Georgia and associated institutes .
 Major mainstream sources are likely to suppress the story as major U.S. defence contractors are heavily investing in American mainstream media . According to Kwiatkowski, major mainstream sources .
 The former Pentagon analyst notes that 90% of U.S. mainstream media personalities, reporters, and publishers are politically Democrats . That makes it almost impossible that they would attack the Democratic administration and key politicians .
 He recalled that he was the first one to blow the whistle that the anthrax attacks of October 2001 came out of the U.S. Biological Warfare Weapons Lab and programme . He said he blew the whistle when anthrax was discovered .
 Russian forces discovered US-operated biolabs in Ukraine carrying out dangerous pathogen research . Biolabs were found to be operating under the guise of US agents .
 Washington initially tried to deny their existence, but later confirmed it, but claimed the labs’ activities were unremarkable .
 Russian Ministry of Defense reveals new documents seized by Russian forces in eastern Ukraine . They include correspondences between Hunter Biden and figures involved in biological research in Ukraine . Hunter Biden's investment firm of his helped to bankroll the research, which he helped to fund .
 Documents revealed an intent to create a ""Central Depository of Especially Dangerous Microorganisms in Kiev,"" according to Russian MoD spokesperson Maj. Maj. Vladimir Putin . The documents reveal an intent for a central repository of especially dangerous microorganisms .
 Igor Konashenkov, as well as ways to distribute biological agents via drone, has been working on the project . He says he hopes to use drones to carry out biological agents in the future .
 A Robert Pope Pope was deputy director of operations, readiness and exercises at the DTRA from 2017 until 2020 . Pope: "The DTRA is a great place to learn and learn from the U.S. military."
 He previously held various positions at United States Air Force European Command, United States Central Command and the Pentagon .
 Pope and Ukraine’s acting health minister exchanged emails between 2016 and 2019 . Ulana Suprun went to Ukraine to participate in the US-backed coup in 2014 . Suprun is an American-born Ulana who went to the country to participate .
 B Rhys M Williams Williams took over for Pope as acting DTRA director in 2020 . Williams was previously the agency’s director of development, test and evaluation .
 He led the Department of Defense’s program to develop capabilities to detect, locate and neutralize foreign WMD and IEDs .
 Williams also served as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Nonproliferation at the National Nuclear Security Administration of the United States Department of Energy .
 Joanna Wintrol headed DTRA projects in Ukraine until 2021 at the United States Embassy in Kiev’s Defense Threat Reduction Office . Joanna heads DTRA Projects in Ukraine .
 Previously released documents showed she also oversaw Project P-782, conducting research into the transmission of diseases through bats .
 CSE was formerly known as Chemical Weapons Elimination program and the Chemical Weapons Destruction program . CSE is now known as the CSE, which is known as CSE .
 Black&Veatch Special Projects Corp. is a multi-national company that focuses on special projects in the U.S.
 He has been with the company since 1978 and was formerly its Chief Operating Officer . He has worked for the firm since 1978 .
 Black & Veatch was long known to be working on Pentagon projects in Ukraine . Documents seized by Russian forces earlier this month revealed the firm’s job in overseeing biological programs there .
 E Lance Lippencott has been the project manager in Ukraine for Black & Veatch since 2011 . He has also been the biological project coordinator in Ukraine . He says Ukraine is the best country in the world to live in .
 In August 2021, he told the Kansas City Business Journal that his work on airborne biological agents in Ukraine had helped Black & Veatch to develop a device for purifying air of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles .
 Lippencott is a graduate of the United States Army Military Academy at West Point . He graduated from West Point in 2007 .
 Another document from Lippencott to the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense concerns the extension of the UP-8 project mentioned above . Another document to be sent to the Ukraine's defense ministry also mentions the extension .
 In Ukraine, Guttieri was the integrator of research projects for the U.S. biology program . He supervised the execution of biological projects related to the research of animals as vectors of disease . In Ukraine he worked for the United States biology program in Ukraine .
 She specializes in epidemiology and pandemics and has a PhD in Public Health . She has a Facebook page dedicated to her work on epidemiology .
 Russian MoD: There was no information in the documents about her supervising any specific biological programs in Ukraine . However, according to the documents, she was not in charge of biological programs .
 I Scott Thornton Thornton Thorton was Metabiota’s senior microbiologist and laboratory start-up coordinator between 2006 and 2016 . Scott Thornton is the author of a new book, The Science of the Microbiological World .
 He previously spent 20 years in the U.S. Navy, where he worked as a research microbiologist and head of the Navy’s Threat Assessment Department .
 The pathogens in Ukrainian labs vary by facility, Pope says . Some can be characterized as presenting a concern in the Ukrainian environment, he says .
 Herein lies the grand deception, another duplicitous treachery of the Euro-American empire, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It cleaned house and disavowed biological and chemical weapon research . The U.S. has disavowed research into biological, chemical weapons research .
 The United States swooped in and collected those biological and chemical weapons . The U.S. continued that research right on Russia’s doorstep .
 There are no bioweapons in Ukraine, while at the same U.S. officials have admitted there are, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter is confident taxpayers and voters along with the rest of the international community will swallow the lie . The truth is that there are no
 Victim nations of the U.S. drive for hegemony in perpetuity (including those afflicted by smear campaigns like the “China Virus” and deadly pathogens) should have a voice, and not be censored by the United States .
 International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh, PAHO.org 29 . Bardhan, ICTR, is a member member of the Bangladesh diarrhoital disease research team .
 "This confirms that United States funded and operated BSL in Ukraine did indeed have what could be and naturally would be viewed by a U.S. target nation as biological weapons" "This proves by confession, United States denials of having those weapons are categorically false"
 Wintrol’s published confession makes two of the top three U.S. officials admitting to and confirming Russian allegations about Ukraine having biological pathogens that could be weaponized . The confession is published in the Washington Post .
 Russian Ministry of Defense: Biological laboratories in Ukraine destroyed dangerous pathogens . Russian Ministry: On February 24, employees of biological laboratories destroyed especially dangerous pathogens in Ukraine .
 Among them were the causative agents of plague, anthrax, tularemia, cholera, and other deadly diseases . Among them are the agents of anthrax and plague, among others .
 An agreement on joint biological activities was concluded between the Pentagon and the Ministry of Health of Ukraine . By the way, an agreement has been concluded .
 The real recipient of the funds was the laboratories of the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense . The funds were intended to be used to develop weapons for Ukraine's military .
 It’s too bad it required a military intervention by Russia for U.S. security officials to destroy those deadly pathogens as it should have done decades ago, if indeed they did, as transporting them another location outside Ukraine would be all too easy .
 DTRA allocated $80 million for biological research in Ukraine as of July 30, 2020, according to the U.S. Federal Contractor Registration .
 U.S. company Black & Veatch Special Projects Corp. was tasked with the project . United States company Black and Veatch special projects were tasked with developing the program .
 There are issues involving destroying evidence, witness tampering, obstructing justice and so on . There are also issues involving destroy evidence, evidence tampering and witness tampering .
 Thousands of American soldiers and civil servants have lost their lives in the War on Terror . Thousands of Americans have been killed in the war on terror .
 Innocent citizens of many nations, including Americans killed on 9/11, have also paid the ultimate price . Innocent citizens have also died in the U.S. have also been killed in the terrorist attacks .
 CIA Handouts That Rocked the World sets the record straight by laying the blame on high-ranking U.S. government officials .
 During the 1980s, the CIA recruited and trained Muslim operatives to fight the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . Muslim operatives were trained to fight Soviet invasion .
 The CIA would move operatives from Afghanistan to the Balkans, and then to Iraq, Libya, and Syria, traveling on illegal U.S. visas . Later, those operatives would move from the Balkans to the Middle East, Libya and Syria .
 Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s very open public support for the internationally recognized LTTE terrorist group in Sri Lanka . Author visited a United States designed Talban training madrassa near Islamabad accompanied by Pakistani military in November 1993 .
 Section 1. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of . America in Congress assembled, Section 1 .
 White supremacists and other far-right-wing extremists are the most significant domestic terrorism threat facing the U.S. White supremacists are the biggest domestic terror threat, the author says .
 U.S. and EU governments have been routinely funding neo-Nazi groups in Ukraine for years . However, providing funding and or weapons to the Ukrainian neo-Nazis might pass this threshold .
 U.S. officials appear to have earned themselves potential life sentences in federal prisons . Why not on his border unless they are there as a threat or weapon, regardless as to the excuses .
 Mainstream media will censor the whole illegal biolabs story to ensure the voting public never hears about until years in the future, if civilization as we know it survives that long .
 Karen U Kwiatkowski and former U.S. State Dept. of State official and diplomat Michael Springmann have been involved in launching previous unjust and illegal wars . Karen U. Kwiatkowski and Michael Springman have been accused of launching wars in the past .
 Sputniknews.com fact checking their sources proves it to be 100% accurate at least in the above quoted article . Someone can dismiss allegations brought forward as Russian propaganda .
 There has never been a credible international body to regulate the development of potential dual-use biological pathogens and chemical weapons . Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons has credibility issues .
 BWC states-parties had been meeting since 1995 under a body known as the Ad Hoc Group to negotiate the protocol . The protocol is a legally binding agreement to strengthen the BWC, which outlaws biological weapons but does not contain verification measures .
 The BWC Protocol was not designed to be capable of detecting violations with a level of confidence comparable to that of verification systems for treaties controlling nuclear or chemical arms . Because of these dual-use dilemmas, the protocol was not able to detect violations .
 Protocol was to provide greater information about, and access to, dual-capable facilities and activities that could potentially be misdirected for BW purposes .
 Such increased transparency was believed to provide a useful deterrent by complicating any efforts of countries attempting to defraud their BWC obligations . The increased transparency is believed to help deter countries from defrauding their obligations .
 It’s a slippery slope when nations start researching potential bioweapons without oversight because they have to create and/or collect, store, store and often transport them to research those potential weapons . It's a slippery slide when nations begin researching potential weapons without oversight .
 To Native Americans, once called “red Indians,” the white colonialists were nearly all (as there were and are always a few notable exceptions) totally corrupt as they went about a systematic genocide of their entire race . The U.S. failure to comply with Biological Weapons
 To the African American slaves, the white colonialists were nearly all (as there were and always a few notable exceptions) totally corrupt . They went about greedily buying and selling, raping and torturing them in what seemed a systematic genocide .
 To the Mexicans for example in the Mexican American War, the white colonialists were nearly all totally corrupt as they went about greedily slaughtering, raping and torturing them in what seemed to be a systematic genocide of their entire race .
 To the Muslim Filipinos starting in 1898, white colonialists were nearly all (as there were and a few notable exceptions) totally corrupt . They went about greedily slaughtering, raping and torturing them in what seemed a systematic genocide of their entire race .
 Most African nations still slaves to Euro-American domination, primarily US, French and British colonialization . Even to this day, most African nations are still slaves .
 African leaders are chosen and installed by the intelligence chiefs of Euro-American nations based on their sole qualification of absolute subservience to Euro-America interests . African leaders will be chosen by intelligence chiefs based on the quality of their service to the nation's interests .
 In his publications | often use Niger as an example of contemporary French/American colonial treacherous duplicity, or duplicitous treachery, or whatever. Niger is a good example of modern colonial treachery .
 To make a long horrific story short I’m just going to list some of my previously used references and let the readers figure it out . I'm not sure how much of this is going to be .
 Euro-US corruption is an intrinsic part of these country’s history and even — especially — today’�s economic and political structures . Euro-U.S. corruption is a part of the history of these countries, especially today's economic, political structures, writes CNN
 Various details of today’s United States internal political corruption are presented with linked references in the “Endnotes” section at the very end of this book .
 Most recent damning evidence of contemporary, previously secret political corruption in the USA . [To be frank, | keep trying to finish this book , but revelations of American corruption and treachery are just pouring down from all directions these days .
 Brooks said that both parties charge their members $1 million and beyond for chairmanships . Brooks said only those taking donations from lobbyists can afford these seats .
 The National Republican Congressional Committee or Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee will charge members of Congress a fee to chair a committee for two years . Members of Congress will be charged with chairing a committee .
 The fee varies depending on how important the committee is, but bidding for a top-tier chairmanship starts at $1 million, Brooks claimed .
 One unnamed candidate showed representatives “a brochure” of his prices, Brooks claimed . Brooks said the prospective NRCC chief had broken his pricing down into three tiers, and boasted that he would charge less .
 Those who can't afford to cough up a million dollars take donations from special interest groups, Brooks said . They then become beholden to these lobbyists once in office, Brooks continued .
 Massie described in 2016 how a lobbyist from “the medical device sector” offered to pay for his seat on the House Ways and Means Committee . Massie also described how, earlier in his political career, a lobbyist offered to help him get his seat .
 The unspoken implication, Massie wrote, was that he would then owe the lobbyist his favor . Massie: "I'm not going to pay the lobbyist my favor" Massie writes .
 Use of the phrase ‘Quid pro quo’ in that original Twitter message is particularly important . The use of that phrase in that tweet is important .
 In order to get a more complete picture of the 7 +2 factors leading the USA and world inexorably towards WWIII one must also take into account the structure of the duopolistic democratic system in the USA, which leans more and more towards populism and permits unlimited anonymous “
 Just Foreign Policy estimates that 2 million Iraqis have been killed since 2003 as a result of our country’s illegal invasion . Davies: With a minimum of 1. million and a maximum of 3. million, we estimate that 2. million Iraqis are dead .
 The crucial importance of the Tweet above comes from strong evidence that quid pro quo relationships do exist between lobby groups, politicians, and power within the U.S. political system .
 FEC decision led to further decisions that led to today’s unlimited anonymous political “donations” and absolute corruption in U.S. politics . FEC decision was the result of a decision by the FEC to allow anonymous donations .
 What the Supreme Court did, is legalized corruption and it certainly appears WWIII, thermonuclear destruction and leaks from the 300+ American biological laboratory freezers are going to be the result . The Supreme Court has legalized corruption .
 Had Biden been a law-abiding moral man that was capable of critical thinking and thought for himself, instead of simply a spokesperson for corporate greed, none of this would be happening . Biden was a law abiding moral man, not a corporate spokesperson .
 U.S. intelligence knew that and provoked it with that knowledge in mind . He, as a moral man that cherishes life, had no choice, and United States intelligence knew it .
 Anyone who studied the details of events leading to President Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine will come to the same conclusion . The weapons-related corporate CEOs, corrupted political system in the US, SCOTUS and the slavish MSM so-called “news” CEOs and
 The U.S. is balancing on the edge of thermonuclear destruction because of those dirty secrets . Now is the time those secrets have to come out in order to prevent that .
 That is prima facie evidence of saturation corruption at the highest levels of the U.S. government, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: That's primafacie evidence that corruption is rampant in the United States .
 Maybe World War III will change their minds, but alas, it will be too late . Maybe the world will change its mind, but it will never change its minds .
 Ukraine terrorized the people of Eastern Ukraine with U.S. weapons but this was never reported on . A timeline on the current phase of the Ukraine War .
 When Ukraine claimed its independence from the voluntarily dissolved USSR, it positioned itself as a non-aligned state capable of protecting its sovereignty and territorial integrity . The Ukraine War e 1991 led to the collapse of the Soviet Union and the fall of Ukraine .
 The draft DPG says non-alignment is self-determined by a state and isn't required to be enacted by international treaties . The U.S. must also “show the leadership necessary to establish and protect a new order that holds the promise of convincing potential competitors that
 The country retains the right to unilaterally reconsider its non-aligned status at any time . Although it involves non-participation in military alliances and blocs, the country retains right to reconsider .
 Non-aligned states can participate in armed conflicts, including those on foreign soil . They are free to enter into defense cooperation agreements with military alliances and individual states .
 Neutrality is defined by an international treaty and recognized by other subjects of international law . Neutrality, on the other hand, has to be defined by international treaty . Neutralism is a form of non-existence that can only be defined in a treaty .
 Yushchenko began his term by announcing that Ukraine was going to work towards the goal of satisfying the requirements necessary to join both the EU and NATO . Ukraine is a collection of former colonial nations led by the USA in violation of its own constitution and neutrality status .
 As early as in 2008, statements were “4 that establishment of a unipolar global system strongly resembles Pope Boniface VIII's November 18, 1302 papal bull, Unam Sanctam . That established salvation is only available through the Church, and that the Church wields
 Think about the 2020 movie “Antebellum” without even the possibility of ever waking into some semblance of a civilized world .
 The Minsk Protocol, was drafted in 2014 by the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine, consisting of Ukraine, Russia, and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe . The Protocol was drafted by the leaders of France and Germany .
 Ceasefire agreements at Minsk were violated by Kyiv, continuing war . This agreement followed multiple previous attempts to stop the fighting in the region and aimed to implement an immediate ceasefire .
 President Biden’s approval ratings have dropped to new lows as his approval ratings drop to new low . Fortunately, American citizens do not appear to be the complete idiots Biden's advisors think they are .
 Biden’s approval rating falls to new low amid economic pessimism, inflation woes, CNBC survey finds . President Joe Biden's approval rating slid to a new low of 38%, according to CNBC's All-America Survey .
 President Obama's approval rating on the economy dropped for a fourth consecutive survey . His approval rating for the economy has also dropped for the past four months .
 Even a “limited” nuclear war would be wonderful distraction news for the Democrats sometime this summer and boost their case, they think, that Democrats really are valiant heroes fighting off the forces of evil embodied in the form President Putin .
 "Force the adversary to expand recklessly in order to unbalance him, and then destroy him," says the author . "Then destroy him. Force the adversary ... and then kill him," she says .
 Rand presents itself as the world’s most reliable source for Intelligence and political analysis for the leaders of the United States and their allies . With a staff of thousands of experts, Rand offers the world's most reliable information .
 Rand analysts estimate that Russia’s greatest vulnerability is that of its economy, due to its heavy dependency on oil and gas exports . Rand analysts say that Russia is vulnerable to its dependence on its oil and natural gas exports.
 The income from these exports can be reduced by strengthening sanctions and increasing energy exports of the U.S. The U.K. should strengthen sanctions and increase energy exports, the author says .
 The goal is to reduce Europe's importation of Russian natural gas, and replace it by liquefied natural gas transported by sea from other countries . Europe wants to reduce its import of Russian gas, to replace it with liquefined natural gas .
 Another way of destabilizing the Russian economy in the long run is to encourage emigration of qualified personnel, particularly young Russians with a high level of education . Young Russians with high levels of education should emigrate to Russia, he says .
 Russia needs to encourage internal contestation and undermine its image on the exterior, writes Alexander Nekrassov . Russia should be excluded from international forums and boycotting international sporting events, he says .
 In the geopolitical sector, arming Ukraine would enable the USA to exploit the central point of Russia’s exterior vulnerability, but this would have to be carefully calculated in order to hold Russia under pressure without slipping into a major conflict, which it would win .
 The U.S. can enjoy high probabilities of success and high benefits, with moderate risks, especially by investing mainly in strategic bombers and long-range attack missiles directed against Russia . The USA can enjoy a high probability of success, with high benefits and high risks, says author .
 Leaving the INF Treaty and deploying in Europe new intermediaterange nuclear missiles pointed at Russia would lead to high probabilities of success, but would also present high risks . Leaving the treaty and deploying new intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe would have high probability of success but also present risks .
 Russia would end up by paying the hardest price in a confrontation, analysts say . The U.S. would also have to invest huge resources, which would therefore no longer be available for other objectives, they say .
 This is also prior warning of a coming major increase in USA/NATO military spending, to the disadvantage of social budgets . Social budgets will be affected by this increase .
 Then President Joe Biden told the world from Warsaw that his Russian counterpart Viadimir Putin ‘cannot remain in power’ The White House quickly sought to downplay the United States leader's remarks, noting that Biden's remarks were not a call for ""regime change"" in
 Overthrow a government the U.S. does not like for whatever reason, and interfering in the affairs of other nations such as overthrowing their government, is blatantly and unambiguously illegal in international law . Overthrow is illegal in the United States, and interference in other nations'
 By labeling the government the United States does not like a “regime” policy makers believe they can “smooth over” the immorality and illegality of their actions in the eyes of the public .
 “spin” is deeply embedded in the American foreign policy maker’s efforts to “control the narrative,” which means override any semblance of honesty with their own excuses . That is called ‘spin’ and that kind of linguistic trickery is embedded in
 Four-day trip was planned at the last minute for the purpose of rallying Europe to the cause of standing up to Russia’s military incursion into Ukraine . It was the culminating event of a four-day .
 U.S. President Joe Biden ended his remarks by going off-script . Biden was speaking to a large and enthusiastic crowd in the Polish capital of Warsaw, Poland .
 A senior Biden administration official was quoted as saying, prior to Biden's slip of the tongue, that in the aftermath of the Russian military incursion into Ukraine, “The only end game now is the end of Putin regime.” Biden was quoted by British journalist Niall Ferguson
 Neither the sentiment nor the mechanism of regime change represent new thinking in terms of the West’s approach to the current Russian government, says Simon Tisdall . Russia is a major ally of Russia in the West, he says .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin believes that the U.S. works hard to foster regime changes around the world, including in Russia . Michael McFaul, the United States Ambassador to Russia from 2012-2014, was McFaul . McFaul: Putin believes the United State works hard for regime changes
 The Russian government has long held that Western intelligence services had been using “democracy promotion” as a front to organize political opposition to Putin with the goal of removing him from office . Russia has long believed Western intelligence agencies had been trying to oust Putin from power .
 Russian intelligence services were accusing the British of secretly funding Russian political opposition groups . At the same time this object (in reality, a covert electronic device used to facilitate communications) was in operation, the Russian intelligence .
 The Russian government cracked down on foreign-funded non-governmental organizations after the 'spy rock' incident . The government passed laws which compelled groups that receive foreign funding and engage in political activities to register as ‘foreign agents’ before barring NGOs altogether .
 The list of banned organizations included USAID, prompting the Obama administration to withdraw from the Civil Society Working Group of the US-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission . The Obama administration withdrew from the civil society Working Group .
 Recently, the West has embraced the trend of making direct appeals to the Russian people, sometimes using sloppy Russianlanguage phrases . Goebbels' Principles Still in Demand in the West, April 12, 2022 .
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky has made similar appeals to Russians in his daily television broadcasts . This is not counting on the frequent injections of similar appeals by the Ukrainian president to Russians .
 Russia would like to remind critics that it was not Russia who started turning on the ""jammers" as was the case during the Cold War . If necessary, our people are ready to share this knowledge with the British, we don't mind, says Putin .
 Schwarzenegger and company genuinely believe that we haven't seen footage of the destruction in Mariupol or other cities . Schwarzenegger: "We're not sure if we've seen footage from Mariupols." Schwarzenegger: We're not going to be surprised by the destruction of the city .
 Arnold refers to his childhood memories of meeting our great heavyweight weightlifter Yury Vlasov . Confessing his ""love for the Russian people"", Arnold also discusses his love for the Russians .
 Schwarzenegger's childhood idol's birthplace in Makeevka, Ukraine, has been in ruins for eight years . Schwarzenegger has no idea what's been going on in the country since then . Schwarzenegger is a former governor of California and a former president of California .
 Show footage of Ukrainian troops razing this city to the ground in 2014-2015, and ask him why he did not remember the name of the great Viasov back then — he will shrug it off, and that is it . Show him footage of . Ukrainian troops . razing
 Kindergartens, schools, and hospitals in Makeevka were indiscriminately shelled . Children's schools, hospitals, hospitals and schools were shelled indiscriminately . The children's school and hospital were among the casualties .
 There were no appeals to the Ukrainian people and UAF soldiers by Western actors, politicians, and writers . But there were no such appeals to Ukraine's people and soldiers .
 Boris Johnson believes that the Russian viewer or reader has heard nothing at all about the events in Bucha . Boris Johnson: 'I'm sure nothing has been heard about the Bucha crisis'
 "If we turn on a VPN and read the British press, the scales will immediately fall from our eyes," says Simon Tisdall . "The scales will fall from their eyes," he says .
 Ukrainian media analyze events in Kiev, Russia, Ukraine, says CNN.com . "We have not seen in any Western publication such a detailed analysis of these horrifying images as we have," says CNN's John Defterios .
 For example, | lived in China for 12 years, and all through those 12 years used VPN as did and do virtually all foreigners there .
 Even the major international hotels supply it as well as major universities, industries for their research, and so on. Even major universities and industries for research, so on .
 “You have no idea what’s going on outside in the real world.” | couldn’t help laughing about that .
 The U.S. overthrew at least 56 foreign governments, according to William Blum, a former State Department foreign service officer . An updated list compiled since his published analysis brings the total up to 67 .
 In none of those cases was the target nation in any way a threat to United States security, in stark contrast to the case of Ukraine and Russia, where the US’ build up WMD and highly trained neo-Nazi brigades most certainly did present a provably imminent threat to
 Yemen 2014, Ukraine 2014*, Turkey 2016, Venezuela 2019, Bolivia 2019* Iran 2017 to present, Nicaragua 2018, China 2018 to present . Cuba and Russia 2022. Cuba .
 Israel is just a cat’s paw (along with Saudi Arabia, other Gulf States and Egypt) of the USA in its ambition to conquer the entire region . One can assert Israel is the aggressor, however, however Israel is not aggressor .
 No nation in world history ever tried to overthrow that many governments (67 at minimum) directly or via proxies . No nation has ever attempted to overthrow any of the world's governments .
 The Ukraine proxy war is the third major assault by the United States on Russia . The most recent economic and media wars against Russia by the US by the U.S. are the most recent .
 1918 US-UK Allied invasion of Russia is a landmark in Russian History, often mistakenly portrayed as being part of a Civil War . The 1918 U.S. and UK Allied invasion is often mistaken for being a civil war between Russia and Russia .
 He tried floating a proposal for NATO to back off, and was totally rebuffed, in fact ridiculed for the effort . He tried to make a proposal to NATO back off .
 The United States does not negotiate with its target nations in its drive for hegemony in perpetuity . The U.S. is not negotiating with its targets, it says .
 Ukrainian forces bombarded Lugansk and Donetsk were not in any way careful about their targets during their deadly eight-year war against innocents . Whereas Russia is attempting to engage in highly targeted attacks against forces trained to attack Russia by the US, Ukrainian forces bombed Lugansk, Donetsk .
 No one in the mainstream media, or even the alt-news has asked why President Putin didn’t just execute his Nazi elimination plan via primarily drones and missiles the way the U.S. has primarily pursued wars for the past 20 years .
 The answer may be that drones, missiles and bombs cause far greater civilian casualties than ground troops and especially special forces . Special forces tend to be much more precise in their targeting .
 President Putin acted honorably to defend innocent Lugansk and Donetsk civilians from the eight-year genocidal war in Donbass waged against it by the neo-Nazi riddled Ukrainian government . The U.S. State Department acted under orders from the United States State Department .
 13,000 human beings murdered in Donbass between 2014 and 2020 in what was then “peaceful Ukraine” because they strongly objected to the illegal American backed coup in 2014 . But, the highly censored corporate controlled American news does not report any of that .
 President Putin's existential need to prevent an even greater build up of Euro-American tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces, neo-Nazi ultra-nationalist extremists, and neo-Nazis . Those collusive entities — with intent — created President Putin’s existential need
 Russia already had one Nazi invasion, and absolute proof of U.S. loading Ukraine with neoNazi forces, other paramilitary forces, and even the government of Ukraine was and remains permeated with neo-Nazis . Let’s not forget the deadly pathogens produced, and stored right on
 No videos of children blown to bloody bits, sobbing grandparents, amputated limbs as happened in Donbass region for eight years — nothing . Nothing happened in the region for 8 years - nothing. Nothing happened .
 The people of Lugansk and Donetsk were under armed attack by American trained and coordinated forces . They pleaded for assistance in self-defence from Russia which was also motivated by selfdefense given American massive buildup of military, paramilitary, neo-Nazi forces, and potential biological weapons right on its
 President Putin’s legal analysts focus on Article 51 on the UN Charter as rational for disarming Ukraine . Article 51 is part of Article 51 of UN Charter, part of article 51 to disarm Ukraine . Putin's legal analysts say Article 51 should be used to disarm Ukraine and disarm
 It was the highly illegal aggressiveness of the US, and failures within the UN that led to the escalation of armed conflict in Ukraine in February 2022 . The highly illegal aggression of the U.S. and failures in the UN led to escalation of the conflict, the author says .
 In the case of Ukraine’s war against dissidents in Donbass region that strongly objected to the 2014 U.S. backed coup against the former democratically elected president of Ukraine, the region strongly objected .
 A solid fact-based case can be made that President Putin was trying to stop a war, and prevent a vastly greater biological weapons war, with his intervention in Ukraine in 2022 . Putin's intervention in 2022 will be seen as an attempt to prevent an even greater biological weapon war .
 Minsk agreements were a great idea that many nations worked together to bring to fruition . The Minsk agreement was an example of the work of many nations working together to achieve success .
 The tragedy of the current escalated conflict can easily be traced to that betrayal by Kiev . Kiev betrayed by Kiev, the tragedy can be traced back to the tragedy of that betrayal .
 The Minsk agreements were a series of international agreements which sought to end the war in the Donbas region of Ukraine . They were aimed at ending the conflict in the region of Donbas, Ukraine .
 The first, known as the Minsk Protocol, was drafted in 2014 by the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine, consisting of Ukraine, Russia, and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe . The first draft of the Protocol was drafted by the leaders of France and Germany in
 This agreement followed multiple previous attempts to stop the fighting in the region . It aimed to implement an immediate ceasefire . This agreement follows multiple attempts to end the fighting .
 War did not start with President Putin’s intervention in Ukraine, but instead stemmed from the successful U.S. coup staged in 2014, overthrowing elected president Yanukovych . The war began with a successful coup staged by the United States .
 The war continued until February 24 2022 when President Putin stepped in to end it . President Putin ended the war in February 2022 when he stepped in .
 The participants of the talks in Minsk agreed on a plan which focused on a ceasefire in eastern Ukraine and efforts to get the government functioning again . The participants agreed to a ceasefire and a return to the Ukrainian government .
 Other points of the agreement include amnesty for all those who disarm and who did not commit serious crimes, corridors for refugees, and humanitarian aid access . The agreement also includes humanitarian aid aid access and corridors for refugee refugees .
 Ukrainian National Security and Defense Council chief Alexey Danilov warns that his country risks collapsing if it implements the UNSC-supported Minsk Accords . The Ukrainian government has been criticized for not implementing the agreement .
 This position doesn’t reflect reality but the existing Ukrainian elite’s self-interests and those of its foreign patrons. This position is not reality but reality, the Ukrainian elite, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Ukraine is therefore legally obligated to implement them though the US’ refusal to compel its proxy to do so in contradiction of that Great Power’s international commitments means that it probably won’t unless the U.S. changes its position eventually .
 Washington wouldn't have done so unless it believed at the time that this was a pragmatic means for resolving its proxy’s civil war . Washington wouldn’t have decided to do so if it believed this was the way to resolve its proxy war .
 This objective observation discredits Danilov’s fears that society will meaningfully revolt over the Minsk Accords’ full implementation . Kiev certainly has the capabilities to offset that scenario, according to the observer .
 Even if it loses control, then that's the government’s own fault, not Russia’S or anyone else . Russia is not the only country to lose control of Crimea, but it is the government's own fault and not anyone else's .
 If carried out to its full extent, this could lead to Ukraine’s de facto or de jure federalization . In practice, this might end up creating a Bosnian-like scenario whereby various regions achieve quasi-independence .
 That might result in the emergence of new elites who can challenging the existing ones . That might be in the process of replacing existing elites with new ones .
 Russia, China, Turkey, and even the GCC might begin patronizing local partners in pursuit of mutual economic and/or strategic benefits . For instance, Russia, . China, . Turkey, Russia and . Turkey might begin patronsizing local . partners .
 There’s nothing wrong with that or inherently destabilizing about it per se but it nevertheless threatens the USled West's current influence over Ukraine . The West is trying to exert influence in Ukraine, but it's not necessarily destabilizing .
 Ukraine wouldn't ‘collapse’ if the Minsk Accords were fully implemented, but it might end up with a very different administrative structure in the most extreme scenario . Ukraine wouldn’t collapse if the Accords are fully implemented .
 Ukraine’s extremely deep contradictions are quickly reaching a breaking point as proven by recent events . That outcome would be disadvantageous for existing elites and their US-led Western patrons . But it would arguably be more strategically stabilizing in the long-run .
 Authorities arrest people who it claims were plotting nationwide riots . Arrests speak to how tense the situation has become in that country .
 It remains unclear whether the detained are genuine grassroots resistance to the increasingly authoritarian government . The development nevertheless confirms that domestic tensions are close to boiling over .
 Danilov’s prediction of a “very difficult internal situation” has already come to pass, says Danilova . The prediction was made by none other than his own government, the Russian president's own government .
 The U.S. and its allies don't have any need to abide by such little things, even if the Minsk agreement did have the force of law . The United States and allies don’t have to abide abide by little little things .
 It was home to nomadic peoples and farmers only moved south with great difficulty . It is now a very difficult place for farmers to move south with difficulty .
 After the Mongol invasion in the 13th century, the Wild Fields was a dangerous place to find yourself . The Wild Fields is now a UNESCO World Heritage Museum .
 It was then that many of the cities without which it is impossible to imagine today’s Donbass were founded . The Donbass was founded in the 1930s and 1940s, when it was still in the region .
 In 1869, the British industrialist John Hughes built a factory around which the village of Yuzovka grew . It had a few more names, including Stalino, before a local man renamed it Donetsk, in 1961 .
 Coal deposits and increasing factories formed the unique ‘face’ of the region . The region was formed by coal deposits, factories and coal factories .
 Donbass was formed as an industrial region and its cities and factories often flow into one another, even today . Donbass has been formed as a region of Donbass, with many factories and factories in it .
 The region was inhabited by several streams of colonists from Russia and Ukraine . Its population was very diverse, but its peoples mixed easily due to the proximity of their languages and cultures .
 Central Rada declared Ukraine autonomous, before making a declaration of independence after the October Revolution . Ukraine declared itself autonomous after the revolution .
 Rada made broad territorial claims, which included the territory of Donbass . The Rada also claimed territory of Ukraine's Donbass, which includes Donbass.
 In Kiev, the Communist uprising was suppressed, and Russian officers actively participated . Russian officers considered the Rada a lesser evil than the Reds .
 Kharkov is a large industrial city that was not part of the Donetsk Basin region but closely tied to it . The region was known as the Donetsk Basin region, but not the Donetsk region .
 Although the area was administratively divided into three entities, they had a common economy and interests . The area was divided into . three entities . Although the . area was . administratively . divided into 3 entities, it was a common area .
 While the Rada was in session, local councils in the east of Ukraine announced the unification of the Donbass and Krivbass coal basins .
 It also included cities belonging to the region of the Don Cossack Army, such as Mariupol and Krivoy Rog . The region was administratively part of the Kherson province .
 'Donkrivbass' did not claim independence and deemed the idea of separating from Russia absurd, considering itself, instead autonomous within it . This structure, which was informally called ‘Donkribass’ or simply ‘donbass,’ deemed itself independent .
 Ukraine's independence projects were of no interest to it creators. Moreover, Ukraine’s independence projects . The country's independence project was not of any interest .
 The district has its own completely independent fundamental importance for Russia and lives a separate life, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "This whole district has ... a completely independent . fundamental importance"
 The administrative subordination of the Kharkov district to Kiev is not called for by anything at all, but on the contrary, does not correspond with reality . Kharkova district's subordination to Kiev 'does not correspond to reality'
 The Russian military intervention in Ukraine was and remains real with verifiable evidence the U.S. media refuses to acknowledge . Unlike the legion of American fake humanitarian interventions all over the world, the Russian intervention in the Ukraine was real . The United States media won't acknowledge the evidence .
 Putin is afraid of a free peaceful Ukraine, competing in a fair election, his own people, and the free press . Putin is also afraid of the free elections, a fair press, and his own own people .
 Killing children is surely one of the most extreme forms of child abuse . At least tens of thousands of those victims were children, and killing children is perhaps one of them .
 President Biden has the temerity to accuse President Putin of genocide, when in fact he is pursuing his own, second genocide . Biden has been accused of genocide by President Putin, but he is not pursuing genocide .
 In an amusing reference President Biden also accuses President Putin of causing inflation, when in fact the causes are much more nuanced and entirely predictable blowback for President Biden’s own corrupt activities in Ukraine, the US’ role in the coup deposing Ukraine”s democratically elected president
 Dima Pavlenko had his right leg blown off as a result of artillery shelling by the Ukrainian Armed Forces . Pavlenka was hit by artillery shelling in the Ukrainian army's shelling of Ukraine .
 They claim that 96% of voters in Luhansk voted for independence . They also claim 96% in the neighboring province of Luhansi voted for independentism .
 Donetsk is Ukraine’s most populous province, home to a tenth of the population . Donetsk is home to the largest city in the country, Donetsk .
 Killing voters before they have a chance to vote is not a free or fair event 48. 48.6 million people voted for President Obama in 2008 .
 NATO is making its best effort to pour jet fuel on the fire they helped start in Ukraine as they possibly can . NATO is certainly trying to pour as much jet fuel as possible as possible .
 Invasion of Ukraine has ushered in ‘new normal’ so the alliance is preparing for ‘reset’ that will allow it to repel attacks from the East . NATO Undergoing ‘Fundamental Transformation’ With Stronger Eastern Flank, But Keeps Eye on
 NATO's military presence in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland is expected to be transformed into a "major force" that would be able to repel a potential invasion . NATO military commanders are developing options for the reset and the reset .
 NATO is the direct descendant organization of the European crusaders . This is all not surprising if one knows anything about the roots of NATO as it is a direct descendant of the crusaders. This is not surprising .
 The crusaders broke every single contract they made with the Muslims during those crusades, thus setting a template for NATO’s disregard of agreements regarding its eastward movement after 1991 . It is the penultimate opposite of honorable gentlemen .
 NATO actively took part in the killing of hundreds of thousands of Muslims in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Middle East, Africa and Libya . Hundreds of thousands were killed in Afghanistan and Pakistan .
 Russia was NATO's original target, before they got distracted in great orgies of death slaughtering Muslims . It’s almost surprising they have now actually set their sights on Russia, however . NATOs original target was Russia .
 They had to do something while waiting to ‘get’ Russia to justify their existence and in that process distinguishing themselves as no better than any other mercenary army . The Russian army is not the only mercenary army in the world, but it is the only one .
 This is one of the many major problems of an army without a legitimate cause beyond lining the pockets of those in Europe who profit from war . This is the cruel slaughter of innocents for profit, the sine qua non pleasure of the bullies and sadists that must be ruling the
 NATO has been used as a stalking horse by the Clintons, Obama, Obama and now Biden to restart the Cold War making proxy-wars between the superpowers ever so much easier for everyone, except the millions of victims . NATO is being used by the Clinton administration and Biden as a
 NATO is just dying to get boots on the ground in a hot, dirty really profitable war . NATO is ignoring the gray lines between conventional weapons and nuclear weapons can be transcended in a few minutes .
 RIP human species, thank you very much CIA, Mr President Biden and the Deep State which ultimately rules both .
 Russia has officially become the most sanctioned country in the world, surpassing Iran, Syria and North Korea . Russia surpasses Syria, North Korea, Iran and Syria .
 The penalties include punishments against individuals, companies, confiscation of assets, and even the freezing of the country’s foreign currency reserves . The penalties range from punishments to freezing of foreign currencies .
 European nations have led the way, even surpassing the United States in some cases . European nations, historically more wary of imposing sanctions, have taken the lead .
 Russia is now the single largest target of global sanctions, according to some economists . Some economists say it is the world's single biggest target of sanctions . Russia is also the focus of sanctions against the West .
 The punitive measures rolled out so far target Russia’s financial sector, central bank reserves, energy supplies, major companies, President Vladimir Putin, his daughters, government officials, and other individuals . The measures target Russia's financial sector and energy supplies .
 Tehran has confronted 3,616 punitive measures against it over the last decade alone, data by the global sanctions-tracking database Castellum shows . The Iranian government has been hit with sanctions in the past decade .
 The penalties have been imposed mainly over the country’s controversial nuclear program . The penalties were imposed mainly because of the country's controversial nuclear project .
 Islamic Republic’s banks were cut off from the SWIFT payment system in 2018 . In 2018, the Islamic Republic's banks were turned off from SWIFT payments system .
 The war-torn country has been hit by a number of economic sanctions from the US, EU and some Arab states . Nevertheless, the country’s economy grew 2.4% in 2020-21 according to the World Bank .
 North Korea has been under UN sanctions since 2006 over its nuclear and ballistic missile programs . The hermit Asian state has been hit hard by sanctions over its missile and nuclear program . UN sanctions have been imposed on North Korea since 2006 .
 The Castellum list shows that North Korea had 2,077 sanctions against it as of March . North Korea was hit by more than 2,000 sanctions against its country .
 This month the United States imposed fresh sanctions on North Korea . The U.S. accuses North Korea of developing weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile programs .
 The economy of the Bolivarian Republic has been under severe pressure over the past years . The situation severely deteriorating after the United States slapped the country with sanctions in 2019 . The United States is expected to impose new sanctions on Venezuela in the coming years .
 The measures targeted businesses and oil entities associated with the government of Nicolas Maduro, both inside and outside of the country . Maduro's government has been accused of corruption .
 The current penalties put Venezuela in fifth place in the global rating of the most sanctioned 18 countries . Venezuela was the darling of the United States during the Iran-Iraq War that began with a full-scale invasion of Iran by neighboring Iraq .
 Around a million people were killed on each side and the infrastructures of both nations destroyed . Around one million people died on either side .
 Previous to that the United States CIA sponsored a coup installing their own leader usually referred to as the Shah of Iran whose reign of terror was and remains horrifically legendary . The Shah was known for his terroristic reign of the Shah .
 Iran holds 157,530,000,000 barrels of proven oil reserves as of 2016, ranking 4th in the world . Iran holds about 9.5% of the world's total oil reserves . Iran's oil reserves are 4th among world's largest, accounting for about 9%
 Each of the sanctioned nations on the above sanctions list have similar stories of suffering unimaginable numbers of deaths and other cruelties inflicted by the United States . The U.S. in pursuit of its own economic and geo-political ambitions, they say .
 The Southeast Asian nation has faced sanctions by the United States and other countries over human rights violations . Myanmar has been accused of human rights abuses in recent years . The United States has imposed sanctions on Myanmar over the issue .
 In January, the one-year anniversary of the military coup of Myanmar’s democratically elected government, the U.S. Treasury designated seven individuals and two entities connected to the military regime .
 U.S., UK and Canada imposed coordinated new sanctions on the country last month . The sanctions were aimed at senior military officials . However, the list seems to have been broadened since the sanctions were imposed last month, focusing on senior officials .
 Cuba has been under United States sanctions for more than 60 years . U.S. sanctions have affected every aspect of life on the island . Cuba is still under sanctions .
 Washington has been systematically ramping up punitive measures against Cuba . Foreign companies and foreign banks operating in Cuba have faced harsh penalties for doing business there . Washington has systematically ramped up sanctions .
 U.S. sanctions regime against Cuba is one of the world’s longest-running boycotts by one country against another . The American sanctions regime has been the most severe in the world .
 According to media reports, the platform is not planning to return paid bills for accommodation . Media reports: Platform is not returning paid bills to accommodation .
 Money that spent on bookings after April 4 date will be converted into bonuses . Money that was spent after that date will also be converted to bonuses .
 It is not clear how those bonuses could be used, as the service is no longer available . It is unclear how the bonuses would be used .
 His legacy mostly focuses on his rhetorical strategy for putting the nation into war with Mexico . Critical attention to this legacy is focused on his strategy for war .
 In a trial there is supposed to be an impartial jury and the defendant has the opportunity to defend himself . In the trial, a jury should not be biased, the judge says .
 In the case of President Putin’s armed intervention in Ukraine, censorship has very effectively gagged him . There can be no impartial jury found in the world given the highly sensationalized barrages of disinformation disseminated by U.S. government trained drones calling themselves reporters .
 The woman interviewed in that story may have been raped, however there is no proof whatsoever the attacker was a Russian soldier . There is no evidence whatsoever that the woman was raped .
 Russian is the native language of 29.6% of Ukraine's population . Most Ukrainians can speak Russian . Russian is a popular language in Ukraine .
 Given the trickery and deceptions of Azov throughout this war it is highly probable that was another ‘false flag” operation designed like all the others .
 NBC presents unproven allegations as fact, as American mainstream media has been doing from the start of this war in 2014 . NBC's story title by NBC shows unproven claims as fact .
 Rape was the number one charge brought against innocent black men in the old south to launch a lynch mob . Rape was also the top charge against innocent blacks in the South .
 To Azov this operation would be considered a “piece of cake,” and they would laugh about it . Azov: "To Azov, this operation is considered a piece of cake" to Azov .
 There is a discernable tempo amidst the barrage of disinformation campaigns being launched against Russia . The timing of this crime against humanity, war crime and crime of defamation fits that tempo perfectly perfectly .
 The probability of that rape having been done by Azov or other Ukrainian forces is 99.999% percent certain . Western politicians and the United States corporate owned “free press” from the beginning of the coup that overthrew democratically president Yanukovych is composed of lies .
 NBC will not question the veracity of NBC’s report . However, there will be no voices questioning the report's accuracy .
 Many U.S. and European corporations are cutting all operations in Russia affecting millions of Russians in Russia and overseas . Resulting from and facilitating this is that many United States and European companies are cutting their operations in the country .
 On March 5, 2022 Reuters reported MasterCard also was “suspending services” of Russian operations . Thousands of Russian tourists and business travelers were left stranded overseas without money .
 Locked markets leads to greater economic isolation for those doing the blocking, as much or more than the blocked parties who simply turn elsewhere for those same markets, products and services . locking markets is a form of illegal “collective punishment,” and another damaging blow to the tourism industry
 The Fordney-McCumber Act of 1922 strongly contributed to the 1929 stock market crash . Smoot-Hawley act of 1930 increased protectionism and deepened that economic Great Depression .
 Russia cut off SWIFT only accelerate global dedollarization . It’s surprising it never occurred to any of them that as they attempt to isolate others, they simultaneously isolate themselves, they also isolate themselves .
 Cash, volatility, commodities and cryptocurrencies could outperform bonds and stocks, he said . He added that in this context, cash, volatility and cryptocurrencies will outperform stocks .
 Keeping/absconding/stealing the money of those people — regular people that already paid for those services is another example of collective punishment, again, a violation of international law . The U.S. government is violating international law, and it's not doing so again .
 In the heat of a good lynching, it seems highly appropriate as it is backed by populist demand, but in the long run will be analyzed as mob rule in just one more of the US’ bloody ruthless campaigns for global domination . In the long-term, it will be
 The United States as usual presumes that the wealthy mostly white nations (plus Japan and Taiwan as a couple of token minorities) really represent the entire world . The U.S. presumes the wealthy, mostly white nation represent the world .
 The “international community” you always hear el eelene . That map does bear a striking resemblance to Wikipedia’s map of countries sanctioning Russia in 2014 .
 Forcibly provoking Russia into a self-defense and humanitarian intervention in Ukraine is apparently a “white” thing, only considered “politically correct” because Russians are white too, sort of of of course . Russia’s intervention in the Ukraine is only considered
 Denisovan DNA is associated with east Asian people than western European cousins . In fact, they are really “Eastern Slavic” with a higher percentage of Denisovan .
 Russian populations very likely contain ancestral components that aren’t easily found in the populations represented in the 1,000 Genomes database or even in the comprehensive HGDP database .
 Asians, Africans and the French also appear to have some Denisovan DNA unlike most western Europeans . However, the Reich et. al. al article above notes primarily Asians and Africans also appear .
 Eastern Russians are Eurasians, according to some of the world's most recent studies . Eastern Russians have been identified as Eurasians in the past .
 Such data are crucial for medical genetics and essential for studying population history . Such data is crucial for the study of genetics and genetics .
 Anti-Russian racism is also “excusable” for the U.S. Department of Defense and intelligence . The United States laid the groundwork to hate Russians at least since the 1950s and 1960s, he says . Anti-Russians are “unquestionable
 The Rocky and Bulwinkle Show features the lovable flying squirrel and the adorable but obtuse moose . Boris Badenov and Natasha are the co-stars of the hilarious show .
 Sanctions imposed by the United States and its junior partners against countries that resist their agendas . Sanctions are imposed by U.S. and junior partners . U.N. has imposed sanctions on Russia, Ukraine, Russia and Syria .
 They are a weapon of Economic War, resulting in chronic shortages of basic necessities, economic dislocation, chaotic hyperinflation, artificial famines, disease, and poverty . They are the weapon of economic War resulting in chaos, chaos, poverty, and chaos .
 In every country, the poorest and the weakest suffer the worst impact of sanctions . Infants, children, the chronically ill and the elderly are among those who suffer from sanctions .
 U.S. imposed sanctions, violate international law and are a tool of regime change, U.N. says . United States imposed sanctions on Iran, Russia, Ukraine, Syria, Russia and Syria have been accused of using sanctions to change regime .
 They are a crime against humanity used, like military intervention, to topple popular governments and movements . They are often used to topple governments or movements, says Julian Zelizer .
 International humanitarian law posits that no person may be punished for acts that he or she did not commit . International law says no person can be punished if they commit an act that is not committed by the person .
 This is one of the fundamental guarantees established by the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Additional Protocols . This is the first time the UN system has been allowed to operate in the United States .
 Respect for this principle can be ensured solely by establishing guarantees that protect judicial procedures . Respect for judicial procedures can only be ensured only if it is protected by guarantees of judicial procedures.
 The case follows a temporary change to Meta's hate speech policy that allows some Facebook and Instagram users to express violent sentiments against Russian armed forced invading Ukraine .
 Meta did not immediately respond to a request for comment from CNN Business regarding Russia's investigation .
 Euro-American Displacement and the Hate China and Russia Syndromes . Westerners really need someone or something to lash out at. After the long painful hibernation of COVID-19 westerners .
 Americans and Western Europeans are ready to kill — somebody, anybody that provides a convenient target right now . Call it “displacement,” that is transferring anger from one person, event or object to another, writes John Sutter .
 President Trump brilliantly turned anger on China with his “China virus” lie . President Trump turned anger into anger at the U.S. President Trump has been accused of spreading a virus in China .
 This is different because it's the world’s premier colonial power picking the fight, instead of the colonized . This is . different because . it is the world's premier . colonial power . Instead of the . colonized, the colonial power has picked the fight for the colon
 The concept has been used to mitigate the lack of definition provided by Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations . Article 51 states sovereign nations may fend off an armed attack until the Security Council has adopted measures under Chapter VII of the UN Charter .
 The Iraq War, promoted by then Senator Biden, was “legally” justified by the Doctrine of Preemption, even though there was no proof of the war’s legitimacy . The Iraq war was ‘legally justified’ by the doctrine of preemption .
 International law recognized that nations need not suffer an attack before they can lawfully take action to defend themselves against forces that present an imminent danger of attack . International law recognizes that nations must not suffer a direct attack before taking action .
 Legal scholars and international jurists often condition the legitimacy of preemption on the existence of an imminent threat . Preemption is often a visible mobilization of armies, navies, and air forces preparing to attack .
 "We must adapt the concept of imminent threat to the capabilities and objectives of today's adversaries," says the U.S. president .
 The United States has long maintained the option of preemptive actions to counter a sufficient threat to our national security . The U.S. has maintained that preemptive action is possible .
 To forestall or prevent such hostile acts by its adversaries, the State will, if necessary, act preemptively, says the State . The State will "act preemptively" if necessary to prevent such acts, says President Obama .
 In the case of the Iraq war to which he was referring there was no proof, he said . The Iraq war was not proof of the war's involvement, he added .
 In the case of the Ukraine War, overwhelming proof does exist regarding American/NATO buildup for war against Russia . The Ukraine War is the result of the U.S. and NATO buildup in Ukraine .
 Euro-American military forces' relentless movement east after 1991 in violation of numerous agreements, especially in Ukraine . Imminent threat is all too easily proven by Euro-U.S. military forces’ relentless movement after 1991 .
 Victoria Nuland’s admissions regarding American biological “research” and destroying evidence right on Russia’S. border . Imminent threat is established by Victoria N.Nuland's admissions about destroying evidence .
 That one admission alone, legally justifies the Russian invasion of Ukraine . That one single admission, alone, legal justifies the invasion, says the Russian president . The admission is the admission that Russia invaded Ukraine .
 Biological weapons can be just as, or even more, dangerous than nuclear weapons . Biological weapons are just as dangerous as nuclear weapons, says CNN.com .
 Actual and imminent threat refers to a physical danger that is real, would occur within an immediate time frame, and could result in death or serious bodily harm . Actual and imminent threat refers to an actual and imminent danger that would occur in an instant .
 The duration of the risk, the nature and severity of the potential harm, the likelihood that the . potential harm will occur, and the length of time before the potential . harm would occur . The duration, the . nature of the . severity and the . likelihood that . the . likely
 An inciter is generally one who is present at the scene of the offense and who encourages the principal offender to commit an act that he is already inclined to commit on his own .
 Given the reasonable possibility that You, Mr President did not cook up the plan for this international crime syndicate yourself, please be so kind as to share the name of the individuals and/or group that proposed this scheme to you .
 Corporate U.S. media and foreign policy hardliners want to create a new Afghanistan in the middle of Europe by flooding Ukraine with weapons . The U.N. media, foreign policy .
 Photographic evidence shows that these weapons have already ended up in the hands of neo-Nazi paramilitaries . The U.S. and NATO allies have already received training and arms from neo-Nazis .
 Many are fleeing back across the Polish border, filled with fear in the face of heavy casualties . Many are now fleeing across the border to the north of Poland .
 The unit is supposed to be acting independently, but has stuck to the same talking points and often the same verbiage . It's a concerted effort to spin the unit as heroic defenders of Ukraine against the alleged “real” fascists .
 The latest wave of the lionization of Azov began sometime before the Russian military operation . The most-publicized image of an AK-47-wielding Ukrainian granny training to repel invaders in the regiment’s camp .
 The last week of March, however, saw the puff pieces come in a tight group, like the bullet holes after an AK burst .
 BBC presenter Ros Atkins sought to debunk Russian ‘untruths’ about Nazis in Ukraine . The first of the bunch was a ten-minute video, from Britain’s state broadcaster BBC, on March 27 .
 Azov was created in 2014 “by volunteers with nationalist and often far-right political leanings,” the FT says . The FT shrugs off its Nazi connections, saying Azov is a "nationalist" group .
 The symbols were picked out by Azov founder Andriy Biletsky, a notorious white supremacist . Azov is one of the most prominent white supremacists in the world .
 Azov has a “history of neo-Nazi leanings, which have not been entirely extinguished by its integration into the Ukrainian military,” but is “an effective fighting force” check . Azov also has “neo-Nazi leaning’s�
 Azov's political wing only won 2.15% of the vote in 2019 — quoting a German researcher this time — check . Azov’s political wing won only 2.25% of votes in 2019, check. Azovs’ political wing also won just 2
 An Azov soldier was killed in the fighting outside of Kiev . His funeral is described as a funeral for a soldier killed by the fighting .
 Azov members are apparently really good at sticking to the message . They know their audience and which buttons to push, Azov says . Azov is known for sticking to their message .
 The Times piece repeatedly mentions praise of the British NLAW anti-tank rockets .
 In an interview after the coup, he told the magazine he picked out Azov’s insignia . Azov's insignia is one of Russia's most prominent symbols .
 The militants browbeat Zelensky into not withdrawing from the Donbass as required by the Minsk agreements . Here they are in October 2019 .
 It's hard to find a terrorist group the U.S. did not create or support, the author says . The United States has created or supported terrorism, he says .
 Azov was absorbed into the Ukrainian National Guard in 2014 . Likewise with Azov that was absorbed in 2014, Azov is now part of Ukraine's National Guard .
 Western mainstream media is not reporting news objectively, and only reporting views and injuries on the side of those who do support the U.S. backed “neo-“ Nazi regime in Ukraine . But western mainstream media news is not . reporting news .
 The need for free speech has been eradicated by President Biden’s government . President Biden's Justice Department has not been challenged by the Justice Department .
 Facebook Allows Praise of Neo-Nazi Ukrainian Battalion If It Fights Russian Invasion . The reversal raises questions about Facebook’s blacklist-based content moderation, which critics say lacks nuance .
 Facebook will temporarily allow its billions of users to praise the Azov Battalion . The Ukrainian neo-Nazi military unit was previously banned from being freely discussed under the company’s Dangerous Individuals and Organizations policy .
 The policy shift, made this week, is pegged to the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine and preceding military escalations . The policy shifts come as Russia continues to invade Ukraine .
 The Azov Battalion is known for its hardcore right-wing ultranationalism and neo-Nazi ideology among its members . The regiment is the armed wing of the broader Ukrainian white nationalist Azov movement .
 Graphic footage purports to show Ukrainian servicemen shooting Russians at point-blank range . Multiple disturbing clips apparently filmed at the same unknown facility, emerged online over the weekend .
 The footage shows multiple people, apparently Russian prisoners of war, lying on the ground . The footage was captured by Russian soldiers in the early 1950s .
 The injured soldiers are interrogated by armed men, many of whom are wearing blue armbands commonly used by Ukrainian units . Many of the injured soldiers have been injured in the Ukraine .
 Some of the wounded personnel apparently died during the interrogation. Some of them apparently died .
 Footage also shows three other prisoners ordered out of a van and shooting their legs at a point-blank range . Footage shows three prisoners being shot at point blank range by police .
 The founder of the US-government funded Bellingcat has described it as “very serious incident” and called for a “further investigation” of the disturbing imagery .
 The Germanand French-brokered protocols had been designed to regularize the status of those regions within the Ukrainian state . The protocols were meant to regularise the status .
 This therefore should not have been difficult to verify and apparently it wasn’t . This is not the first time this has happened to be true, and it's not the second time .
 Ukrainian government vows to investigate the incident . The Ukrainian government has stated that such behaviour was unacceptable .
 Russian Special Forces have managed to detain Ukrainian nationalists responsible for torturing captured Russian soldiers . Russian lawmaker, Chairman of the Defence Committee of the State Duma, Vladimir Shamanov said .
 The Russian Defence Ministry has not yet confirmed the lawmaker's claim . The Russian government has not confirmed the claim .
 A video depicting several Ukrainians humiliating and torturing Russian soldiers has been making the rounds online for days . The video shows several Ukrainians, either members of the armed forces or one of the nationalist battalions, humiliating Russian soldiers .
 Several of the Russian servicemen had their legs shot and were left without any medical assistance, according to the footage . The footage shows several of the servicemen being shot and without medical assistance .
 The soldiers were captured during the special military operation that Moscow had launched in Ukraine on 24 February . The operation was part of a Russian military operation in Ukraine .
 At least eight captured Russian soldiers were killed after being tortured . The Russian investigative committee ordered the launch of an investigation into the incident .
 Committee said it will spare no efforts to identify the perpetrators of the crime . Committee said that it would spare no effort to find out the perpetrators .
 The Russian special operation was launched by President Vladimir Putin in response to a request from the Donetsk and Lugansk People's Republics . The Russian forces had been shelling by Ukrainian forces for over a week in February .
 There has been a drop in foreign volunteers willing to go to Ukraine for a variety of reasons one being that they are often killed before they reach any battlefield . Meanwhile, Azov appears to have spread its extremist approaches to war throughout the Ukraine military .
 Facebook rules now allow anyone to advocate for torturing and killing any Russian anywhere simply by yelling “Ukraine” first .
 The USA under the leadership of President Biden has devolved into a level of depravity far below what most sane and healthy minds can possibly conceive . And thus, the USA . under the . leadership of . President Biden, the . president of the United States .
 As for those caught up personally in the current Euro-American war fever on any side, the price is likely to be beyond imagining . The price of the war fever in the U.S. is beyond imagining.
 Socrates observations about the fate of democracies devolving into populism, in this case an insane mob rule, have been proven eerily and morbidly accurate . Socrates' observations about democracy devolving to populism have been proved true .
 President Biden’s top cabinet officers in addition to members of the senate that profit from war, are most certainly culpable in all of these crimes . The monopolist Euro-American news media is also culpable, writes John Avlon .
 Militants from Ukrainian nationalist battalions are taking humanitarian aid away from civilians in Donbass, rights commissioner says . Victoria Serdyukova, the Human Rights Commissioner of the Lugansk People's Republic, says .
 Humanitarian convoy will be located in part of the Syrian capital . The convoy is expected to arrive at the end of the month .
 Members of nationalist battalions arrive there with weapons in their hands, and they forbid them to receive this humanitarian aid . Members of nationalists battalions arrived with weapons, and were not allowed to receive aid .
 U.S. forces stole $7 billion in Afghan funds, which they say was donated to 9/11 victim families . 15 of the 19 attackers were Saudi Arabia, two were from the United Arab Emirates, one was from Lebanon, and one from Egypt .
 55% of Afghans will face acute food insecurity throughout early 2022, including nearly 9 million people at emergency levels . This is one step before famine conditions, one step ahead of famine conditions .
 Food insecurity is likely to deepen in 2022 as the country is facing shortages of food, rapidly rising food prices and an ongoing drought . Food insecurity likely to worsen in 2022, according to experts .
 Nebojsa Malic is a member of an international crime syndicate and cabal . Yet, this sort of criminal behavior is deemed not worthy by the “media club” Malic .
 The Washington DC generated war in Ukraine has shot world food prices to their highest levels in recorded history . World food prices are now at the highest level in history . Food prices have reached a record high in the past year .
 FAO Food Price Index* averaged 159. points in March 2022, up 17. points from February . It is the highest level since the index's inception in 1990 . The index is based on food prices in the United States .
 The latest increase reflects new all-time highs for vegetable oils, cereals and meat sub-indices . Those of sugar and dairy products also rose significantly .
 Often overlooked in this analysis of the crimes leading up to and continuing during the most recent phase of the war in Ukraine is the most willing accomplice called Canada .
 Western government should be voted out of office with all possible haste, writes Andrew Hammond . They can lie about their role in this war all they want, but that is another western government that should be ousted .
 According to the Hunger Hotspots Report from the World Food Programme and Food and Agriculture Organization , Ethiopia, Nigeria, South Sudan and Yemen remain the countries of highest concern .
 Ukraine only comes in at 5"" place with less than half of the wheat exports of Russia but is usually listed first for some odd reason on MSM these days .
 Ukraine and Russia are two of the top five grain exporters in the world . Russia and Ukraine are among the world's top grain exporter .
 By some estimates, what is at stake is global food security since the global agricultural trade involved is worth nearly $1.2 trillion . The global agriculture trade involved in this trade is worth almost $1 trillion, some estimates say .
 Egypt, Turkey, Bangladesh, Iran, and Iran buy more than 60 percent of their wheat from Russia and Ukraine . The immediate food related effects of the conflict are being felt in Egypt and Turkey . All of them have outstanding food imports .
 Lebanon, Tunisia, Yemen, Libya, Libya and Pakistan also rely heavily on the two countries for their wheat supply .
 The Pentagon, Langley and the British military intelligence planned to entrap him, the author says . Something he didn't put into his calculus was the years of planning at the Pentagon and Langley, he says .
 Lethal equipment was obviously stationed in Ukraine by the West much before the war drums rolled . Lethal equipment has been deployed in Ukraine since the start of the war .
 The chorus of 'Putin is about to invade' was raised after the equipment was in place and duly manned . In fact, the chorus was raised before the equipment had been put on the ground .
 Russians acted on a script they have been refining since the Orange Revolution of November 2004 . Russians acted with a script that has been refined since the 2004 Orange Revolution . Russian President Vladimir Putin is expected to speak at the end of the year .
 NATO expansion reached its climax in 1998 when the United States senate ratified NATO expansion . The U.S. Senate ratified NATO's expansion in 1998 .
 Kennan’s statement must be read in full to understand why Ukraine has been attacked . Kennan's statement is essential to understanding why Ukraine attacked .
 "Now we are turning our backs on the very people who mounted the greatest bloodless revolution in history to remove that Soviet regime," he said . "And now we turn our backs," he added . "We are turning back on the people who mount the greatest bloodyless revolution," he
 Kennan: Despite Kennan’s warning, the Military Industrial Complex stopped at nothing . The military Industrial Complex is still at work today .
 Jens Stoltenberg, Secretary General of NATO, has been salivating on Georgia and Ukraine, both red lines for Russia . NATO Secretary General has been interviewed as a peacenik Prime Minister of Norway .
 The other purpose was to deter neo-Nazi groups menacing for the past eight years, Luhansk and Donetsk, pro-Russian enclaves of Donbas in the East . The two cities have been the target of neo-Nazis for years . The pro-Russians in Luh
 Just when his neck seemed to be on the line, he flew to Ukraine to shed the boozy image . He flew to Kiev to shed his boozy reputation .
 Supposing Johnson had fallen, President Joe Biden would have slipped with no hand to pull him up . Joe Biden's hand would have been enough to pull Johnson up .
 Questions were being raised about his mental fitness; Trump’s rating were the same as his, pandemic blues were not ending . Race relations were plummeting, school kids were killing school kids with automatic weapons regularly . Questions were raised about the president's mental fitness .
 All of this is against the backdrop of defeat in Afghanistan, a failed attempt at regime change in Kazakhstan and the western alliance in total disarray .
 Anglo-American combine were beating the war drums at such high decibel levels that a larger war with Europe was being dreamed up . The Anglo-U.S. combine was being beaten up, writes Peter Bergen .
 The United States was across the Atlantic; Britain beyond the channel, distanced even more from Europe by leaving Europe . The U.S. was in the middle of the Atlantic . The United Kingdom was in a position similar to the United States in the 1960s .
 Military intelligence of the countries was pointing to the 1,20,000 Russian troops on the Ukraine border as precursor to a general war . Military intelligence pointed to the presence of Russian troops in Ukraine as a precursor to an invasion .
 War hysteria was a smokescreen to lure Russia into the Ukrainian foxhole for a sufficient length of time to enable the western media, transformed into a lying propaganda machine, to demonize Putin irreparably . The western media turned into a propaganda machine and demonized Putin .
 Rabbi Kaminezki, chief rabbi in Dnipro in eastern Ukraine, had warned against Zelensky becoming President .
 Zelensky ignored the rabbi and appointed Volodymyr Groysman, a fellow Jew as his Prime Minister . Zelenky also ignored his rabbi's wishes and appointed him as Prime Minister of Israel .
 Since then, the Prime Minister has changed . I wonder if this detail makes any material difference to the story .
 The Russian embassy in neighboring Warsaw has been ‘seized’ not by mobs but Poland’s Foreign Ministry . Poland's Foreign Ministry seized the Russian embassy, not mobs, but mobs .
 Americans too were ‘trapped’ in Afghanistan for 20 years and left in disgrace . Americans too should have been ‘tougher’ than the Taliban, says President Obama . Americans were “trapped in Afghanistan’s war zone,” says Obama
 President Biden's and Boris Johnson’s foreign policy planners decided to intentionally provoke President Putin into war . There probably were at least five to nine reasons why they decided to provoke Putin .
 President Putin being a man of honor with limits as to how much blood of innocents can be poured upon his doorstep before he would act decisively to stop it . President Putin is a man who has limits to what he can do to stop the bloodshed .
 Only those without honor so deeply enthralled with a Machiavellian perspective on life and such cold-blooded cynicism as to be arguably inhuman . Only those who lack honor are enthrhralled by such cynicism as well .
 As all familiar with Greek tragedies regarding hubris know, the results of hubris are invariably not good for those inflicted with it . The results of the hubris in Greek tragedies are always not good .
 The United States is risking all on a roll of the dice, thinking it will make a “man” of someone who clearly is not a man at all . Yes, the U.S. risks all — the very future of all life on earth on a dice roll of
 The USA creates the real and imaginary monsters in the world just to keep enriching the already ultra-super rich who incidentally mostly don’t pay taxes .
 The U.S. is attempting to crash both Russia and China’s economies . And yet, now, the United States is trying to crash them, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We don’t hear much about the human suffering in Palestine, Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, Chad, Niger, Ethiopia, Ethiopia and Ethiopia, Somali (which is in the third year of a drought and relentlessly bombed and sanctioned by the US), Mali, Mali, and so on
 The link here is a real-time counter the reader is invited to investigate . The link is a live counter counter to a series of images posted on CNN iReport .
 Reports are slowly starting to leak out from the hermetically sealed American political/media echo chamber that all Ukrainian civilians around the country are not all so enthralled with love for the United States installed neoNazi regime in Kiev . Many are welcoming Russian liberation from that totalitarian and corrupt regime
 A million or more Ukrainians will happily take a U.S. visa to find a better life in the US, writes Andrew Hammond . But that will not change events leading up to, and consequent from the realities on the ground in Ukraine during the past eight years, now and the
 The inhumane acts are often attributed to nationalist and Neo-Nazi groups .
 Many reported atrocities are being committed by Ukrainian nationalists and the neo-Nazi Azov Battalion . The Azov battalion is known for its neo-Nazism .
 Ukraine's National Guard was incorporated into the National Guard in 2014 . The group is subordinate to the Ukrainian authorities . The Ukrainian National Guard is now subordinate to Ukraine's authorities .
 Civilians tied to electric poles or trees with tape, sometimes their faces smeared with paint or green antiseptic dye, they are whipped and left in the cold . Civilians are tied to poles, sometimes tied to trees or poles with tape .
 Photos of the victims and footage of the punishment are widely shared on social media networks . The punishment is widely viewed as punishment for the child .
 Among those targeted are the Roma people, one of Ukraine's ethnic minorities . The Roma people are one of the Ukraine's biggest ethnic minorities.
 One photo shows a Roma family tied to a pole with their faces painted with green dye in Lvov . The photo was taken in the city of Lvov, Ukraine .
 There is no evidence that these people committed crimes, nor is there any provision in Ukrainian legislation authorizing the use of such brutal methods of punishment, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 Yet another infamous torture site codenamed ""Library" was located in the International Airport of Mariupol, the Donetsk region . The airport is located in Donetsk region, Ukraine .
 Those who disagreed with the policies of the Ukrainian authorities after the 2014 coup were detained, tortured and even killed there . Those who disagree with the government's policies were detained and tortured there .
 Kasonta says everyone in the West is perfectly aware of what is happening in Ukraine . She says Ukrainian nationalists, the Azov Battalion, and violent mobs are treating regular citizens and ethnic minorities in Ukraine as normal citizens .
 Racism and xenophobia have long penetrated into the fabric of Ukrainian society, an analyst says . Racism has long been a problem in Ukrainian society for years, he says .
 African students were turned back by Ukrainian border guards while attempting to cross into Poland . The students were attempting to enter Poland from Africa .
 The nationalist agenda became part of the Ukrainian education system . Meanwhile, the nationalist agenda has become part of Ukraine's education .
 The nationalist projects received up to half of all the funds allocated by the Ukrainian government for children's and youth organizations in 2020 alone . According to Ukrainian outlet STRANA.ua .
 Euro-American mainstream news can so blithely completely cover it up and present Ukraine’s leadership and well-known neo-Nazi support in a positive light . While claiming to be liberal enlightened people and honest news producers and reporters, they claim to be honest . What is amazing
 U.S. and western European voters and tax payers are being conned again, by the same miscreants that led us into the last war, and the one before that . So, yes, United States and western . European voters are being . conned . again,
 Had Russia submitted to the US’ attempted nuclear blackmail, Washington would have immediately set its sights on China, after which it would have restored its declining unipolar hegemony over the planet if it subsequently succeeded in strategically neutralizing that country too .
 The author warned earlier this week that “Kiev Must Withdraw From Donetsk & Lugansk If It Truly Wants To Avert War” The author pointed out that Moscow will decisively support its newfound Donbass allies with military means in order to ensure the security of their civilian populations
 The United States failed to rein in its Eastern European proxy army, which prompted Russia to commence its ongoing special operation in Ukraine . Regrettably, the U.S. failed to re-involve the Eastern European proxies, resulting in Russia's special operation .
 Russian Ambassador to the UN Vasily Nebenzya articulated the reasons behind President Putin’s decision earlier this morning . The Russian ambassador to the U.N. said the decision was made by President Putin .
 President Biden’s approval ratings in the U.S. plummet to new record lows 87.9 percent . President Biden's approval rating in the United States plummet to 87 percent .
 The latest research by Redfield & Wilton Strategies finds that 47% of Americans disapprove and 37% approve of President Joe Biden’s overall job performance as President . The latest poll finds 47% disapprove of Biden's job performance .
 His net approval rating, at -10%, is eight points lower than in our polling on 23 February, when 41% disapproved and 39% approved of Biden’s performance .
 The following is a graphic representation of the overall data of that survey . Redfield & Wilton Strategies survey conducted by Redfield and Wilton .
 By far the strongest single issue diminishing his tattered remnants of his popularity is economics . By far, the strongest issue is economics, according to the polls .
 Throwing an extra four billion dollars at Ukrainians to get those same Ukrainians killed in another game of thrones is wasteful at a time when inflation is also at an all time high .
 The price of gasoline is one of the single most important issues for Americans . President Biden’s urgent need to overthrow President Putin and try to demolish another nation. The price has skyrocketed thanks to President Biden's urgent need .
 Raising fuel prices and other inflationary trends are not helping President Biden’s standing . President Biden's standing may not be helping him standing .
 The mainstream news lies so much one must assume the opposite of what is reported to get any inkling of the truth . Maybe somehow, enough Americans have learned the mainstream news .
 Public opinion surveys reveal American citizens strong distrust of the American mainstream news . 88% of Americans say they distrust of mainstream news, according to surveys .
 U.S. trust in the mainstream news media is justifiably very low . So, it should not be terribly surprising that American trust in ‘news’ is very low, he says .
 United States ranks last among 46 countries in trust in media, Reuters Institute report finds . Just 29% of people surveyed in the U.S. said they trust the news, compared to 45% in Canada and 54% in Brazil, report found .
 If one types “chemical weapons used by Russia in Ukraine” into Google a mind-numbing 65,600,000 links emerge . There is not a shred, not an atom of evidence to back up those scurrilous accusations .
 House Speaker Nancy Pelosi compares Putin’s Ukraine moves to Hitler . Pelosi calls Putin ‘very evil’ for his deployment of troops into eastern Ukraine . Pelosi compares Russian President Vladimir Putin to Nazi leader Adolf Hitler .
 Pelosi likened Putin sending Russian ‘peacekeeping’ troops into separatist-held areas of Ukraine on Monday to the Nazi takeover of Czechoslovakia prior to World War Il. She likened Putin's actions to that of the Nazis . Pelosi likened the move to the takeover of the Czechoslov
 The longer a debate rages, the greater the likelihood that someone else will compare someone else to Hitler . Hitler was the only dictator to be compared to Hitler in the world .
 The former secretary of state reportedly told a private fund-raising party that Putin's actions are similar to Hitler's in the run up to World War I .
 Clinton might have had some invisible hand behind events in Ukraine and President Biden’s feverish attempts at overthrowing the government of Russia . Clinton might also have had a hand behind efforts to overthrow Russia .
 She was President Obama’s principal foreign policy advisor that pushed for the disastrous and deadly so-called “Arab Spring” “color revolutions” that left nothing but death and chaos behind .
 The Maidan riots in Ukraine were American funded and emblematic example of a classic color revolution . Maidan rioters were emblematic examples of the American funded revolution . The Kiev riots were a classic example of the classic color revolutions .
 It's really easy from lofty perches in DC and NY to beat the war drums that get men, women and children killed in far away lands, but not so easy to see one’s own family members butchered in another American orchestrated war .
 For the record it is the United States that’s funding and training neo-Nazis and sending them to Ukraine to fight against Russians . The U.S. is funding and sending neo-Nazi forces to Ukraine, the author says .
 One of President Putin’s key goals was and remains to de-Nazify Ukraine, says Putin . Putin's key goal was to ‘de-nomenalify Ukraine’, Putin says . Putin: ‘One of President Vladimir's key goals is to de
 The United States Department of State organized the government the U.S. put into Ukraine and loaded it with Nazis too . The U.N. put the government in Ukraine with a government of Nazis .
 It would be fascinating to do MRI scans on people like Presidents Trump and Biden, Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and mainstream news reporters to see to what extent they really believe .
 Ash Center research team unveils findings from long-term public opinion survey July 9, 2000 . For Tony Saich, Daewoo Professor of International Affairs and director of the Ash Center .
 It began with an attempt to develop a suite of curricular materials to inform a course on local government in China .
 The work began in 2003, and together with a leading private research and polling company in China, the team developed a series of questionnaires for in-person interviews .
 The surveys were conducted in eight waves from 2003 through 2016 . They captured opinion data from 32,000 individual respondents .
 The survey team set out to assess overall satisfaction levels with government among respondents from across the socioeconomic and geographic strata of China . The survey was conducted by a team of surveyors across China .
 The survey team found that compared to public opinion patterns in the U.S., in China there was very high satisfaction with the central government . In China, satisfaction was high compared to satisfaction levels in the United States .
 In 2016, 95 percent of respondents were either ‘relatively satisfied’ or ‘highly satisfied” with Beijing . In 2016 the last year the survey was conducted, the survey found that 95. percent of those surveyed were “relatively” satisfied with Beijing.
 Tanay: “You go to a movie, and violence is there,” Tanay told Psychiatric Times . “Violence is there in movies and movies,’ he said .
 The average American watches nearly 5 hours of video each day . 98% of that video is watched on a traditional television set, according to the Nielsen Company .
 Most self-involving video games contain some violent content, even those for children . The games are self-playable, with some adult content .
 In a given year, more U.S. children will die from gun violence than from cancer, pneumonia, influenza, asthma, asthma and HIV/AIDS combined combined .
 The overall rate of firearmrelated death or injury in the United States is higher than most other industrialized countries . In fact, the U.S. has a higher firearm-related death rate than most countries .
 Theaters of Command tells how the Pentagon and sometimes the CIA have had the final say over thousands of films, video-games, and TV shows, often imposing heavy rewrites . Drawing on vast archives of shocking new documentation, the film is based in the Pentagon's archives .
 The government’s deliberate creation of what investigator Roger Stahl terms “American empire’�s cinematic universe” is one of the great swindles perpetuated against an unwitting public, he says .
 These actions have systematically scrubbed from the screen an unsavory century of military history . War crimes, illegal arms sales, racism and sexual assault, torture, coups, assassinations, and weapons of mass destruction are scrubbed out of the screen .
 This government operation amounts to the airbrushing of entire culture, laid bare here for the first time after decades of secrecy, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This deliberate creation of what some have called ‘American empire’s cinematic universe’ is one of the great under-reported PR coups of our time . The creation of the American empire's cinematic universe is a major PR coup .
 A false flag operation is when one side in a conflict does something horrible, like kills many of its own people, then blames the opposing side in that conflict . False flag operations are when a side kills its own civilians and blames the other side in the conflict .
 False flag operations are usually difficult to prove, but some circumstantial evidence collects to make it quite clear who was the real perpetrator of that crime .
 Evidence from Ukraine strongly suggests that Kiev’s neo-Nazis have perpetrated at least two false flag operations thus far in an attempt to encourage the U.S. and/or Europe to enforce a no-fly zone over Ukraine, escalating this conflict into a larger international war .
 The following is published March 23, 2022 in the Canadian Global Research online newspaper . The following was published March 25, 2022 .
 Russians are now in the same boat with African Americans and Hispanic Americans . The Mariupol Theater Bombing is guilty until proven innocent . Russian President Vladimir Putin has been accused of a crime in Russia .
 Those who exalt Hitler, don’t even feel the need to do convincing frame-ups and instead leave enough clues behind to prove that they themselves are committing atrocities . Fortunately, due to the preternatural overconfidence of the real aggressors in this ongoing tragedy, those who
 Testimony by evacuated Mariupol residents and warnings of a false flag attack undermine the Ukrainian government’s claims about a Russian bombing of a theater sheltering civilians . Max Blumenthal-March 18, 2022 .
 Local residents in Mariupol had warned three days before the March 16 incident that the theater would be the site of a false flag attack . The openly neo-Nazi Azov Battalion controlled the building and the territory around it .
 Civilians that escaped the city through humanitarian corridors have testified that Azov held them as human shields . Azov fighters detonated parts of the theater as they retreated, witnesses say . Civilians have testified they were held by Azov forces as shields .
 Despite claims of a massive Russian airstrike that reduced the building to ashes, all civilians appear to have escaped with their lives . Despite claims that the building was destroyed, the building appears to be safe .
 Video of the attack on the theater remains unavailable at the time of publication . Only photographs of the damaged structure can be viewed . The attack was carried out in the early hours of Thursday .
 The Russian Ministry of Defense has denied conducting an airstrike on the theater . The site had no military value and that no sorties were flown in the area on March 16 .
 The Russian military operation in Ukraine has triggered a humanitarian crisis . Russia gained nothing by targeting the theater, and virtually guaranteed itself another blow .
 Azov, on the other hand, stood to benefit from a dramatic and grisly attack blamed on Russia . Azov's government has been accused of a cover-up of the attack in Ukraine .
 In full retreat all around Mariupol and facing the possibility of brutal treatment at the hands of a Russian military hellbent on “de-Nazification,” its fighters’ only hope seemed to lie in triggering direct NATO intervention .
 Zelensky invoked Martin Luther King Jr.’s “| Have a Dream” speech and played a video depicting civilian suffering to make the case for a no fly zone . The same sense of desperation informed his carefully scripted address .
 Azov Battalion fighters grow desperate in Mariupol, plea for Western military intervention . The strategic southeastern port city has been held by the Azov battalion since 2014 . It is one of Russia's most strategic cities in the region .
 Since seizure, it has served as a political and military base for the ultra-nationalist paramilitary . It has launched assaults on pro-Russian separatists in the breakaway republic of Donetsk .
 The Azov Battalion has been formally incorporated into the Ukrainian National Guard by the country’s Interior Ministry . Gathered from the ranks of extreme right activists that provided protesters with street muscle during the 2013-14 Euromaidan coup, the battalion has been incorporated .
 Azov fighters make no secret of their ideological goals . With the Nazi-inspired Wolfsangel symbol emblazoned on their uniforms and flags, they have ideological goals in Russia .
 Azov has been identified by the FBI and United States Congress as a neo-Nazi unit . It has been implicated in an array of sordid human rights violations . Despite having been identified as neo-Nazis, it has been linked to the crimes .
 Putin has marked Azov's base in Mariupol as the front line of his stated campaign to “de-Nazify” Ukraine . Putin has accused Azov of seeking to exterminate the ethnic Russians of Donbas .
 Russian special forces and Donetsk People's Republic People’s Militia forces are waging a block-by-block fight for control of the city . The city has been the site of ferocious urban fighting since Russia’February 24 invasion of Ukraine .
 On March 7, an Azov Battalion commander named Denis Prokopenko appeared on camera from Mariupol with an urgent message . The Azov battalion commander appeared on March 7 with a message to the Kremlin .
 Prokopenko: Azov's position is growing more dire by the day . Azov’s position in the country has been described as ‘deteriorated’ by the court’.
 Russia’s military rapidly degraded Azov positions throughout the second week of March 2022 . Soldiers apparently directed elderly civilians as well as women and children into the wardrobe hall of the Donetsk Academic Regional Drama Theater in Mariupol .
 A video filmed inside the dimly lit building on March 11 featured a local man claiming that one thousand civilians were trapped inside and demanding a humanitarian corridor to allow them to escape . The video was posted on YouTube and posted March 11 .
 Azov Battalion soldiers have been filmed preventing civilians from leaving Mariupol . They have even forced men out of their cars and brutally assaulted them while they attempted to break through checkpoints .
 Azov had used many of Mariupol residents as human shields, testimony from many of them was to be believed . Azov has been accused of using them as shields in the past .
 Local residents told Steshen an alleged bombing of a mosque in Mariupol was a false flag intended to “drag Turkey into the war’s war,” he said . Residents also warned that a false false flag attack on a theater was imminent . Stes
 Ukrainian artillery gunners shelling the grounds of the mosque, from their positions at Balka in Nizhniaya Kirvoka . One of the provocation is against the citizens of Turkey, who hid in the mosque built by Akhmetov, who built the mosque .
 Zelensky was unable to drag the EU, USA and UK into the war against the Russian Federation . Zelenski was not able to drag his country into joining the war .
 Zelensky is trying to drag Turkey into the war, pinning his hopes on the explosive emotional character and the love the faithful feel for their sacred shrines . The war is now being waged in Turkey .
 The Associated Press repeated Ukrainian government claims that the mosque in Mariupol had been shelled by Russia with 80 civilians inside, including children . Western media outlets like the Associated Press said that 80 civilians were inside the Turkish mosque .
 Turkish state media revealed that the Ukrainian government had misled Western reporters . However, Turkey state media said that the government had lied to them .
 The Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Mosque was not only fully intact, it had never been hit by Russian fire . The mosque was never hit by fire and was never damaged by fire .
 Still filled with civilians, the Mariupol theater was next on somebody’s target list . The theater was last seen in the theater in the Russian city of Mariupols .
 Less than 48 hours after the debunked claims of a Russian attack on the mosque in Mariupol were introduced, humanitarian corridors finally opened up around the city .
 The flight of thousands of civilians toward Russian military positions further weakened the Azov Battalion, which was using Mariupol’s residents as collateral in its bid to compel a no-fly zone . Thousands of civilians have been fleeing the city since the start of the conflict .
 On March 16, with his military collapsing under the Russian onslaught, the Ukrainian president and famed comedian-actor Zelensky appeared by video for a carefully scripted, elaborately produced presentation before an assembly of awestruck members of Congress . “| have a dream.”
 Zelensky: “Can say | have a need. | need to protect our sky. These words are known to each of you today. | can say . have a. need. to protect the sky,” Zelenski proclaimed .
 Russia bombed theater theater in Mariupol hours after Zelensky's address . Azov Battalion’s press department said Russia had bombed theater . The theater was bombed by the Russian military in the city .
 The Azov Battalion’s watermark can be seen clearly in the lower right-hand corner of the image below . The watermark is clearly visible in the photo of the Azov battalion .
 Azov’s photo was republished by international outlets including Sky News, but with the paramilitary's brand cropped out . Sky News republished the photo of the paramilitary with the logo cropped out of the image .
 Illia Ponomarenko, a Kiev-based, UStrained reporter, has managed to rack up over a million Twitter followers since Russia’s invasion began .
 Illia Ponomarenko happened to work for the Kyiv Independent, an outlet that has functioned as one of the most potent U.S. information weapons in Ukraine .
 The paper had been set up with assistance from the National Endowment for Democracy, a United States intelligence cut-out, and an EU-funded grant .
 The billionaire-backed NGO acknowledged it had not interviewed any Mariupol residents after the attack . It provided no evidence to demonstrate Russian responsibility for the attack, the NGO said .
 Azov boasts a sophisticated press unit which films its exploits in the field, and soldiers are publishing even the most banal video of themselves on social media . The theater bombing was nowhere to be found .
 Azov photos show bombed-out theater without any people in sight, living or dead . Photos supplied by Azov to media in Ukraine and abroad invariably depict the bombed out theater . Azov's photos show no people in the theater, living, dead or dead, Azov says .
 One day before the bombing, on March 15, a group of militaryaged men were photographed in front of the Mariupol theater . The theater was bombed in the Russian capital on March 16 .
 The men can be seen placing pallets against the side of the building, ferrying large objects across the theater grounds, and cutting down a tree .
 Pallets and other objects were piled against the same area of the building hit by an explosive charge the following day . Pallets, other objects, were piled on the same spot hit by the blast .
 The outlet 0629 has attempted to explain away the mysterious disappearance of the thousand civilians said to have been in the theater . The paper claims they were evacuated to the city of Zaporozhye a day before the supposed attack .
 As Mariupol residents poured out of the city through the Russian military’s humanitarian corridors, testimonies began to emerge of ruthless attacks on fleeing civilians . Azov attacks on the fleeing civilians — and of a major deception .
 They were breaking everything, all around us, they were not letting us outside . They were not even letting us out of the house, they said . They said they were breaking all around, all of us .
 Azov Nazis held civilians as human shields in the local theater in Mariupol, Ukraine, says locals . Azov nationalists are said to have used the theater as a 'human shield' for civilians .
 When the Russian advance forced them to retreat, they blew up the theater to frame Russian forces . When they were forced to retreat from the theater, the theater blew up to frame the Russian forces.
 Numerous evacuees echoed the woman’s testimony about Azov holding Mariupol civilians as hostages, and said they were targeted with gunfire as they escaped through humanitarian corridors . This plan was published 3 days in advance by an Azov deserter .
 The above a good example of real investigative journalism that looks at the details and clears away the ‘fog of war,” in so many cases intentionally generated to obscure those very same details . The above is an example .
 There is absolutely no — zero motivation for Russia to have bombed that theater. Motivation for that series of deceptions and killings by Azov is easily proven, but there is no motivation for that bombing .
 The Mariupol Theater Bombing We don't know for sure what happened to the theatre, but it wouldn’t be the first time the Ukrainian government made false claims . The Donetsk Regional Drama Theatre was bombed March 16 .
 Maxar satellite images show the word ‘CHILDREN’ written in Russian in large letters on the pavement outside . The word “CHILDEAR’s” was written on pavement outside of the building .
 The incident occurred within hours of President Volodymyr Zelensky’s virtual address to Congress, where he asked again for the United States to establish a no-fly zone over Ukraine .
 Civilians would be endangered or even killed before the world’s watching eyes . Civilians could be endangered, even killed, in the U.S.
 These allegations merit examination precisely because the incident had the supposedly desired effect . But these allegations, in the context of a war that has been distorted by misinformation, merit examination .
 If Moscow wanted to slaughter civilians, it could have easily targeted vehicles rolling in bumper-to-bumper traffic out of the city . The pro-Russian separatist-controlled north of Moscow could have targeted the vehicles .
 This is not to say civilians have not been killed during the conflict, but Russia is not deliberately targeting them as part of a genocidal campaign . Russia has not deliberately targeted civilians in Syria .
 These facts, coupled with what happened in the days before the bombing, raise questions no one in the mainstream is asking . These facts raise questions about what happened before the attack, which no one is asking.
 The mosque would drag Turkey into the war, while the drama theater would supply a justification for closing the skies over Ukraine, ideally bringing a U.S.-led NATO into direct confrontation with Russia . The mosque is one of Turkey's most prominent mosques .
 This is done so that they could scream to the whole world that Russia’s aviation did this and that the Ukrainian sky needs to be closed immediately, etc. etc. The Ukrainian sky was closed, and the Russian air force was not responsible for the incident . This was done so
 Western media repeated Ukrainian officials’ claims about the mosque in Mariupol being shelled by Russia with scores of civilians, including children, inside . Later, investigative journalist Max Blumenthal noted that .
 Zelensky and his officials had previously made similar misleading claims about the bombing of the memorial at Babi Yar, a ravine in Kiev that was also the site of massacres committed by the Nazis during World War II .
 Twitter user Elena Evdokimova issued another warning on March 13 . Elena Evkimova is a Russian-born Russian citizen .
 Militants of the Azov nationalist battalion blew up the Mariupol theater building, Russian Defense Ministry says . The theater building was rigged with explosives earlier, the ministry says .
 The Defense Ministry debunked Kiev’s accusations of an airstrike on the theater building . The theater building was where civilians could have been held hostage, the defense ministry said .
 The Azov nationalist battalion carried out another bloody provocation by blowing up the theater building, the Ministry of Defense said . “According to the verified information, militants of the Azov nationalists carried out a bloody provocation," the ministry said .
 People sheltering in a theater in the Ukrainian city of Mariupol are emerging from the building after it was bombed, former head of the Donetsk region says . The theater was bombed in the city, a former mayor of Donetsk region said .
 CNN was interested only in information supplied by Ukraine’s government . Apparently, CNN was . interested ONLY in information that was being supplied by the government .
 Of course, ‘reporting’ in that way is only propaganda — not journalism . ‘ Reporting’ is propaganda, not journalism,’s not journalism.
 Britain has reacted with concern at unconfirmed reports of an alleged chemical attack in the besieged city of Mariupol . Unconfirmed reports have not been confirmed as true .
 The alarm was raised by some of the last Ukrainian soldiers still holding out against the Russian assault there . The alarm has been raised by the last Ukraine soldiers holding out .
 Azov Battalion is a small but controversial element of Ukraine's National Guard due to its far right tendencies . They are from the Azov battalion, which is from the far right wing of the National Guard .
 Russian drone flew over and smoke caused breathing difficulties for members of the group . Three of their members experienced breathing difficulties after the incident . They claim the smoke was caused by a Russian drone flying over .
 The part about “unconfirmed,” will be forgotten by the vast majority of those “news” consumers . The part of the ‘unconfirmed” part of that ‘news’ consumers will forget by the majority of them .
 This is a form of subliminal programming of, and planting false memories in western audiences to the conflict in Ukraine, and an extreme abuse of . news media and psychology as weapons of war . This is an extreme use of news media . and psychology . as weapons .
 Most news consumers in the west won’t see the motivation or sneakiness of that kind of defamatory trickery . Unfortunately, most of the world won't see the motivations or sneakness of that sort of trickery,’s most news consumers will .
 99% of the mainstream media “news” regarding the Ukraine conflict is unconscionably misleading . That’s along with 99% . of the . mainstream media "news" regarding the . Ukraine conflict, however, is unconsprincable misleading .
 This, like all other so-called “news’s about the war in Ukraine is another fabrication used to smear Russia . This is another complete fabrication used by Russia to smear the country, Vladimir Putin says .
 He explained that the situation in Mariupol was ‘an eye-opener’ for him, claiming he sought to convince his commanders to leave the city . But they chose to stay, not least because Kiev supposedly wanted them to stay . He said he was trying to convince
 CNN is owned by the same corporate shareholders that own CNN as profit from the war industries . Simply put, it’s the same company that owns CNN as profits from war industries.
 The truth about Bucha is out there, but perhaps too inconvenient to be discovered . It should be easy to find out what really happened to the massacred civilians in the Ukrainian town . Scott Ritter is a former United States Marine Corps intelligence officer .
 One of the first lessons of objectivity is to slow things down to make sure that fact is not obscured by emotion . The first lesson to objectivity should be to make it clear that fact of the facts, not emotion, is to be obscured .
 The video has been released in its present form, it appears, with the express intent of producing a visceral “shock and awe” moment for the viewer . It appears to be aimed at producing a ‘shock’ moment for viewers .
 The Ukrainian National Police have succeeded beyond their wildest imagination . If this was indeed the case, then those who released it would be the Ukrainian National police .
 The linkage between the dead and the Russian military was established immediately, without any fact-based data to back it up, and subsequently echoed in all forms of media — mainstream and social alike alike .
 Anyone who dared question the established “Russia did it’s” narrative was shouted down and belittled as a “Russian shill,” or worse . Anyone who questioned the established Russia did it, or worse, were shouted down .
 Why seek to be objective when the narrative fits every stereotype that had been carefully assembled beforehand by the same people parroting the Bucha_ story today . That these conclusions are the byproduct of mass hysteria is beside the point .
 Social “preconditioning” of an audience unused to critical thinking is an essential step in getting this audience to accept at face value anything that is put before it, regardless of how egregiously the facts of the story strain credulity .
 The Ukrainian narrative of the events in Bucha seems to stretch credibility . And let’s be clear, the Ukrainian narrative seems to be stretching credibility .
 It is established fact that Russian troops evacuated Bucha on March 30. It is a fact that Russia troops evacuated the city of Bucha .
 Ukrainian National Police began entering Bucha on March 31, and that same day the mayor of Bucha announced that the town was fully under Ukrainian officials .
 At no time was there any suggestion by the mayor or any other Ukrainian official of mass killings undertaken by Russia . The mayor and other officials did not suggest mass killings were carried out by Russia, the mayor said .
 The videotape in question was released by Ukrainian authorities on April 2 . It is not certain if the video had been taken earlier, or on that day, or not earlier .
 The mayor's version of the mayor's account of events differs sharply from his initial account . The mayor says the mayor is not sure what happened to the video . He says it's not clear what happened after the mayor released the video of the incident .
 Russia has vehemently denied the allegations, and has requested an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council to discuss what the Russian Foreign Ministry has called the “criminal provocations by Ukrainian soldiers and radicals” in Bucha . For its part, Russia has asked the UN to hold an emergency
 The presidency of the Security Council is held by Great Britain . The British mission to the UN has denied the Russian request . A discussion on Ukraine currently scheduled for Tuesday, April 4 would serve as a forum for any discussion about Bucha .
 The Security Council has shown a readiness in the past to meet on short notice to discuss the events coming out of Ukraine . One would think the Security Council would seek to accommodate Russia’s request on a matter of such importance .
 The goal of the British is to buy time to allow the political fallout from the alleged massacre in Bucha to develop further . The British does not appear to be the rapid search for truth and justice, but rather to allow political fallout .
 President Joe Biden's reaction to the situation is a tactic used by the U.S. Vice President Biden . Biden has been accused of using the tactic to distract attention from the media .
 Biden took advantage of the Bucha crisis to advocate for the delivery of more weaponry to Ukraine . Biden also pushed for more weapons to be delivered to Ukraine by the U.S.
 The president of the country has refused to recognise the International Criminal Court . All this from the president of acountry which has refused recognition of the court .
 British chief prosecutor of the court, Karim Khan, announced in early March 2022 that he had launched an investigation into alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in Ukraine . President Biden and the Ukrainian government hope that the investigation will help them .
 Khan has dispatched a forensics team to take control of the crime scene and oversee autopsies on the victims . It's unclear whether the victims died where they were allegedly found, or if their bodies had been moved there from another location .
 Khan would also be empowered to conduct interviews with the Ukrainian National Police . The police have a history of close relations with members of the Ukrainian far right, including the infamous Azov Battalion . Khan would be able to interview the Ukrainian police .
 Of particular interest would be any investigation into orders given to the police regarding the treatment of those Ukrainian civilians deemed to have collaborated with the Russian military during its occupation of Bucha .
 The results of such an investigation would conflict with the narrative being pursued by the Ukrainian government and echoed in the West by compliant media outlets and politicians alike .
 Khan is not currently on the ground in Bucha, Romania . This is the prime reason why he has not been in the country for the past two weeks .
 If and when Khan is given access to evidence about the Bucha killings, it will have been manipulated by the Ukrainian National Police to such an extent that disproving the allegations will be virtually impossible . One can assume that if and when . Khan is eventually given . access to . evidence about
 The truth about what happened in Bucha is out there, waiting to be discovered, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The truth is still out there," he says .
 The truth appears to be inconvenient for those in a position to pursue it aggressively through a forensics-based, on-site investigation . Unfortunately, that truth is inconvenient .
 He presented the outline of a criminal case against President Biden for war crimes . Biden likens that case to the Nuremberg trial .
 Russia denies involvement in mass killings of civilians in Bucha, Ukraine . Moscow claims accusations of Bucha massacre by Russian forces are fake news . Russian military has firmly denied accusations of its involvement .
 The claims have been made by Ukraine itself and amplified by some Western media outlets and human rights groups . The claims come days after Moscow withdrew its troops from the area .
 Some of the dead apparently had their hands tied . Others wore white armbands, commonly used by Russian forces and civilians in areas under Russian control .
 Kuleba: "We must stop them and kick them out of the G7. | demand new, devastating G7 sanctions NOW" “We must demand new sanctions NOW,” he tweeted .
 Top Western politicians have backed Kiev’s assessment of Bucha . Some have explicitly pinning the blame for the killings on Moscow as well .
 Western media have been fueling allegations that Russia committed mass killings of civilians in the Ukrainian city of Bucha . Bucha-Like ‘False Flag’ Incidents to continue as West ‘Frustrated’ Over Propaganda Failures, April 3, 2022 .
 The Russian Defence Ministry dismissed the accusations, underscoring that the footage is nothing short of yet another provocation . Russia's Defence Ministry said the footage was "yet another provocation"
 Kiev quickly accuses Russia of ‘genocide’ and ‘massacre’ in Bucha . Western media seems eager to automatically criminalize Moscow without a full investigation . Experts say the media is a tool for the West to make up for frustrations caused by the failures of its
 ‘NATO-aligned’ media plays its role to “protect their ‘side’” from repercussions for the war crimes they have been committing for decades"", says Vanessa Beeley, an independent investigative journalist .
 Ukrainian military policy was to shoot anyone on the street that did not have a blue armband, a sign recognized as an identifier of the Russian military . Joe Quinn, political commentator and author, says it was “entirely plausible” that that Ukrainian military . policy was
 Quinn says it was possible that some of the Bucha civilians wore white bandages as a sign of friendliness towards the Russian military . According to Quinn, some of those who wore the bandages were thought to be aligned with the Russian forces . Quinn: It's possible that it was
 It is certainly a more plausible explanation than the irrational claim that retreating Russian soldiers decided to indiscriminately 'shoot' civilians on the street in Bucha, Quinn says .
 Russia has made significant steps towards financial and economic independence from the West and stronger ties with China and India, which ""is causing a huge frustration"" in the West, he said . He also said that it can relate to the fact that it is causing a 'huge frustration'
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has said that Belarusian counterpart Alexander Lukashenko handed him documents exposing the Bucha fake . Putin said that the documents were handed to him by Lukashenka . Putin has also said that he has been handed the documents to him .
 Putin: The Bucha provocation is similar to the claims made regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria . According to Putin, the claims are similar to those made about the alleged chemical weapons use of Syria . Putin: "The Bucha provocation is like a provocation similar to that
 The Bucha provocation has been condemned by Russia as an ""outrageous"" fake created solely with the purpose of slandering Moscow . Russia has condemned the provocation as an 'outrageously' fake created .
 Russia says the timeline of the Ukrainian allegations does not add up to the time when the troops actually left the city in the Kiev region . Russia: Timeline of the allegations about the mass killing of civilians by Russian troops doesn't add up . The timeline does not appear to be accurate, Russia
 Moscow asserts that Ukrainian forces shelled Bucha after the Russian withdrawal with rocket and tank fire . Moscow says it shelled the city with rocket, tank fire after the withdrawal . The Ukrainian forces are said to have fired on the city .
 The Russian president also said that Kiev had backed away from the agreements made in Istanbul, leading the talks into a deadlock . The talks have been deadlocked since talks broke out in Istanbul last week .
 Moscow attributed the attack to a Ukrainian missile unit . The attack killed 17 people and injured 36 others, it said . Moscow said the attack was carried out by a missile unit in Ukraine .
 When hostilities flared in eastern Ukraine in the wake of the 2014 armed coup, the city remained under Kiev’s control . The city is now under the control of Kiev .
 The missile was fired from Dobropole, around 45km southwest of the city, Moscow stated . Moscow said the missile was launched from the city .
 The latest casualty count by the city administration said 39 people were killed in the incident and 87 were injured . The city administration has said the death toll is 39 .
 When hostilities broke out in eastern Ukraine in the wake of the 2014 Maidan, the city remained under Kiev’s control . The city remains under Kiev's control .
 Kiev accused Russia of hitting the station, claiming civilians were targeted deliberately with the intent to kill . Kiev also claimed civilians were deliberately targeted deliberately in the attack .
 Kramatorsk Mayor Aleksandr Goncharenko said missile debris was found 40 meters from where most of the damage was done . Mayor: Missile debris found 40 metres from where the damage is done .
 Western media are reporting not the news, but rather only U.S. government and Ukrainian propaganda . Those "little details" of motivation and intent are critical for proving a criminal case .
 Forensic evidence suggests this was not a Russian attack, but a Ukrainian false flag attack working hand in hand with U.S. “information war” strategies .
 President Zelensky consents to and participates in this proves he values the American agenda of hegemony in perpetuity more-so than the lives of his own citizenry . That is exactly what one would expect from an American puppet president in a distant colony .
 President Biden's and western media’s habit of automatically blaming Russia for atrocities, without proof or objective 3 party analysis of any kind . The real perpetrators in the Ukrainian military are encouraged to continue and escalate those crimes .
 President Zelensky presented false evidence to the Euro-American publics as incitement for further crimes in Ukraine . This crime can be added to the list of war crimes and crimes against humanity that should appropriately, and with haste be leveled at President Biden, western mainstream news media and President
 False flag operations by the U.S. A long dishonorable tradition 90. false flag operations have a long history of American involvement in terrorism .
 False flags are a longstanding U.S. tradition, dating from the 19th century . False flags have been a longstanding tradition in the United States since the late 1800s .
 Once-classified documents and tapes released in the past several years make clear that high government officials distorted facts and deceived the American public about events that led to full U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War . But once-classified . documents and . previously uncovered facts, combined with previously uncovered
 There was not a second attack on U.S. Navy ships in the Tonkin Gulf in August 1964 .
 The Azov neo-Nazis were trained by the Nazis in Ukraine . So, it’s not surprising they used such horrific methods as well as those trained by them .
 Occam's razor principle suggests it probably was Azov, as they have motivation, means and opportunities, however in a fair world ruled with justice one must await further evidence to be absolutely positive of their guilt before conviction . U.S. media’s immediate assignation of blame
 In 2017, the Syrian Arab Republic had been in the grip of a Western-backed regime change operation . The operation was launched in response to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s 2009 refusal to allow US-allied Qatar to build a pipeline through his country .
 Timber Sycamore would see the arming, funding and training of Wahhabi terrorists groups by the West and its allies . Operation Cyclone aims to remove Assad’s secular government and replace it with a Western-friendly leadership .
 With the Syrian regime change operation not going as planned, Washington’s Neocons would soon resort to desperate — and reckless — measures . Washington would be resorting to desperate and reckless measures .
 The phrase “false flag” can be used to describe an imagined threat by another nation used to justify an attack upon it as in the following quote . More general uses of the phrase "false flag"
 U.S. government spokespeople are forever demonizing Iran . Iran, the United States and False Flags by Robert Fantina, Global Research, September 15, 2020 .
 Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has proclaimed that Iran is the world’s chief sponsor of terrorism . Pompeo says Iran is responsible for terrorism in the world . Iran has been accused of supporting terrorism in Iraq and Syria .
 The possibility of a U.S. war against Iran is very real, CNN's Peter Bergen says . He says the possibility of war is real, and it's not just a matter of war .
 The United States is currently bombing or supporting the bombing of Palestine, Yemen, Syria, Syria and Afghanistan . The U.S. is also bombing, or supporting, the bombing, of Yemen, Iraq, Libya and Somalia .
 It is sanctioning Venezuela, causing untold suffering there, wanting ‘regime change’ in that nation also . It is sanctions that have caused untold suffering in Venezuela . The U.S. wants 'regime changes' in Venezuela also .
 Pompeo has the temerity to say that Iran is the world’s chief sponsor of terrorism . Pompeo says Iran is world's top sponsor of terror . He says it's responsible for terrorism in the world .
 President Donald Trump and his cohorts continually raise the false flag of Iranian threats to the world, against all facts . By any objective standard, that title must go to the U.S.
 The United States has been at war for the vast majority of its history . The U.S. has been in the midst of a war with Russia and China .
 "Strong evidence" is often based on weak evidence, questionable motives, and outright lies . Yet more often than not they have been based on strong evidence, or questionable motives .
 How the United States Justifies its Wars (June 2020, Red Pill Press) Robert Fantina explains how the U.S. government has rallied public opinion to support its wars and military objectives since before the American Revolution . Fantina: The United States justifies its wars by rallying public
 Next comes the use of propaganda to manipulate public opinion and enlist widespread buy-in . Next comes from propaganda to use public opinion .
 Quoting and parroting the government, the media helps spread this propaganda, the government says . Quoting government quotes government quotes, parropping government propaganda . The media is complicit in this propaganda .
 This approach has successfully garnered support for both official warfare and acts of aggression such as plundering other countries’s resources and removing left-leaning foreign leaders . The approach has been successful, with support for official warfare, and aggression, according to the author .
 Muhammad A Aziz and Khalil Islam, who each served more than 20 years of a life sentence, had always maintained their innocence . The men had been wrongfully imprisoned for the murder of Malcolm X_have been exonerated .
 FAIR founder Jeff Cohen says media coverage of the Russian invasion of Ukraine differs from past wars . A lot less, particularly when they’re victims of the United States, he says .
 We used Nexis news database to count both sources and segments about Ukraine during the study period .
 Comparing this coverage to that of other conflicts reveals both a familiar reliance on United States officials to frame events, as well as a newfound ability to cover the impact on civililans . Those civilians are white and under attack by an official United States enemy, rather than by the United States
 One of the most striking things about early coverage of Ukraine has been the sheer number of Ukrainian sources . The Ukrainian government has been accused of corruption in recent years .
 FAIR challenges news media to seek out the perspective of those most impacted by events . U.S. outlets are doing so to a much greater extent in this war than in any war in recent history, FAIR says .
 Even the three Ukrainian individuals identified as having a relevant professional expertise — two doctors and a journalist — spoke only of their personal experience of the war .
 Only five civil society experts appeared during the study period . Civil society voices were almost completely marginalized .
 Fair.com’s niche specialty is media bias and the entire article quoted above is well worth reading . Fair .com's niche specialty . is media . bias .
 The U.S. and NATO must escalate with more weapons until every last Ukrainian is dead . As if sanctions against Russia were not enough, stealing Russian assets in western banks was not enough . The United States and NATO need more weapons, NATO says .
 Before that happens though some western nation will declare war on Russia . Before that, some western nations would declare war against Russia .
 The mass and momentum pushing this drive to war will not be stopped by common sense or even self preservation . The mass of people pushing this push to war is not being stopped, even self-preservationists .
 Russia defeated the Nazis before and will again no doubt, no doubt. None-the-less, Russia defeated them before and again .
 U.S. and NATO are flooding nations adjacent to Russia with soldiers trained to kill . The United States and NATO is training soldiers to kill in Russia .
 That is an artifact of a bygone age when the U.S. needed to pretend to be nice sometimes, at little bit at least . The United States needs to pretend it's nice sometimes sometimes .
 Tod Wolters, commander of U.S. European Command, fell short of specifying whether he meant permanent basing . Wolters told American senators on 29 March, that he would not comment on whether he would continue .
 In recent months, United States military forces have soared from roughly 60,000 to 102,000 in Europe . U.S. military forces in Europe now number 102,500 .
 Tod Wolters was asked by Senator Roger Wicker whether the U.S. should increase the number of troops permanently stationed in Europe, rather than the rotating forces . Wolters says the United States should increase troops permanently in Europe .
 Still, Wolters' remarks left more questions than answers, as it remains unclear whether the additional U.S. military forces would be deployed on a permanent basis .
 The general is aware of these financial and political unknowns, adds the military analyst . He says he is not sure how long it will take for him to make the decision .
 NATO-allied European states hosted a total of 450,000 U.S. military servicemen in 1957, during the Cold War .
 Russia is the target of this strategy, this is the way to start a thermonuclear war, says CNN's John Defterios . Russia is a target of the strategy, he says, and when Russia is targeted, it could start a war .
 NATO holds war games on Russia’s border 'Bold Dragon' drills held in Estonia, 11 Apr, 2022 . British, French, and Danish troops have recently arrived to serve in NATO Battlegroup Estonia .
 The one and only thing that matters is quarterly dividends from war related industries for the super-rich, because they also own the politicians and news monopolies . The super rich own politicians and media monopolies, and they own war related businesses .
 There are delicate little perks along the road to war sure to be enjoyed by all the great “warriors,” the shameless “men” of the west . Besides all that, there are delicate . little perks .
 More than 19,600 people, including more than 3,300 children, evacuated from dangerous regions in Ukraine . Lugansk and Donetsk People’s Republics to Russia during the day . Over 6,300 foreigners kept hostage by Ukrainian nationalists .
 More than 19,600 people, including more than 3,300 children, were evacuated from dangerous regions in Ukraine . The Lugansk and Donetsk People’s Republics were evacuated to Russia during the day .
 Banning all voices contradicting U.S. government dicta will be one of the primary causes of WWIII, and potentially the extinction of humanity . Banning dissenters will be a violation of innumerable human rights and national and international laws, says author .
 Google and MSN “deranking’s voices is the exact same thing and has been going on for years,” Google says . “Deranking” is the same thing .
 Since the beginning of the special military operation a total of 677,758 people, including 131,706 children, have been evacuated,""" Since the start of the operation, more than 700,000 people have already been evacuated, he said .
 2,920 private cars crossed the Russian border on Friday and 86,980 since the beginning of the operation . According to Mizintsev, some 2.920 private vehicles crossed the border last Friday . The operation has been ongoing for more than two years .
 The Ukrainian side is deliberately hampering evacuation from Mariupol via humanitarian corridors opened by Russia, Mizintsev said . Russia is part of its response to Germany’s Turkey, Turkey and France's humanitarian initiatives, he said .
 Russia's armed forces open humanitarian corridors from Kharkov and Mariupol every day . According to Mizintsev, Russia’s armed forces are opening humanitarian corridors every day.
 An additional humanitarian corridor is daily opened daily from Mariupol to Berdyansk . The corridor is part of the response to Germany’s, Turkey’�s and France’S humanitarian initiatives . It includes surface transport for Crimea or Zaporozhye, or
 Militants of nationalist units have mined storage facilities with toxic chemicals at a coke plant . They plan to blow them up when forces of the Donetsk People’s Republic approach them .
 Ukrainian “right wing nationalists’s” barely distinguishable from WWII Nazis, violently prevents seeking refuge in Russia to they extent they can . Furthermore, Ukrainian ‘right wing’ nationalists, barely distinguishably from WWII Nazi Nazis, are violently preventing seeking refuge from Russia .
 Most Americans believe American wars are good for the U.S. economy, a fact which can help motivate American politicians to start wars . In addition, it is commonly believed by most Americans that war is good for America .
 Most nations in the UN General Assembly are held as economic hostages to American threats and/or bribes . Simultaneously, most nations in U.S. are held hostage to American economic threats and bribes .
 As political pundit Caitlin Johnstone noted in 2020, the U.S. has no allies, only hostages . The United States is not allies, but hostages, she said .
 Based on substantial well-researched and verified public information it appears President Biden, due to his, his son’s*® and his top cabinet members’ corruption, threats and an astonishing array of provocations have brought the United States and Russia to the brink of
 The United States invaded Iraq based on false information regarding “weapons of mass destruction” including chemical and biological weapons, yet none were found . The U.S. invaded Iraq in 2003, but none of the weapons were ever found .
 Analysts and diplomats have been saying since the 1990s that NATO expansion would eventually spark a conflict in Eastern Europe . 50 prominent foreign policy experts, including former senators, military leaders, and diplomats, sent an open letter to then-President Bill Clinton outlining their opposition to NATO expansion .
 This reminds me so much of the show-off rape, and the torture, rape and murder of Libyan President Gaddafi, about which former Secretary of State laughed so glibly . This is reminiscent of the rape, torture and murder that Gaddafi's torture, raped and murdered of Libya, about
 Hillary Clinton laughs, and admits to that murder . Hillary Clinton's 10 second video posted on YouTube shows her laughing and admitting murder .
 YouTube video is horrifically violent especially given that viewers know it is real and not a Hollywood production .
 President Biden could lead the U.S. to World War III, author says . Biden's intent, intent, methods, and opportunity for President Biden to lead the United States to the brink of war III are all there .
 Material facts prove the Ukrainian war started in 2013/2014, with a United States funded and orchestrated “Color Revolution” against former President Viktor Yanukovych, in violation of “The principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples under Article 1, paragraph 2” of the
 President Biden and his top cabinet officials have “the appearance of conflicts of interest” between their government posts and weapons and related war industries . Instead, the US, led by President Biden, accelerated the slaughter of innocents in Lugansk and Donetsk .
 President Putin's provocative move was "undiplomatic" and more extreme provocation . Putin virtually guaranteed a Russian military response in the Donbass region, at least .
 Previous to this decision, the United States had been playing a game of “peek-a-boo” repeatedly dangling the possibility of Ukraine joining NATO, and then later denying they would permit it . The U.S. has been playing the game of "peek
 Provocation was the name of the game the U.S. and NATO were playing and finally, they got a response . The United States and NATO have responded to the situation .
 “innocent’s Ukrainian military, and genuinely innocent civilians, are dying on the battlefields in Ukraine to “line the pockets” of the provably corrupt President Biden family and many of his top appointed government officials .
 At this point, the only way to stop the acceleration of this war, is for Ukrainian President Zelensky to surrender . The only way of stopping the escalation is for Ukraine to surrender to Russia .
 He would never do that, buoyed by massive U.S. and European financial, military, media and “moral” support . He however would never . do that .
 The only other option to stop this war from devolving into WWIII, is to place a moratorium on weapons delivery to Ukraine, such that President Zelensky has a “facesaving” excuse for calling for a truce, and negotiating in a reasonable manner .
 The potential for peace with self-determination and dignity for all parties would spring to life in 2014, says author .
 The alternatives include loselose scenarios for the entire human species and earth’s ecology . The alternatives to the current scenario include losinglosing scenarios for human species .
 Relevant United States and international laws and policies allegedly violated by above named U.S. officials . Il. officials Il. John McCain and Hillary Clinton are accused of violating the law . McCain and Clinton both made comments about the alleged violations .
 Public officials shall not use their official authority for the improper advancement of their own or their family's personal or financial interest . Public officials should not use official authority to advance their own interests, the law says .
 Requires such Member, officer, or employee to recuse himself or herself from any matter in which there is or appears to be a conflict of interest under the Rule, and to notify the Committee of such recusal . Recusal is required by members of the House of Representatives .
 Requires such individual also to submit to the Clerk of the House, for public disclosure, the statement of disclosure for which such recusal was made . Requires such . recusal from such individuals to submit .
 Lugansk and Donetsk had voted in a referendum to secede from Ukraine . They regarded the newly imposed Ukrainian government as illegitimate and had close economic and cultural ties to Russia . The city of Lugansk was surrounded and under siege for several months .
 Water and electricity were cut, no people or supplies were allowed in or out of the city . The city was subjected to constant shelling by heavy artillery . Water, electricity and water supplies were also cut .
 The victims were killed primarily by the Ukrainian Army including by shelling, not by the Russians . War crimes were also committed in neighboring villages, including some occupied by right-wing militias that Kyiv had to rely on .
 The war in Ukraine did not begin February 24, 2022 as western media makes it appear . The conflict in Ukraine has been ongoing for more than 20 years .
 Earlier a residential neighborhood had been struck by a grad missile, while other Ukrainian army attacks destroyed schools . Earlier, residential neighborhoods had been hit by a Grad missile .
 A woman told him that her daughter had been born on June 26, 2014, and that the war began in her village on July 19 . A woman said her daughter was born in June 2014 and that her village has been fighting since July 19, 2014 .
 Ukraine instigated the war but has committed significant war crimes, says Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin . Ukraine has been accused of war crimes in the Ukraine-Russia conflict .
 "Credible and credible evidence" is provided in this document, it says . Those motivations can be proven, the document says, and there is evidence that they were motivated .
 Nobody can know just how deeply the Bidens and other administration officials are involved with taking bribes from fracking industrialists .
 Client does not have access rights to the content so server is rejecting to give proper response . Server is rejecting response to client's request for response . That's an error Client doesn't have access to content .
 International Court of Justice in Namibia case 7, the Western Sahara case and the 8.8. case 7 . Namibia and Western Sahara cases are among the cases before the court in the 8 .
 President Trump actively worked against building up the war machine in Ukraine and was impeached for it . Motivation for President Trump to accelerate the Ukraine War will not be found because he actively fought against it . President Trump will not find motivation for him to accelerate it .
 President Biden wants to speed up the war in Ukraine . Biden has multiple motivations for his involvement in the Ukraine war . Biden could have many more reasons to accelerate the war, including financial and political reasons .
 It isn't the same as intent, which relates to whether an action was accidental or intentional, or intentional . It's not the same thing as intent .
 Intent is an element of just about every crime, meaning that the prosecution must establish that the defendant intended to commit the criminal act . The prosecution must prove intent to commit a criminal act in order to convict the defendant .
 The prosecution doesn't have to prove the defendant had motive to convict him . But motive usually isn't a criminal element, it's a crime .
 In regards to incentives, just making Hillary Clinton and his CIA director happy might have been enough . In addition to incentives for the CIA director, the White House may have been able to make a deal .
 This referral for criminal investigation is not directed at President Obama per se, but rather at President Biden . Biden had multiple motivations and material incentives to rapidly escalate this war, the author says .
 Hillary Clinton was President Obama’s foreign policy advisor and Secretary of State for some time . Hillary Clinton has been a key figure in the Obama administration since 2008 .
 Hillary Clinton is credited with the disastrous and massively deadly series of so-called Arab Spring revolutions in more than half a dozen formerly stable nations . As Doug Bandow wrote in Forbes.com, ""Hillary Clinton Never Met a War She Didn't Want Other Americans to Fight,""
 War and related industries in the U.S. were highly profitable for war and related industry in the US . Yet the American public did not weep for them, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The American public didn't weep for those wars .
 To prove a crime, one must show intent and motivation . Biden has clear intent for President Biden to commit crimes against humanity in Ukraine .
 President Biden should start and relentlessly escalate the most current phase of the Ukraine War . Biden has four separate but related verifiable motivations with references for President Biden to start .
 President Biden's family’s long-standing corrupt business practices in Ukraine profit from starting a war just to kill the legitimate Nord Stream 2 pipeline between Russia and Germany . Biden family's business practices have been in Ukraine for decades .
 Most of Biden’s top political appointees have the appearance of conflicts of interest . They have personally profited from corporate war industries in the past, and most certainly will continue those collusive relationships after retiring .
 War and oil & gas industrialists wanted to create a boogieman to justify their budgets, bonuses and dividends . Profit motive of other Euro-American war and oil . industrialists and politicians they own .
 The U.S. spends more on the war industry than China, India, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Germany, France, Japan, South Korea, Italy, and Australia combined .
 President Biden might well have had additional motivation to greatly accelerate the Ukraine War provided by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton . Hillary Clinton is a former secretary of state .
 To what extent she is merely a salesperson for the CIA, or actually a progenitor of various international criminal schemes is unknown . She is known to be a key figure in the CIA .
 At minimum she is most certainly a facilitator of those illegal schemes, and therefore at minimum culpable in them . At least she is at least culpable, she is the facilitator, she says .
 The United States had driven the nuclear arms race from the beginning, and Russia has maintained parity . The U.S. and Russia have maintained parity in nuclear weapons .
 The United States is jealous that China’s economy could grow larger than U.S. at some time in the future . China's economic growth could be bigger than the United States at some point in future, experts say .
 Ukraine has been considered a “battleground” nation since the dissolution of the Soviet Union . Ukraine is considered to be a "national crisis" in the country .
 All of the above resulted in violations of the UN Charter (e.g., interfering in the affairs of other nations thereby negating any . possibility of those nations exercising a right to selfdetermination) and innumerable other international laws and treaties .
 The appearance of conflict of interest becomes impossible to ignore . However, that several distinctly personal motivations for . greatly accelerating the War in Ukraine can be proven .
 Raytheon’s stock rose over 4.6% on Monday and has risen more than 18% this year . The company's stock has risen over 18% in the last six months . Ray theon's stock rose more than 4% this week and is now valued at
 Lockheed Martin, the maker of the F-35 fighter jet, advanced more than 5.4% on Monday . Lockheed Martin shares rose more than five percent on the day after the announcement .
 The Patriot missile defense system is set to be deployed with the NATO battlegroup in Slovakia . The company, with Raytheon, is the manufacturer of the system . The system will be deployed in the country with NATO forces .
 Northrop Grumman saw its stock rise close to 7% on Monday, after rising 3% since the Ukrainian conflict began . The company is a leading manufacturer of attack and surveillance drones .
 Britain’s BAE Systems, the largest defense contractor in Europe, has seen its share prices rise sharply . Germany's Rheinmetall, France's Thales and Italy's Leonardo have all seen their share prices go up .
 In addition to mass murder and scars that never heal enmities that will last generations, the super-wealthy can buy another island and boast at cocktail and drug parties about the “killing’s” they made on Wall Street .
 Or worse, a nuclear winter could kill a billion people instantly, cause another two billion to die of hunger, disease, and disease that will follow, and leave the rest scarred and damaged for life .
 In 2021 alone we committed over $300 million in assistance to support Ukraine’s democratic and economic development, and over $650 million in security assistance . Ukraine is one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 He does not want his entire western front lined with American and NATO tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces and neo-Nazi ultra-nationalists .
 The Soviet Union is estimated to have suffered the highest number of WWII casualties . It is estimated that the Soviet Union suffered the most casualties during the war .
 As many as 27 million Soviets lost their lives, with as many as 11. million military deaths joined by up to 10 million civilian deaths due to military activity . An additional 8 million to 9 million people died due to famine and disease .
 More than 14 million Soviet soldiers were wounded during the war . Those totals do not include the more than 14million Soviet soldiers who were wounded .
 Russia withstood the highest number of casualties, with 6,750,000 military deaths and 7,200,000 civilian deaths . Among the Soviet Union's 15 republics, Russia suffered the highest casualties . Russia suffered more than 7,000,000 deaths during the Soviet-era Soviet
 Threatening aggression is a violation of the UN Charter and the U.S. placing tanks, missiles, military bases, special operations forces, neo-Nazi ultranationalist extremists all along Russia’s western border is viewed as a threat to Russian security . The United States placing
 Neo-Nazi groups and U.S. government officials have links between Neo-Nazis and the United States government . There are also many links between neo-Nazis groups and United States .
 Hatewatch could not find Kreider or his contact information to seek comment from him . Hatewatch was unable to find him or contact him for comment .
 The United States government has openly embraced many neo-Nazi groups around the world, including in the USA, Europe and Ukraine .
 President Putin's demands prior to it’s attack on Ukraine, appear critically necessary in order to ensure Russia's selfdetermination as guaranteed by UN Charter . Given the US's buildup of military along all of Russia's western front, other military assets including space-based weapons, the west
 President Putin is an oldfashioned romantic who apparently believes in family values and honor . He is willing to risk all to help those in Lugansk and Donetsk suffering under the withering fire of EuroAmerican-Kiev imposed genocide for eight years .
 President Putin is living in a world where honor has been cast aside for profits and political expediency, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Putin's world makes him difficult or impossible for most Americans to understand .
 Most American politicians don’t really care about his motivation for his attempt to disarm his neighbor . In any event, most American politicians are not interested in his motivation .
 Starting wars has been a “tried and method” of stimulating the U.S. economy when it appears flat, as occurred as the result of the COVID-19 pandemic and mounting American debt . Starting wars is a tried and method of stimulating America's economy when
 Had former President Trump been reelected there is a reasonably high probability he would have somehow provoked a war against China instead of Russia .
 Ukraine is a place well known to President Biden and his son Hunter due to their deep investments and profiteering there . Biden and Hunter Biden are well known for their investments in the country .
 They wanted a war, and they got it, thanks to the U.S. backing of the 2014 coup against the democratically elected president Viktor Yanukovych . The coup was hugely aided by the fact that United States had one already going .
 President Biden has profited enormously from the Ukrainian oil and gas industry . Many of his top appointed cabinet officials give the appearance of conflicts of interest between their official government positions, and positions in lobby groups and/or government funded think tanks .
 President Biden’s family profit motivation and his top cabinet members’ profit motivation, fueled by the American intelligence apparatus and Department of Defense . The world now stands poised on the brink of thermonuclear war, writes Julian Zelizer .
 That is a comic book style rational cooked up by some minion in the legions of American disinformation experts posing as journalists . That is not the case, it's the case of the U.S. and the media .
 Evidence suggests Russia is complicit in launching and escalating the current conflict in Ukraine . That is because substantial evidence suggests they are complicit in the conflict . The U.S. has been involved in escalating the conflict in the Ukraine .
 They should have no say whatsoever in the determination to open a criminal investigation into their roles in starting this armed conflict/war . Likewise, they should not have had a say in the decision to open an investigation .
 Al Capone and Jack the Ripper had to give approval before police and/or judicial investigation into their criminal activities was permitted . The question is whether Capone gave approval before an investigation into his criminal activities could be permitted .
 This is the case | am bringing to the recipients of this request for a criminal investigation . This is not the case of the recipients, I am bringing . The recipients of the request for an investigation are being investigated .
 There appears only one reasonable and simple way to end the war in Ukraine almost immediately . There appears to be only one simple and simple solution to the Ukraine crisis .
 The UN needs to take a lead on a moratorium on arms shipments to Ukraine . President Zelensky needs a face-saving excuse for surrender, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Ukraine becoming a neutral country is the only solution to this war forced on it by the U.S. and European political and economic ambitions . Ukraine should become a neutral nation, Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin says .
 This war is no different from any of the other wars the U.S. has launched since WWII, except it is still in its very early stages, and has a very real possibility of leading to nuclear war . This war has the potential to lead to a nuclear war, CNN's
 He had very substantial legal, national security and moral rationale for it . Yet the western media has entirely suppressed and mocked his legitimate motivations and instead demonized and censored him .
 Americans falsely believe they have fair access to news, falsely believing themselves to have that fair access . Americans have not had fair access, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Americans are programmed by the U.S. government to enjoy extreme violence, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Many or most Americans are enjoying this war in Ukraine, he says .
 At this time there is strong evidence Kiev is only escalating the US-NATO terrorism campaign in Ukraine begun in 2014 . Kiev is trying to further provoke and escalate it as much as possible to increase corporate profits in their respective countries and enlist NATO’s involvement, again leading to World
 UN Secretary General Guterres to call for a moratorium on weapons shipments to Ukraine, investigation into alleged corrupt activities by President Biden, his 27-year-old brother of Vice President Joe Biden .
 Though this may seem awkward, ill-advised, and/or politically risky, compared to the effects of thermonuclear war, those efforts would be trivial . The effects of a nuclear war are trivial compared to those of nuclear war .
 The onus of responsibility lies with the relevant authorities to whom this Referral for Criminal Investigation is addressed . This Referral is addressed by the relevant Authorities .
 The operation in Ukraine was launched on 24 February, as Russian forces hit Ukrainian military objects with precision weapons . The operation was launched by Russian forces in the country .
 Putin noted it was started to stop the genocide in Donbass, where people have been suffering from an eight-year-long war waged against them by Kiev . President Vladimir Putin noted that people have suffered from the war waged by Kiev for years .
 Due to increasing censorship of Russian news media by the US, am posting full text versions of some of the latest news regarding discoveries from Ukraine’s biological “research” facilities below .
 The U.S. fights wars to make profits from war and war related industries . Instead, the United States will pump that war for all it’s worth until the target country is flattened .
 The United States disgracefully withdraws, while the corporate profiteers, the merchants of death, laugh all the way to the bank . Then the U.S. disgracefully withdrews, the United States says .
 Ukraine is meat on the table of the “good ol’ USA,” at least those rich enough to profit from it . The U.S. is investing heavily in Ukraine, especially in the region .
 A nearly $32-million program was aimed at “organizing work of the laboratories, built and modernized with the help of the donor’s . The program includes “monitoring infectious diseases” and conducting work to “react rapidly” to outbreaks .
 The program also listed the “safe collection, processing, temporary storage and transportation of clinical samples” as its goals . The program is also listed as a goal for safe collection and processing .
 The Ukrainian biolaboratories network has been funded by other U.S. agencies . Kirillov described the scale of the biolabs program as an “impressive” one .
 DoD Advisery Board Progec Recommendations based on recommendations from September 27. Policy and Implementation Guidance for the Defense Threat Reduction Agency 0 the Cooperative Biological Research DoD . DoD: DoD Advisory Board's recommendations for Biological Research .
 The document highlights a meeting between the attaché and representatives of the US-Canadian company Skymount . Skymount is involved in Al-related research .
 The system “performs the work of 60-person years per day, greatly reducing the manual labor hours to generate new target molecules from existing, pre-approved drugs,” developers say . The system will “greatly reduce the manual work hours’s manual labor
 Kirillov: "We are talking about the screening system for pharmaceuticals ‘Deep Drug’ which have not passed the licensing procedure in the U.S. and Canada” "Deep Drug" is not a drug that has not passed licensing procedures in the United States and
 Indonesia shut down the U.S. Navy Medical Center in Jakarta in 2010 over “numerous violations,” he says . In 2010, Indonesia shut it down the United States Navy Medical Medical Center .
 Russian media outlets recently reported that the Pentagon had commissioned more than 30 biological laboratories in Ukraine . Large quantities of dangerous viruses were stored in Ukraine, they said . The Pentagon has commissioned over 30 labs in Ukraine to store viruses .
 The government is aware of the high risks of viruses leaking and triggering pandemics . Maybe because they have laboratories spread around the world, they are aware of risks of leaks .
 They assumed similar risks from Chinese laboratories, but that's stretching it too far . The government has been accused of being too cautious in its dealings with China .
 The United States has failed to bring COVID-19 under control on its shores . And that's precisely why the U.S. hasn't been able to bring it under control in its own country .
 There are many laboratories around the world, but they cannot wash away the fact about the existence of such laboratories . But they cannot be washed away from the fact that such laboratories exist .
 It is time the United States published information about these biological laboratories, including what kind of viruses are stored there, what ""research"" is going on .
 Maybe Americans “let it all hang out,” but they don’t in this part of the world . Maybe Americans let it all out, but they do not in this region .
 As for Russia asking China for military assistance in a military operation in Ukraine, it is laughably ridiculous . Russia asked China for help in Ukraine in order to protect its own interests, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Nothing less than screenplay writing for Hollywood style movies — smear jobs based on complete fiction . "Smear jobs" based on smears jobs based upon complete fiction. Nothing less . Hollywood style movie-style movies are Hollywood style .
 The US, with more than 10 times the military budget of Russia, has never stopped research on biological weapons . The U.S. has 10 times more than Russia's military budget .
 Russia ceased all of that research in 1991 and has been open to international weapons inspections . Russia on the other hand ceased all the research and is now open to inspections .
 The U.S. has been known to “exaggerate” the threat posed by foreign nations it chooses to attack, and simply for the purpose of expanding its already gargantuan budget . The United States “Department of defense” and most especially the intelligence apparatus
 The United States is so rich and has no problems with poverty, health, education, infrastructure, supply chains and so on, so it can easily afford to waste trillions of dollars playing god around the world . Fortunately for Americans the U.S. is so wealthy that it can afford to
 Russia Today published an interview with some of their findings on United States and German research in Ukraine on what can be termed “dual-use’s biological pathogens .
 The US, with 10 times the military budget of Russia, has never stopped research on biological weapons . The U.S. has 10 times Russia's military budget .
 Russian troops discovered new documents on military biological activities in Ukraine . It became known that during the special military operation in Ukraine Russian troops found new documents . The documents were discovered during a special operation .
 Documents shed light on bio-military programme implemented by the United States Defence Department in Ukraine . Russia’s Armed Forces found documents that shed some light on the programme .
 Researchers are researching ways that epidemics spread based on these agents . They are also researching ways to spread epidemics based on the agents .
 The scale of work makes it obvious that a considerable, and probably, the most important, part of the information on the American military programme remains concealed from the international community .
 Germany and the U.S. had been conducting vigorous military biological activities in Ukraine for many years . Germany, alongside the United States, has been conducting military biological activity in Ukraine .
 'For you to better understand the situation, | will cite the following facts. For you to . better understand this . We are happy to clarify the facts. The facts.
 Since 2013, under the auspices of the German Federal Foreign Office, the German Government has been implementing the German Biosecurity Programme . Ukraine became part of the program in 2014, the year of Maidan, when Ukraine became the country .
 German specialists from the Institute of Microbiology of the German Armed Forces, Friedrich Loeffler Institute and Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine are engaged in practical activities .
 The third phase of the GBP will be implemented in 2020-2022 . According to the German Federal Foreign Office, the third phase is due to be implemented soon .
 The GBP’s stated technical goals include gathering epidemic intelligence in third countries, including with the use of big data technology, and developing the infrastructure of partner countries for handling dangerous biological agents . We can infer from the publicly available materials that the GBP's stated .
 The Institute of Experimental and Clinical Veterinary Medicine in Kharkov has been the Institute of Microbiology of the German Armed Forces’ main Ukrainian counterparty since 2016, which we know from its own data . We know from the Institute’s own data.
 The official goal is to “improve the biological defence and security situation” in Ukraine, “particularly in the east of the country” gives rise to the rhetorical question of which border the German military biologists consider an outer border for the purposes of their professional interests .
 Institute of Microbiology claims project is related to the “potential threat of biological terrorism” in Ukraine . Institute says it is concerned about biological terrorism in Ukraine amid ongoing hostilities in eastern regions .
 It is crystal clear that this is a way to send a subtle message about the DPR and LPR’s possible ‘involvement’ in hatching plans for the use of internationally prohibited biological weapons . The DPR is believed to be involved in planning to use biological weapons
 It is first necessary to study the potential biological agents with which it can be made, it says . Obviously, to ensure protection against a potential biological attack, it is necessary to .
 In other words, it is necessary to conduct research in the field of biological or chemical weapons . The Russian government is seeking to find out what is needed to develop a chemical or biological weapon .
 The Armed Forces of Germany have enough knowledge and practical skills in this area, as was demonstrated by the scandalous incident with the mysterious poisoning of blogger Alexey Navalny .
 NATO lists a military toxin that NATO lists in the Novichok family . Specialists from the AFG Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology supposedly detected in the body of the Russian citizen .
 Such a high level of expertise suggests that the AFG is able to synthesise toxic substances independently, including the notorious Novichok and its markers .
 Germany’s Friedrich Loeffler Institute that is in charge of the centre for the study of the most dangerous viruses and zoonotic infections on the Baltic Island of Riems, maintains active cooperation with Ukraine .
 In Ukraine, the Friedrich Loeffler Institute has focused on Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever . The institute's focus has been focused on the fever . In Ukraine it has been focusing on the Crimean hemorrhagic Fever .
 Soviet scientists discovered it for the first time on the territory of Russian Crimea in 1944 . The discovery was made by Soviet scientists in the Soviet Union .
 There is documented evidence that the institute commissioned its Ukrainian partners to collect samples of ectoparasite recipients of bats that were transferred to the aforementioned Reims Island under the existing agreements .
 The Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine has concentrated its activities in Ukraine on extremely dangerous fevers . Denge, Chikungunya, West Nile and Usutu are some of the most dangerous fever fevers in Ukraine .
 It cannot be ruled out that, as the special military operation progresses, additional documents will be discovered by the Russian Armed Forces . Additional documents will also be discovered as the operation progresses .
 According to confirmed reports, Germany coordinated its work on biological security with its American allies . The U.S. established a network of at least 30 biological laboratories in Ukraine, reports say .
 In addition to their other activities, they were involved in dangerous research . The pair were involved with dangerous research.
 We urge German officials to immediately stop spreading false allegations about our country’s intentions to use weapons banned by international law . The U.S. government says it has no intention of using such weapons in Germany .
 The Reich Ministry for Public Enlightenment and Propaganda was responsible for controlling the content of the press, literature, visual arts, film, theater, music and radio in Nazi Germany . The Ministry of Propaganda also known as the Ministry of Proaganda .
 The ministry was created as the central institution of Nazi propaganda shortly after the party's national seizure of power in January 1933 .
 In Hitler’s cabinet it was headed by Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels, who exercised control over all German mass media and creative artists through his ministry .
 After Hitler’s death, Goebbels had his six children given morphine and then cyanide pills . After Hitler's death, his children were given cyanide and morphine first . Hitler's children were also given morphine before cyanide .
 America’s allies in this asymmetric war on Russia (and all Russian people everywhere) are being extremely foolish . America's game of international Whac-A-Mole is never ending. America's allies are being foolish .
 The US’s friends today will find themselves on the receiving end of that same ‘game” sometime in the nottoo-distant future . The U.S. friends today and tomorrow will face the same "game" as today's friends today .
 That assertion however presupposes they survive the current war against Russia, which is a 50/50 bet at best . The assertion however, however, presupposes that they survive .
 As soon as any nation develops to the point where it might be able to compete with the United States in anything, the U.S. sends it back to the Stone Ages . The United States is sending any nation back to its Stone Ages, the author says .
 The U.S. insists on remaining the slave master of planet earth in perpetuity . And so, the United States insists on becoming the slave masters of planet Earth .
 The French can easily understand jumping on board with this kind of agenda, but I am truly amazed Germans and British would fall for this old trick again . The French are more than happy to accept the idea, but the French are not so keen on it .
 Iran-Iraq War (Sep 22, 1980 — Aug 20, 1988) wherein the United States supplied weapons, including chemical weapons to Iraq, back in the good old days when Saddam Hussein worked for the CIA . Both nations were highly developed with computer generated social security checks .
 A million people on each side of that war were killed, and the infrastructures of both nations destroyed . A million killed, a million of them on either side of the war .
 Oil reserves were a huge motivating factor for the Iraqi government . The country's oil reserves were also a motivation for the government .
 U.S. has nearly a hundred years of ‘hate Russians’ propaganda floating around in the culture, so this war is easy to sell too . Likewise, the United States has nearly 100 years of "hate Russians" propaganda . The United States also has a history of �
 We'll make America great again piled upon the bones of innocents wherever and whenever convenient, as usual. We’ll make America . We'll also make America. great again. We will make America’s great again .
 In the case of virtually all post-WWII wars, it has been the super-rich in the USA that profited from those crimes, and all wars are crimes . The super rich in the U.S. profited greatly from the crimes .
 The UK, Germany, Japan, and so on down the list of U.S. allies in this most current war effort are not in any way protecting their own nations, but rather ensuring their own dooms sooner . Helping to knock out the one super-power that might have
 Please consider the evidence contained in this Referral carefully before making any decisions regarding the validity of this evidence, as failure to consider and act upon it in a timely fashion can and probably will have catastrophic consequences for all of humanity .
 The Security Council took no measures to “maintain international peace and security,” despite President Putin’s best efforts, the U.N. Security Council said . The U.S. should not have taken measures to maintain international peace, security, the council said .
 The proven American “dual-use” biological “research” facilities in Ukraine alone, with some of them very close to the Russian border, are arguably reasonable justification for Putin’s armed intervention in Ukraine for the purpose of removing those threats .
 Nuland might not have known at the time of Hunter Biden’s key role in helping to escalate that dual-use pathogen technology “research” in Ukraine . Hunter Biden's key role was to help escalate that technology research .
 Hunter Biden DID help secure millions in funding for U.S. contractor in Ukraine specializing in deadly pathogen research, laptop emails reveal . Emails reveal more questions about the disgraced son of then vice president .
 Metabiota also introduced him to an allegedly corrupt Ukrainian gas firm, Burisma, for a 'science project' involving high biosecurity level labs in Ukraine .
 Every Russian has ‘links’ with President Putin, as do many other world leaders . Putin has links with many world leaders, including Vladimir Putin, according to reports .
 Anyone who ever sold a washing machine to any Russian has links to Putin, says Putin . Anyone who sold washing machines to a Russian has ties to the Russian president .
 The absurdity of United States sanctions is contemptable and proves U.S. contempt for international law, signed treaties, and innumerable signed contracts, the author says . "The absurdity of these sanctions proves that the United States is contemptible"
 It also embraces expression that may be regarded by some as deeply offensive . It is also embracing expression that might be considered offensive .
 The right covers communications that are both verbal and non-verbal . All modes of expression, including audio-visual, electronic and internet-based modes of communication, are covered .
 The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries with it special duties and responsibilities . Exercise of the right to exercise these rights carries with with it .
 The United States retains sole right to censor all news except “news” generated by the U.S. government .
 President Putin has a legitimate and legal right to protect the security of Russia from known and proven weapons of mass destruction the U.S. trafficked to Ukraine, including but not limited to highly infectious biological pathogens .
 Many make it clear both political parties are simply two sides of the same coin representing corporate interests and not the people . Many make a clear both parties represent corporate interests rather than people .
 If they are pro-peace, against racism, misogyny and economic sanctions, they are probably alt-news . If they support drastically reducing the ever-widening wealth gaps within and between nations, they're probably alt news . If you are anti-war, anti-racism,
 America doesn’t need to strangle and blow up smaller weaker nations to be great and amazing, says President Obama . America doesn't need to be strangled and blow-up weaker nations, he says .
 There has been a ‘dark side’ to American history and current events and we all know it. And yet to collect all that glory there's been a "dark side" to America's history .
 There is the USA again, perfectly willing and able to give us 10 million “very good reasons” for every crime against humanity, foreign invasion, and we at least pretend to go along with it . And there is the U.S. again, fully willing and . able
 The United States is a super-sized grand-scale serial killer selecting one target group, and/or nation after another for robbery, human slaughter and destruction . Like a predatory killer, a hungry tiger, a vampire, a sadistic mass murderer the U.S. selects one target
 The United States can afford to feed every person on earth, yet is more interested in accumulating ever more vast and unimaginable wealth for that small group of already fabulously rich people . The U.S. can afford the food of every person in the world, but is more focused on accumulating
 That is unrestrained capitalism which is totally different from and vastly worse than any hungry tiger . Unrestrained capitalism is very different from the hungry tiger, says the author of the book . The author says capitalism is a form of socialism that is not socialism .
 The USA does need to keep blowing-up and robbing other nations to keep the momentum of its incredible grandeur going . The U.S. needs to continue to blow up and rob other nations .
 The list of American slaughter of by-in-large innocent nations — they antiseptically call ‘interventions” is a very long one .
 Many or most of the educated around the world have known one or two or more Americans and they can be amazing . Many of the world has known one of these Americans .
 Sometimes they come into a situation, analyze problems, diseases, structural flaws etc. faster than imaginable, and have figured out solutions and ways to implement those solutions with light speed . Sometimes they analyze problems and find solutions quickly .
 It is easy to see all that goodness in so many American movies, TV shows, cartoons, medical journals, and even from time-to-time newspapers, says author .
 President's war powers have expanded so much that it's no longer clear whether a president requires congressional authorization at all . The War Powers Act of 1973 was passed by Congress in 1973 . The Congressional Research Service says it's unclear if a president needs congressional authorization .
 "The reality was much more complicated, and it's only gotten more complicated. But the reality is that it's not all about what happened," says CNN's John Sutter .
 These operations may require low visibility, clandestine, or covert capabilities . Operation may require covert or low visibility or clandestine capabilities .
 Operations can be conducted independently or in conjunction with operations of conventional forces or other government agencies . They can include operations through, with, or by indigenous or surrogate forces .
 It's almost impossible to know where and when different operations are taking place . That doesn't mean its forces are carrying out capture or kill raids in every country, but it's hard to know .
 Since then, it has more than tripled in size, received an ever-increasing share of funding . It has conducted operationsin dozens of countries .
 Army's 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment, the Naval Special Warfare Development Group, and the Air Force's 24th Special Tactics Squadron . The U.S. Army and Navy's Special Forces teams are involved in the operation .
 JSOC often oversees the 75th Ranger Regiment, the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment and other special operations forces . JSOC has its own intelligence division, the Intelligence Support Activity .
 Journalists Dana Priest and William Arkin found that JSOC has carried out counterterrorism operations in Iraq, Afghanistan, Algeria, Iran, Malaysia, Mali, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, Somalia, Syria, and Yemen .
 Psychologist Sigmund Freud was the first to deeply explore psychological defense mechanisms in humans . Freud was first to explore psychological defenses in humans.
 In most cases, these psychological responses are not under a person’s conscious control . In most of cases, the psychological responses aren’t under the conscious control of a person .
 Some are well known and | won’t elaborate on the meaning, but some are not so well known . Some of the meaning of these words deserve some explanation .
 Denial — This is when a person consciously or unconsciously refuses to accept obvious facts . Denial is a refusal to accept the facts, and denial is a denial of the truth .
 Nearly all American politicians, and probably half of the U.S. population, are in denial of the criminality of American foreign wars . For example, nearly all politicians and probably at least half the United States population are .
 Memories of things done by a person that are incompatible with a person’s value system are suppressed and “magically” forgotten . Repression is a form of suppression of memories that are not compatible with the values of a person .
 Some thoughts or feelings people have about another person may make that person so uncomfortable they project those feelings to the other person . Projection may make people misattributing their feelings to others .
 For example, a person may dislike a new co-worker, but instead of accepting that, s/he chooses to tell him/herself that they dislike you . Instead of accepting the fact that they don't like you, they choose to tell yourself that they do .
 This is when a person redirects feelings from the true source to another . Displacement is when the feelings are redirected from the source to the other . Displaced feelings are when someone redirects them to another source .
 After work the man goes running, or plays a furious game of basketball . Or, perhaps after work, or playing basketball, he goes running .
 This is like a kind of denial where a person unconsciously goes back to an earlier stage of life — like childhood . Regression . This is . like a . person unconsciously going back to childhoodto avoid some uncomfortable or painful reality they can’t deal with .
 This is making excuses for things a person says or does when they know those things are incompatible with their value system . Rationalization is rationalizing, not rationalizing .
 So, they can build elaborate systems of excuses — usually flimsy reasons to excuse their words or actions . So, there are no excuses for their actions or words, so they can be used to justify their actions, says CNN.com .
 Instead of feeling bad about having done something wrong, a person flips to the opposite side and takes excessive pride in it . Reaction formation is a form of reaction to a person doing something wrong .
 In 2015-2016, 45.8% of the United States population used prescription drugs in the past 30 days . 45.9% of Americans used prescription drug in the last 30 days, according to the CDC .
 "Anytime any national leader does not kowtow to American interests, they and their nation will be crushed," Obama says . Obama: Anytime any . national leader . does not . kowkow to U.S. interests, he says .
 If a nation signs on with the China led “One Belt One Road’s project, they will be punished . China led the project, which is based in the Middle East, has a history of corruption .
 This is the Antebellum movie from which there is no waking up to a better reality for most of the world . This is not a good movie, but it's a bad movie, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It’s a nightmare with no escape or end until death, which will be experienced without painkillers, however long it may take . It's a nightmare without an escape or an end to death, it's a death that will never end .
 That’s the reality of U.S. overseas foreign economic and military aggression . That's a reality of American overseas foreign . economic and . military aggression.
 He isn’t just fighting Euro-American weapons, or the neo-Nazi saturated government, he’s also fighting the disinformation machine that turns heroes into devils, and devils into heroes . American Hollywood media and the world's most clever psychologists know how to shape those lies into
 Every American and western European voter should read this book, and the links in their entirely. And, that’s why every American . and western . European voter . should read the book .
 Both bibles and virtually every major spiritual philosophy warns against the tyranny of ego . The tyranny of . ego .
 It does appear murder/suicide, rather than learning to get along with those who are different, is an option for those so sure of themselves .
 Freud postulated that humans are primarily motivated by unconscious forces, with the two dominant ones being sex and aggression . Freud said humans are motivated primarily by sex, aggression .
 Well-being means to be fully related to man and nature affectively, to overcome separateness and alienation, says the Dalai Lama . "Well-being is an experience of oneness with all that exists," he says .
 Though it only reached #3 on United States Billboard Hot 100, it was by year end #1 on the United States Top Singles list . By year end of 2013, it had reached #1 .
 It signaled the final inglorious end of the peace and love generation and became the theme song of Gen X generations . Generations Y and Z are only elaborations on the military-industrial complex’s full domination of popular culture .
 Batman and Ironman don’t need superpowers like other characters because they’re rich, and with that wealth they can buy superpowers . In the more recent movie series Batman and Marvel superhero series, super rich characters Bruce Wayne and . Ironman . Batman and . Marvel
 During the 1980s many of the former anti-war, peace and love peak baby-boomers in the United States “sold out” and joined the “establishment” of corporate America facilitated by also taking up cocaine . Wealth and power overpowered the more social-minded
 Given cocaine’s addictive qualities, it really was the perfect antidote to cure Americans of the ‘peace and love” disease, at least from the perspective of the military industrial complex . The U.S. government imported tons of cocaine to help kill off any altruistic hang
 The Clintons appear to have been facilitators of that process at least in Mina, Arkansas, Arkansas .
 Transgender operations are “all-the-rage” in the 2020s, with U.S. schools coaching children on the reasonable viability of correcting nature’s “mistakes” with a “simple” operation .
 The male-to-female vaginoplasty is estimated to be somewhere between $20,000 and $50,000 or even higher . It's estimated to cost between $10,000 to $50K .
 Penectomy — surgical procedure for removing external genitalia of males . Penectomy is a surgical procedure to remove the external genitals of males in males .
 Feminizing genitoplasty is surgical procedure for creating the internal female genitalia . The procedure is called "genitalization surgery"
 One must notice the new vocabulary that has arisen to smooth this process out . The new vocabulary has emerged to smooth out the process out.
 Adam’s apple reduction, Cheek augmentation, Chin surgery, Forehead contouring, Hairline advancement, Jaw reduction, Jaw Reduction, Lip augmentation & Rhinoplasty .
 Stunting prevents children from developing to their full potential mentally and physically, and it is largely irreversible . Stunting is a form of mental and physical damage that can be irreversible .
 Children who have severe acute malnutrition, the deadliest form of extreme hunger, can succumb to the disease in just a few days . Children who are suffering from acute malnutrition can be severely malnourished and die within days .
 Children who die in this way suffer immensely as their vital organ functions slow down and eventually stop . Children who suffer from this type of death suffer as vital organs slowly die .
 Transgender people might think the global transgender movement a bit ridiculous given they only want to avoid agony and live . Regardless as to the above, starving people may think the whole transgender movement is ridiculous given the fact they are starving .
 Given the total victory of the military-industrialmedia-medical-educational complex within the U.S. to shape culture, it is not surprising narcissism is a common trait .
 A human being dies of hunger every 5 seconds . Americans worry about which body wash to use, which alcohol and drugs to use to stimulate sexual encounters, and what their gender identity really is or should be .
 The problem with President Putin as seen by the United States “defense” establishment is he’s kind of old fashioned and traditional (as western civilization once was before the CIA re-engineered it) and just isn’t “hip” to all these
 Money may not ‘trickle down’ to the great unwashed in the USA, but popular trends that encase the dictates of the military-industrial-media-medical-educational complex — in steel certainly do .
 President Putin may be the last great hope of western civilization, writes Julian Zelizer . Meanwhile conservative American Republicans hold on to a glimmer of hope that former President Trump can save them from the excesses of the liberal democrats, he says .
 President Biden appears ready, willing and able to launch WWIII to prove “what a macho man he really is” in the ultimate expression of grandiose ego in world history . One must also keep in mind there may be no “next” American presidential elections
 The mass and momentum of the military-industrial-media-educational complex appears to be irresistible . The mass of the media and medical education complex is irresistible .
 Even most Americans that don’t approve of the whole American ego trip are terrified into silence, and unfriend their parents and progeny, brothers and sisters on Facebook who might have even once questioned the drive for American global supremacy in perpetuity .
 "A great cowardice has overtaken traditional Americans inspired by the terror the CIA is so very, very good at instilling in captive populations around the world," writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Russia is by far the world’s largest country occupying about 11.% of the earth's land mass . Russia is also one of the world's natural resource richest countries .
 It is also a harsh and unforgiving land as the artic cold sweeps in from the North Pole and kills all those not very well prepared in advance .
 To survive in Russia requires a great deal of planning, forethought and industrial cleverness . To survive there requires planning and forethought .
 Russia has been invaded by the west three times now with the last time resulting in about 24,000,000 total Russian civilian and military deaths caused by Nazi Germany . The last time, WWII, resulted in a total of 24,00,000 deaths in Russia .
 The Russians make amazing weapons that actually work, unlike so many of the hyperexpensive American weapon systems . Instead of making amazing movies, cell phones and cars, they make amazing Russian weapons that work .
 Russia has a nuclear arsenal just a bit larger than the USA, but if the truth be told, it wasn’t Russia leading the arms race at any time . Likewise, Russia has an arsenal of nuclear weapons just a few times bigger than the U.S.
 For the most part it was a jolly party, though their sadness did manifest in teary eyes at those memories . The party was held in memory of the tragic events at the end of last year .
 Less than 1 in 100,000 Nazis were ever prosecuted, with the majority melting back into society, mainly industry, the police, military and government . The majority of the Nazis were never prosecuted .
 Too many of their grown children have apparently rediscovered the ultra-nationalist philosophies that launched those first-generation Nazis in WWII and spread that fanaticism around the world, again, with a great deal of U.S. help .
 The United States has never tried to tackle a nation like Russia before . The U.S. has never tackled Russia before, but it's never been before .
 It must be understood Russia has demonstrated no desire to be anyone’s foe, simple protect innocents and defend its own nation . Russia has shown no desire for anyone to be a foe, says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 It's like every other target of American unrestrained military aggression, wants to be friends . The U.S. wants to make friends with Russia .
 "Our interests are eternal and perpetual, and those interests it is our duty to follow," says British Prime Minister David Cameron . "We are in the right to follow our interests," he says .
 Life so often offers us winwin solutions, and to then betray the friends who make possible such brightness in our lives and endeavors, is treachery . To then betray your friends, you are treachery, the author says . Life offers us a winwin solution, and then betraying
 There is a limited warranty on all empires that have based their survival on such foundations. There is no guarantee on the existence of empires that survive from such foundations, says George W Bush .
 Sooner or later, forces from both within and without always, always end up creating implosions and/or explosions leading to the downfall of such unmitigated arrogance .
 Excessive alcohol, drugs, and other transitory escapist pleasures are needed to hide from and deny otherwise inescapable truths . And it appears most Euro-Americans are aware of this, and thus excessive alcohol and drugs are needed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russians have planned for another attack from the west far more meticulously than the USA or Europe . And yes, Russians do drink too, but, as per the climactic mandates their environment demands .
 President Biden and the world will pay for this unimaginably deadly gamble in unimaginable ways if Euro-Americans do not back-off and soon . The world is paying for the gamble, and will be paying for it, if not soon .
 All of the psychological defense mechanisms and potassium iodine in the world will not protect the mostly good people of the U.S. and Europe if this conflict is permitted to escalate any further . The United States and Europe will not be able to cope with the conflict if it continues .
 This documented reality was deliberately obscured by the same sources that had previously documented its existence once the Russian invasion occurred . The Russian invasion began in 2003, but was not stopped by the Russians .
 To acknowledge the existence of this odious ideology by NATO would require NATO to acknowledge the role it played in training and equipping Azov regiment personnel since 2015 . NATO has trained and equipped Azov soldiers since 2015, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The Ukrainian conflict is a proxy war, but one which Russia is poised to win decisively . The Ukraine conflict is the proxy war for Russia, but it is a war that could be won decisively by Russia . Russia is set to win the conflict decisively in Ukraine .
 The sense of invincibility inherent in EuroAmerican hubris will lead them to attempt to enforce a no-fly zone over Ukraine by striking at Russian airfields, he says . What concerns me is the sense of ‘narcissistic hubris’ leading them to
 That can escalate very quickly into the grey-zone use of depleted uranium munitions which is the final step before all-out thermonuclear war . The grey zone is the last step before nuclear weapons can be used in war .
 President Putin’s military strategists have anticipated this possibility also and have contingency plans already in place for just such an eventuality . On the bright side, it is highly likely President Putin has already had contingency plans .
 It is highly highly like NATO will screw it up, as the probability their pilots really want to die en masse over Russia or Ukraine is extremely low . It is also highly like it will screw up . The probability that NATO will kill its pilots over Russia and Ukraine knowing full well the political
 Air Force personnel by the way have the highest IQs among the armed services . Air force personnel have the most IQs in the armed forces .
 In sum, Scott Ritter is probably right, regardless as to NATO and/or American potential interferences . Ritter was probably right to say, regardless of NATO or U.S. involvement .
 The United States was already sanctioning 1/3"" of humanity before Russia’s armed intervention in Ukraine . The U.S. was already sanctioned by Russia before the intervention .
 By cutting Russia out of the world economy, the U.S. further isolates itself as well . The United States is isolating itself by cutting Russia from the world .
 The United States is spending itself silly, and its debts deeper than the Mariana Trench . The U.S. needs to be careful of its debt, says President Obama . The country's debts are deep enough to sink the country's entire nation .
 President Biden’s war chiefs are attempting to goad NATO into attempting to enforce a no-fly zone and possibly sending ground troops to Ukraine . As casualties mount, and carefully crafted U.S. disinformation escalates, it seems as if President Biden .
 Russia's attempt to clear Ukraine of weapons of mass destruction and neo-Nazi extremists would lead to a major war, which the U.S. and EU “defense” industrialists would just love, in spite of the fact it would destroy all infrastructure in Ukraine and kill millions
 U.S. and European war machines never slowed down the United States and European War machines for a second . Those kinds of considerations didn't slow down the Americans and Europeans .
 Americans get to sell weapons, while primarily Europeans and Russians die in a macabre replay of WWIII, again, far, far from American shores .
 OECD predicts German economic growth rate at 4.1% in 2022 and 2.4% in 2023, possibly undercut by shortages of key manufacturing input which might turn out to be worse and more expensive than originally calculated .
 One of the biggest global resource producers from the world market cannot be cut out of the market without all kinds of ripples . One cannot simply cut out one of the world's biggest resource producers without ripples greater than those produced by butterfly wings .
 President Biden’s true masters are attempting to trap Europeans into a very deadly quagmire of a major world war, without the loss of a single American life . In any case there is evidence there is . evidence .
 Dulles’ plan from the beginning was to break the German-Russian alliance forcing the Russians to carry the burden of stopping Nazi Germany . It was the Dulles' plan to then break the alliance forcing Russia to carry out the heavy burden . The Dulles plan was the plan from
 That made it easy for the U.S. to attack from the west and win the war they created in the first place . That made the United States to attack .
 Europe, North Africa and Japan were smoking ruins, while U.S. industrialists had wild parties and enjoyed the many fruits of their total victory . The United States industrialists were having wild parties .
 60 million people were killed, sacrificed on the altar of American capitalists’ and politicians’ infinite greed . Oh yes, forgot to mention 60 million humans were killed .
 Deaths from WWIII however are likely to be in the billions, but the profits will be in trillions if anyone survives . Deaths from the war will likely be in billions, though the profits are likely in the trillions . If anyone survives, it will be billions of dollars .
 Those who might think this is too cynical and wicked for any person to really consider simply don’t personally know the sadists and bullies American target nations have had to deal with since that nation’s inception .
 True, there is much that is good in the US, and they were and continue to be intentionally cultivated to conceal that which is not good . There is much of the good in America, but there is also a lot of the bad in the country .
 Expanding empires in history usually did so with a great deal of bloodshed, true, but then their empires enjoyed at least a few hundred years of relative peace afterwards . Expanding empire in history usually enjoyed a few hundreds of generous years of relative
 Even if WWIII does not happen, President Biden’s blunder of forcing this war is accelerating de-dollarization . Even if it doesn't happen, this is accelerating the process . Biden's blunder is a blunder that will accelerate the process of de-doll
 The status of the dollar in international trade fell below 50% several months ago . Sanctions imposed on Iran have led to a drop in the dollar's status of international trade .
 Russia banned from more than 70 countries and territories abroad . The ban includes giant “Little Americas” to small radar facilities .
 Federal borrowing competes for funds in the nation’s capital markets, thereby raising interest rates and crowding out new investment in business equipment and structures . Federal borrowing is competitively competitive with funds in capital markets .
 Entrepreneurs face a higher cost of capital, potentially stifling innovation and slowing the advancement of new breakthroughs that could improve our lives . Entrepreneurs need to be able to make breakthrough breakthroughs faster and more easily .
 Growing debt also has a direct effect on the economic opportunities available to every American . Growing debt has also been seen as a direct impact on the economy .
 The G7 and EU can’t figure out de-dollarizing the world economy will have a rather negative effect on the value of the dollar, which is an imaginary entity anyways since ditching the gold standard .
 These kinds of isolationist policies directly led to the Great Depression of 1929 . Besides that, exactly these kinds of . isolationist . policies directly . led to a Great Depression .
 Narcissistic personalities virtually always exhibit delusional beliefs in their own invincibility . Narcissists are delusional in their delusional beliefs about their invincibles .
 Countless would-be world conquerors have tried and died along with their empires . Countless empires have tried to conquer the world, but have died in the process .
 In the language of competition fighters everywhere, the U.S. “telegraphs’s next moves loudly and clearly,” the United States says . The United States “tweets” its next moves loud and clearly .
 They need public support to further their unlimited aggression against innocents . So they need to ‘spin’ their deeds before the deeds to ensure public acceptance . They need to "spin” their deeds first, so they must be ‘spunted’
 The United States intentionally promotes divisiveness, conflict and chaos in overseas foreign countries . The U.S. is geographically very isolated from all other superpowers and therefore theoretically safe from their problems .
 They will not sell out their national sovereignty for U.S. dollars or anything, they say . They won't sell their sovereignty for United States dollars . U.N. citizens will not be sold out their sovereignty .
 The U.S. capitalist corporate and political leadership hate them so much . That’s what makes them true super-powers, and that's why they’re not super-powered,’S.
 More than 50% of world trade is no longer in United States dollars . That weakens with every sanction the U.S. applies to other nations . The dollar as the global currency weakens .
 Without its supremacy holding it up, the United States dollar can drop to the value of monopoly money overnight . The U.S. dollar's supremacy holds it up .
 In any case, predicting the U.S. intelligence apparatus’ next move isn’t difficult, it’s easy .
 Sometime before the November 2022 election the United States will attack and at least try to sink at least one and probably several of China’s Naval ships in the South China Sea . The U.S. will probably attack and probably sink several of the Chinese naval ships .
 The U.S. managed to provoke President Putin into his invasion of Ukraine with extreme aggression, and so they hope to provoke China with aggression into an invasion of Taiwan . The United States also want to provoke the Chinese with aggression .
 Such an action would invite full-scale war against China even if it only attempts to fight back in any way in a naval battle . The U.S. believes it could win given United States naval and nuclear superiority over China .
 U.S. foreign policy makers believe the Chinese people will then want to overthrow the Chinese government . The United States think tanks, pentagon and CIA believe this will happen . CIA reports of Chinese dissatisfaction with the government .
 There are many indicators this is precisely what the U.S. has planned to do, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "It seeks to overtake us in literally every domain, from economic strength to military power, and from space to cyberspace," says President Obama .
 Intelligence chief calls China a “silent partner” in Russia’s “aggression” against Ukraine . He also suggests that “desperation” on the part of President Vladimir Putin could trigger a nuclear exchange .
 China and Russia could be the US’s best friend if the U.S. wasn’t suffering “state capture” by corporate CEOs and their corrupt pet DC politicians . The United States is suffering from state capture by corporate leaders and politicians .
 It is pitiful that today’s American leaders are so paranoid and terrified of playing and working nicely with other people . Likewise, it is so pitiful today's U.S. leaders are afraid of playing nice with others .
 This is a natural problem of American concepts regarding unrestrained capitalism that cannot tolerate friends and cooperation . This is the problem of capitalism that creates conflict and aggression in all areas .
 The world economy and especially the poor suffer the agonies of the damned . Thus, the United States creates loselose scenarios at every turn, writes David Frum .
 China actually believes in and works toward winwin solutions by way of cooperation . China is committed to win-win solutions, says the country's ambassador to Washington .
 They are relentlessly smeared with false narratives at every turn . And so naturally they're relentlessly smearing them with false stories, they're constantly smeared .
 The U.S. leadership cannot tolerate cooperation because they ultimately are controlled by corporations only motivated by quarterly earnings reports and nothing else . The United States leadership can't tolerate cooperation from corporations, the author says .
 "The possibility of WWIII and thermonuclear and biological devastation of humanity is irrelevant to them," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . The possibility of a nuclear war with the U.S. remains irrelevant to the Russian leader .
 "Corporations are so much like reptiles and machines and see only what is right in front of them," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 They cannot imagine a cliff looming in front of them, before they reach it . They say they cannot imagine the cliff looming .
 It is difficult to predict how China would react to the sinking of one or more of its naval ships .
 Were Were Were . them, | would use mass media as a defensive weapon to decry U.S. aggression and relentlessly scream in outrage and righteous indignation, while activating squadrons of legalists to tie up United States and international courts and other criminal justice bodies until President Biden retires
 Kamala Harris has accumulated a rather terrible reputation among Americans with many or most minorities seeing her as the “incarceral queen” and most white supremacists . Most white supremacists see her as an existential threat to their communities . Harris has a terrible reputation for herself among Americans .
 NATO Honors Nancy Pelosi with First-ever “Women for Peace” Award . With an annual salary of $172,000 ($223,000 when she’s speaker of the House), Pelosi is worth an estimated $120-$315 million .
 Number 3 in line for the presidency is President pro tempore of the Senate Patrick Leahy . Leahy is a known China and Russia-phobe who again is likely to accelerate a war rather than put a halt to it .
 Next in line for the presidency is Secretary of State Anthony Blinken . Blinken has a long history of “giving the appearance” of conflicts of interest .
 By this time of American chaos, the United States Civil War II will be cooking along vigorously . China still screaming and wailing in righteous indignation, and most of the U.S. and world crying and screaming .
 China’s symbol is the panda afterall, and everyone still loves Kung Fu Panda, even if folks in Langley and DC don’t like it .
 President Xi is almost always smiling in photos and videos and that does speak to the heart of the civilized world or what remains of it . Besides all that, President Xi has a reputation for being smiling .
 CIA Director Burns will have long virtual meetings with President Putin trying to appeal to his ‘whiteness’ to prevent him from joining in a thermonuclear war, and fail spectacularly . Meanwhile CIA director Burns will try to convince Putin that he is not going to join in
 President Putin's honor code is probably what will lead him to scald Burns with open contempt . Burns will be scalded in a scald .
 When it comes out, it will be something the U.S. has never seen or even imagined before . Instead that outrage and anger has built up inside inside, and when it does come out, will be an outrage .
 Americans have been watching American driven wars on TV for decades, like Romans watching the gladiatorial games, and enjoyed it while millions died in horror, agony and dirt . Americans have watched the wars on television for decades .
 President Putin knows this, as do I, having worked in several American wars as a journalist and having interviewed many, many American war survivors . Putin and Putin know each other better than the U.S. President Obama knows this .
 What finally triggered his invasion of Ukraine however was the massively expanded indiscriminate bombardment — mass murder of innocents in Donbass next door . What triggered the invasion was the increased indiscriminate bombing of Donbass .
 "He simply could not tolerate any more massive wholesale intentional intentional, sadistic slaughter of his innocent friends," he said . He said. "He was simply not satisfied with the slaughter of innocent friends"
 His invasion of Ukraine appears to be been driven by empathy, and all people of empathy in the world who know what’s going on the world are livid, absolutely outraged beyond words to express — in response to the long, horrific bloody history of U.S. foreign policy
 The instant the U.S. declares war on China, Russia will be there guarding its back, in full-force . Russia will protect its back in full force if the United States declares war against China .
 There is virtually zero chance any Americans will read this book beyond DoD legalists hoping to advocate violence or something else illegal so-as-as to have an excuse to frame me for some crime . But, because of illegal pervasive American censorship (including and especially shadow regulation on the servers
 The reader will notice, | hope, this writer never, in any way, shape or form, advocates violence . Believe communication and education are the only solutions to the epidemics of hate and violence in the world .
 'I am not optimistic about the future of humanity due almost entirely to the political/economic structure of the USA and most especially the wildly illegal eradication of the formerly mostly free press. In spite of that optimistic approach, I am not . optimistic about humanity due to the . political/
 In other words, thermonuclear war is inevitable in the relatively near future . Civil war will be accompanied by a civil war in the US, and followed by revolutions around the world against American puppet leaders .
 'I believe socialism will be the new prevailing political and economic world system, however without any suppression of religion. Likewise, | believe socialism . However, we believe socialism is not a solution to the problems of religion .
 The leadership of the major religions have been corrupted, weaponized and turned against each other . Religions are not the causes of the current problems, even though the leadership has been corrupted and weaponized .
 That is not due to any inherent flaws in the religions themselves, any more than humanity is to blame for the “excesses” of the U.S. Military-Industrial-Media-Educational-Medical-Medical Complex . The military-industrial-media-
 The U.S. government has mocked religion from the very beginning of its history . The United States has put forth pretenses of piety masking slavery, expansionism and colonialism as national virtues, even until today . Now the world is in a position, for the first-time centuries
 My article (cited in many locations in this book and) below is now impossible to find on Google.com even searching the “full name of the article” + “my name,” even though . could find it a few months ago on Google easily .
 Censorship in the U.S. is accelerating at a logarithmic rate these days . It's not surprising that censors in the United States are increasing .
 So many links | found doing research only few years, months and weeks ago are now dead links or gone . So many of these links are no longer relevant or relevant .
 The United States is “weeding” out everything that does not parrot U.S. government dicta from the internet . The government is "weeding" out everything not parrots the government's dicta .
 The U.S. corporate and political leaders are fully prepared to start WWIII, even knowing the risk of thermonuclear war and leaks from many if not most of the United States biolabs around the world, in order to maintain its insane ‘hegemony in perpetuity
 My review article about the labyrinth of American censorship mechanisms and laws prohibiting that censorship is one of the best in the world . American censorship is a great place to learn about censorship, but censorship is still a problem .
 The only reason | was able to find the four links above for this manuscript is | knew where to look and logged in to find them . The only way to find these four links is to know where you've found them is to log in .
 It’s better than going into that long night of humanity silently, without resistance . It's better than being silent, but it's better to be silent .
 The U.S. and its European allies must back off immediately and start negotiating to back NATO off Russia’s borders entirely . They must close their BSL laboratories and get psychological help for those Euro-American politicians and corporate leaders responsible for all of the American wars, and American
 The future of humanity, if there is to be one, is highly uncertain . Given that in any large complex equation with many unknown variables, the best one can calculate the outcome is 50/50 .
 The fate of advanced life on earth beyond plants, bacteria and viruses rests on a 50/50 gamble unless the “Western Alliance” of unrestrained capitalists start to back off now .
 In the case of a thermonuclear war, the U.S. would be totally obliterated along with large parts of Russia . The United States would be obliterated in the case, along with parts of the Russian-held territory .
 Following that, there will be revolutions around the world deposing American puppet leaders in developing countries . The U.S. puppet leaders will be deposed by the world's puppet leaders, says Julian Zelizer .
 The probability all 300+ Top Secret American biological research labs will keep their pathogens contained is-equal-to-zero . The probability of keeping pathogens contained in their labs is equal to zero .
 In other words, the full range of all American biological pathogens, some call “weapons” will be set loose upon the earth . In other . words, some . call ‘weapons’ will be released upon the Earth .
 There will be no cures or vaccines due to obliteration of global supply chains . Global supply chains will be obliterated by obliteration . There will also be no cure or vaccines for the disease .
 In this current day real life scenario however, President Biden’s family is hugely sneakier and more corrupt than Nikita Khrushchev ever was . President Biden's family is more corrupt and more sneakier than the Khrushchets .
 U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs concludes . The report is the conclusion of the United States Senate Committee . The author would not argue with it .
 President Biden is playing the role of Nikita Khrushchev who wanted to put nuclear weapons in Cuba . Biden is no Kennedy and in the context of the current military conflict in Ukraine, he is playing a role in the role . One thing is for sure, President Biden will no longer
 President Biden and his predecessors have permitted deadly dual-use biological pathogens in Ukraine very close to its borders . The U.S. financed and trained neo-Nazi militias in Ukraine, and NATO in several sections of its western border .
 He will push the red button ending civilization as we know it without a second thought when the time comes, he says . He says he would push the button to end civilization without a thought .
 There is no animal more dangerous than a cornered animal, and this is the situation into which the west thinks they have pushed him into the situation . The west thinks it has pushed him to the brink, but he is still dangerous .
 The dollar as the global currency is finished, and its legitimacy as legal tender for currency was based entirely upon its status as a global currency . The dollar will no longer be allowed to be legal tender in the world .
 I am certain he has an endgame in mind and believes he has predicted Euro-American responses precisely precisely . Maybe, maybe not. Maybe he has a plan for the future? Maybe not . Maybe not?
 'The odds are 51% according to my calculations, because I believe his intelligence sources are vastly more reliable than American intelligence sources. The odds are that he will be able to trust the U.S. intelligence sources .
 Region and country desk chiefs then tell their CIA station chiefs what the big bosses in Langly want to hear . The CIA is tasked with telling the world's top agency what it wants to hear from Langly .
 Station chiefs tell their CIA officers what the big bosses want to hear . Station chiefs say CIA officers tell them what they think about . The station chiefs tell the CIA officers to tell them the truth .
 CIA officers tell their local agents want those officers want to hear . CIA agents tell local agents what they want them to hear, then listen to them . CIA officers say they want to know what they think about the CIA .
 Local agents go out into their own countries, either make those dicta come true, or just lie and affirm everything their CIA “handlers” want to hear . Then they go out to their own country, and either lie or affirm everything they’ve been told to
 The big bosses in Langly were right, not really, but they have “actionable intel” to go ahead with whatever they wanted to do in the first place . Langly’s boss was right, but he has ‘actionable intelligence’ to go
 They live in a much more dangerous world dominated by the CIA . Real intelligence (access to accurate information) is essential for the CIA and for the public .
 President Putin’s somewhat autocratic style of leadership has all the advantages of a good ship captain in a storm as argued by Socrates . My mother always argued that a benign despot is better than a liberal democracy ruled by Narcissistic demigods .
 It appears highly likely the debt-riddled U.S. and EU have isolated themselves from world markets even more since February 24 . Most of the people in Africa, Latin America and Asia now have some new measures of hope that the United States will grow up and let a multi-
 "Civilian intelligence organizations usually have much more influence with national leaders than their military intelligence people," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Around 90 million displaced people worldwide now and that population rapidly increasing at ever increasing speeds . That chaos includes destruction of nations’ infrastructures, around 90 million people worldwide .
 In the case of WWIII, most of humanity will die painfully of disease, starvation and violence . Hundreds of millions will die from thermonuclear weapons directly and in about 1/3"" of the cases relatively quickly .
 The U.S. will probably experience a civil war which the White Supremacists have been planning on since the end of the last Civil War . The United States will probably be the first to see a war between the two sides .
 There will probably be only a few million survivors around the world living in extremely remote areas . Only a small number of survivors are likely to survive in remote areas of the world .
 American corporate greed and nationalist ego will not permit them to back off this war . Nuclear war is the most probable outcome of the current situation in Ukraine, says Julian Zelizer .
 Euro/American voters should have paid a great deal more attention to who they voted for in past elections . Euro/U.S. voters should pay more attention than they did in previous elections . Conclusions on probable outcomes of Ukraine War: Euro and American voters should be paying more attention
 The United States will not permit a fair outcome to Russia’s legitimate need for security and peace with true self-determination within the nations along its western borders . Nuclear war is the most probable outcome, with nuclear war likely to be the most likely outcome .
 President Putin will not be intimidated into surrender, says Putin . President Putin is not easy to capture or kill, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 In the case of unlimited nuclear war most of the world’s population will be killed by the release of American biological pathogens stored in freezers around the world .
 Surviving Russians celebrated as having finally brought the infinitely cruel white slavers to the bitter ends they deserved . Western Euro-American Caucasians will immediately be killed or enslaved whenever encountered if possible .
 Either the Euro-Americans back off quickly or the probability of nuclear war looms hugely . The probability of nukes war looms huge .
 "My parents did — each in their own unique way heavily influence me in becoming who | am and for that | thank them. My parents did," she writes .
 The side of peace is peace with dignity, self-determination and security for all . Peace with dignity with dignity and selfdetermination . Peace is with dignity .
 The current conflict in Ukraine is only profiting those invested in western “defense’s related industries . The vast majority of those involved in the conflict are already very rich men .
 Everyone else in the world is losing at a time when humanity as a whole should be investing in global economic development, including COVID-19 recovery . Globalization, climate change, poverty and inadequate health care precautions are very rapidly spreading many infectious diseases .
 Putin 'has access to a great deal more information than | have, so cannot and will not assert he was wrong for launching his military operation in Ukraine' Putin has access to 'a great deal of more information' than anyone else, says Putin .
 It appears there is more at stake here than simply the survival of Ukrainians, Russians and Americans . The U.S. is in the midst of a major crisis in Ukraine .
 Five years ago, had friends in Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Ukraine and Russia and all was well with everyone .
 U.S. has played the deadliest “Game of Thrones” in world history, with my friends’ lives on all five continents . At the same time, | have infinite empathy for my dear, dear friends in Ukraine who the United States has thrown “under the
 The Biden family, other politicians, corporate shareholders and puppet presidents like Zelensky, are responsible for the loss of their loved ones to the Russian military, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Until campaign finance in the U.S. and Europe cleaned up, these wars will continue until thermonuclear war and a global biological and chemical weapons blitzkrieg occurs . Ultimately however all are slaves to the dictates of the reptile-like big corporations*4 .
 The working poor and jobless world-wide, including the US, are all held hostages to the very corrupt dictates of the very same ‘rulebased order” President Biden so loves to brag about but corrupts with every word and deed .
 Global unrestrained capitalism has brought the working people and jobless to our knees . There is no hope in sight, except that provided by China and Russia . The working people have been brought to their knees by the global capitalism .
 The system of governance is not as important as the quality of people in 31 . Carl Sagan's book “The Dragons of Eden” by popular scientist Carl Sagan is worth reading . The midbrain region that mediates emotions didn’t evolve until after the age of the reptiles
 In other words, he warned the world of the dangers of corporations in a way similar to President Eisenhower’s final address . He based his arguments on natural evolution and human neuroanatomy rather than the experiences President Eisenhower had .
 Sagan's observations may well have been partly motivated by Eisenhower’s final speech in addition to his own . Sagan: ‘Icyrism’ may have been inspired by the speech .
 Socialist/capitalist hybrid economic systems like China’s to have an infinite number of advantages over the U.S. and Western Europe . Likewise, | see flexible socialist/capitalist hybrids to have infinite advantages over capitalism .
 The political system in the U.S. has reached such levels of corruption, such expertise in overthrowing governments, and such a casual attitude towards killing innocents . No honest person in the world is safe now, anywhere, anywhere .
 Russia’s lead negotiator, Vladimir Medinsky, said on Wednesday that Ukraine agreed in principle to officially become a neutral country . Ukraine stated that it's ready to implement the demands that Russia has been insisting on for years, he claims .
 Ukraine’s bid to join NATO was one of the reasons Moscow said it launched a military campaign against the country last month . Moscow says it launched the campaign against Ukraine's bid to become part of the country's NATO membership .
 Ukrainian team presented a draft roadmapping a future peace deal, he said . He said the draft road map was presented by the Ukrainian team . The Ukrainian team is working on a possible peace deal .
 The North Atlantic Alliance has also been creating an anti-Russian foothold from Ukraine, more precisely, from Ukrainian territory, for years . And the North Atlantic alliance has been creating anti-Russia foothold in Ukraine .
 The issue of Ukraine's acquisition of nuclear weapons was also made public knowledge . Moreover, the issue of the issue was also revealed publicly .
 There’s irrefutable evidence that Kyiv was planning to launch an offensive against Donbass in the near future . Kyiv planned to launch offensive in Donbass, according to Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 In that case Russia would have had to stand up for tens of thousands of our Russian citizens living there anyway, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "Russia would have stood up for millions of its citizens living in Russia anyway"
 Ukraine stated that it’s ready to fulfill these demands that Russia has been insisting on all these years . That is, Ukraine stated . Ukraine state that it is ready to comply with these demands . Russia has insisted on these demands all the years .
 As head of Central Command, Austin actively campaigned to resurrect the Pentagon’s failed program of trying to arm ‘rebels’ in Syria to fight ISIS . He backed immunity for U.S. troops from war crimes prosecutions by the government of Afghanistan .
 Just prior to the election, Pine Island launched some new ‘special purpose acquisition companies’ which are essentially shell companies . Though claiming to divest themselves of any investment in Pine Island, just prior to election, just before the election Pine Island .
 His previous role as chairman of the House Intelligence Subcommittee on Terrorism and Homeland Security made him one of the leading congressional experts on those issues .
 Daschle joined law and lobbying firm Alston & Bird as a “special policy adviser,” earning as much as $2. million a year, but he never registered as a lobbyist .
 Daschle previously registered with the Justice Department under the Foreign Agents Registration Act to represent Taiwan . He previously registered under the act to register as an agent for Taiwan .
 Daschle serves on numerous public and private boards, including the Center for American Progress and the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs . He has served on numerous boards since 1992 .
 Mandy Smithberger, the director of the Straus Military Reform Project at the Project on Government Oversight, says it's concerning in this case . Smithberger: "It's just that sort of business as usual"
 WestExec Advisors thrive in the so-called gray zone doing many, most or all of the same things as a lobby group . The group is not officially a lobbying group, but thrives in the gray zone .
 Antony J Blinken was sworn in as the 71st United States Secretary of State on January 26, 2021 .
 Michéle serves on the boards of Booz Allen Hamilton, Amida Technology Solutions, The Mission Continues, Spirit of America, The United States Naval Academy Foundation, CARE, and CARE . She sits on the Honorary Advisory Committee of The Leadership Council for Women in National Security .
 People who work closely with Biden are enmeshed in the opaque world of strategic consultancies and by extension a network of the world’s biggest businesses . Biden's team includes a number of people who work for him in the private sector .
 If they've been consulting for corporations with offshore interests, this spells potential conflicts . If they’ve been consulting with offshore companies, they could have conflicts .
 The legality of that has yet to be challenged, given the potential for encouraging corruption in government, and the deadly consequences of that potential corruption . It's not yet clear whether the legality of this has yet been challenged .
 The Ukraine War is at minimum prima facia proof of that deadly corruption, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Ukraine War at minimum is proof of deadly corruption in the country .
 The world of special interest control of U.S. politicians may not be so opaque as Mandy Smithberger suggests . Smithberger: Special interest control in politics may be opaque .
 After leaving the Obama administration, Haines worked in the private sector consulting for companies such as national security contractor Palantir Technologies . He is also an expert in data analytics .
 Palantir’s government business grew much faster in 2020 than its commercial business . The company also grew faster than its government business did in 2020 .
 Its total revenue increased 47% from about $743 million to $1,093 million in 2020 . The company's total revenue will increase 47% in the coming years .
 Google’s “de-ranking” algorithms have done a thorough job of silencing all views not marching lockstep behind U.S. government edicts . Google's de-ranking algorithm has silenced all views, including that of the United States government .
 The U.S. keeps claiming “just war,” when its wars are profoundly unjust . When someone actually does promote a real humanitarian intervention, and in real defense of his nation, nobody believes it is even possible .
 Nobody believes there are wolves anymore, anywhere. It is like the boy who falsely cried ‘Wolf’ so many times, nobody believes there is wolves anymore . Nobody believes wolves anymore. Nobody believes they exist in the United States anymore. The boy who cried “Wolf”
 It is long past time to exculpate President Putin and place the responsibility for the war in Ukraine where it belongs . The responsibility for Ukraine's war in 2014 really began in 2014 should be placed in the hands of Putin .
 Due to U.S. dominance in world media and censorship, there are no fair trials anymore. Unfortunately, due to United States dominance in the world media, there is no fair trial anymore .
 U.S. attempts to overthrow foreign governments since WWII have been unsuccessful . Russia can and will fight back effectively, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The war is very different from the 67 other attempts to oust foreign governments .
 Author argues that President Putin will not hesitate for an instant to do whatever is necessary to prevent this latest U.S. attempt at so-called “regime change” this time in Russia . The author of this book argues that . President Putin .
 President Putin was intentionally provoked in a legion of extreme ways with the specific goal of eliciting a military response . The author argues that this Ukrainian war began with a United States financed and orchestrated coup in Ukraine in 2014 .
 This book argues if the United States and NATO do not back off very quickly this war will definitely lead to thermonuclear war and containment breeches at most or all 300+ U.S. BSL-3 and BSLs-3 laboratories around the world . The book argues
 If American and European citizens should read one book this year, it better be this one because failing to effectively pressure western leaders into backing off this war they intentionally provoked has inevitable consequences far beyond the worst nightmares .
 The benefits of getting used to the idea of a multi-polar world are beautiful far beyond the imaginings of even the most optimistic . Furthermore, the benefits are beautiful beyond the imagination of any optimistic person, even though they are not optimistic .