 The Cuban missile crisis continues to inspire books and attract readers because it was the most terrifying face-off of the Cold War . New evidence has repeatedly compelled historians to reassess those harrowing thirteen days .
 Scholars were unable to nail down specifics about the secret discussions in the White House . They knew even less about events in the Kremlin and Havana . Most of the evidence on the crisis came from United States sources .
 Washington Post reporter Michael Dobbs found that many key Soviet archives remain closed . Dobbs covered the collapse of the USSR and is fluent in Russian . He says many key archives are closed .
 Most of the book deals with one day, “Black Saturday,” October 27, 1962 . Without doubt, it was the most perilous day of the Cold War if not in all of human history . The book is based on that day .
 Dobbs takes the reader directly into the thoughts and actions of American, Soviet, and Cuban leaders . Dobbs also details the gut-wrenching fear and confusion experienced by Soviet combat and technical support forces in Cuba .
 JFK and Khrushchev's conclusion that humankind was fortunate to have restrained and rational leaders in charge at this potentially apocalyptic moment is not new, he says .
 Dobbs relentlessly and rightly stresses the theme of historical contingency . Dobbs: "Historical contingency is a matter of historical concern"
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were often making decisions based on inaccurate, misleading, or dead wrong information . Kennedy's decisions were often made based on incorrect information or misleading information .
 They could not communicate directly and securely (the hotline was installed in 1963) Their exchange of letters and cables was agonizingly slow and unreliable . The hotline was not installed until 1963, and their exchange of communication was slow .
 Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin recalls watching in disbelief as a Western Union courier on a bicycle carrying a vital message for Khrushchev, stopped down the street from the Soviet Embassy .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev shared eerily parallel experiences with their top-ranking military advisers . Kennedy and his top-ranked military advisers also shared similar experiences with top-level advisers .
 Soviet Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky urged Khrushchev to authorize his forces in Cuba to use “all available means,” including medium-range nuclear missiles, to protect the island . Three days later, Dobbs reveals, the Soviet defense minister urged his forces to use
 Dobbs' principal contribution is to document a series of chilling details . Dobbs’s principal contribution to this article is to documenting a series .
 Soviet junior officers in Cuba were also prepared to launch nuclear missiles at the United States in the event of bombing or an invasion . Without specific authorization from the Kremlin, they could launch missiles in Cuba without permission from Moscow .
 A Soviet missile regiment moved nuclear cruise missiles into position to destroy the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo in the event of an American attack on Cuba . And a Soviet missile unit moved nuclear missile missiles into place to destroy a US base .
 Dobbs also discloses that the famous “eyeball to eyeball” confrontation of U.S. and Soviet ships at sea never really happened . Dobbs: The famous confrontation of United States and Soviet vessels at sea was never really occurred .
 The belief that this remark was ever made during a taped ExComm discussion, like the alleged confrontation at sea may itself be a myth .
 Dobbs: Scali-Alexsandr Feklisov meetings had no real impact on resolving the crisis . Dobbs says the secret and dramatic discussions had nothing to do with solving the crisis in Russia .
 JFK and his advisers did not know that during the ExComm meetings . However, it is nonetheless important to remember that JFK's advisers didn't know that .
 Dobbs is skeptical about the celebrated argument that the missile crisis represents a model for presidential crisis management . Dobbs says he's skeptical of the claim that the crisis was a success model for crisis management in the United States .
 Even leaders with the best of intentions cannot effectively manage such momentous historical events, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Crisis management is largely an artificial political science illusion . Crisis management on this scale is largely a political illusion, says Simon Tisdall .
 Chaos theory, rather than crisis management modeling, provides a far better guide to understanding the Cuban missile crisis . Chaos theory is a better way to understand what happened in Cuba, experts say .
 By October 27, the errant U-2 over the Soviet Union was only the latest in a string of safety nightmares haunting the Strategic Air Command .
 Nuclear bombers had gone astray, reconnaissance planes had been shot down, bombs had been dropped accidentally, and early warning systems had given false alerts of a Soviet attack .
 Dobbs makes clear that ideology was a potent factor in both Washington and Moscow . Dobbs: Ideology was a key factor in the Russian takeover of Crimea .
 JFK’s political career began in 1946 and closely paralleled the evolution of the Cold War and the ideology of containment . JFK's political career closely parallels the evolution and the emergence of Cold War ideology .
 Kennedy became an articulate representative of the new generation of World War II veterans . Kennedy was determined to avoid repeating the appeasement of the 1930s in what they perceived as a life-and-death struggle against communism .
 Dobbs’s book is not about the ExComm tapes, Dobbs says . Dobbs: "I’m doing my own area of scholarly work" Dobbs' book isn't about the tapes, he says .
 Readers can benefit from highlighting a few instances from the tapes on which we disagree . However, readers can benefit by highlighting some instances of the tapes .
 Only two days earlier, he had revived the previously rejected option of bombing the missile sites in Cuba . He remained a stubborn opponent of the president’s determination to accept Khrushchev's public offer .
 Late that evening, Dobbs acknowledges, the younger Kennedy was still “dreaming of revenge” and remarked wistfully, “I’d like to take Cuba back.” He says he was still dreaming of revenge . Dobbs: "I'd like
 In fact, McNamara did not “snap” at all, but instead muttered morosely and almost inaudibly, “Well, let’s wait” McNamara said .
 Dobbs' bleak tone momentarily exposed the depths of exhaustion, insecurity and anxiety that these men had endured around the clock since the morning of October 16 . JFK and Khrushchev understood, Dobbs makes clear, that history is not a play .
 Bush was that JFK “had an instinctive appreciation for the chaotic forces of history” JFK had an “intinctive appreciation” for the chaos, Bush said .
 His experience as a junior Navy officer in World War II had taught him to expect screwups, he says . He says he expects screwups in the military .
 Historians should not let JFK off the hook for their over-reaction to Castro’s Cuba . But, at the same time, historians should not be able to blame JFK for their reaction to Castro's Cuba .
 This fixation led to the Bay of Pigs fiasco and the sabotage and murder sanctioned by Operation Mongoose . Khrushchev’s decision to gamble on deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba in the hope of discouraging further U.S. military action against Castro .
 There is no evidence thus far to suggest that Khrushchev’s meetings or discussions were recorded . Unfortunately, there has been no evidence so far that there is no .
 Dobbs has crafted a highly readable contribution to the seemingly endless literature on the Cuban missile crisis . Dobbs probed the qualities of judgment, temperament, and restraint that are indispensable for leadership in the nuclear age, he says .
 JFK approved many more acts of sabotage against Cuba in the year after the crisis . JFK actually approved many additional acts of sabotaging against Cuba . The Cuban crisis was a major source of Cuban sabotage .
 Rusk’s reference to an “advantage” hints that he might have been proposing a cover story . Rusk: “Advantage” is an ‘advantage.’
 Historical verdict on Dobbs’s work requires a thorough analysis of his methodology and use of sources . Inevitably, the historical verdict must be an analysis of Dobbs's methodology and sources .
 For the first such attempt, see Barton J Bernstein’s forthcoming review of One Minute to Midnight on www.washingtondecoded.com.com .