 This was all during the Cold War, where the U.S. and it's allies was recovering from World War II, and communism was a new trend . This was during the 1950s and '60s when communism was still a threat to the world of Europe and Asia .
 It was soon realize that communism wasn't as good as with the capitalist countries . It was also soon realized that communism was not as bad with the capitalists .
 Communism lands in Cuba, and now has possession of nuclear missile given by the Commies . The missile was given to Cuba by the communist regime .
 "This was a huge event that took place in history that the world would have catastrophically change," he says . "The world would've catastrophicized change. This was a massive event," he adds .
 During Kennedy's presidency, the CIA launched U-2 spy planes and took photographs of intermediate-range ballistic missile sites being built in Cuba by the Soviets .
 He was then facing a major dilemma, which was if the United States were to theoretically engage the sites, a nuclear holocaust will commence . The United States was faced with the dilemma .
 Most of the National Security Council wanted an airstrike to take out the sites . Most of them wanted to kill the sites, but most of the NSC wanted a strike .
 John F Kennedy ordered a ""quarantine"" to block and inspect all ships coming into the Caribbean . But instead, he ordered a 'quarantine' to block all ships from the Caribbean.
 On October 24, 1968, The crisis ended by pulling out the aging missiles in Turkey, and JFK was more favored in the U.S. The crisis was over .
 Che Guevara was a major figure around the world, especially during the Cuban Revolution . He was one of the most prominent figures in the world .
 Che was very important because he developed the relationship with Cuba and the Soviets . Che was important for the relationship between Cuba and Cuba, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Nikita Khrushchev was a Russian politician who led the Soviet Union during part of the Cold War . He was one of the most prominent figures in Soviet politics during the 1960s .
 When meeting Fidel Castro, he sought to place nuclear missiles in Cuba so he can expand he missile range farther . He sought to expand his missile range in Cuba .
 They secretly shipped in missiles and started to build missile launching facilities . They then agreed to secretly ship in missiles to the country . They agreed and started building missile launch facilities .
 The Soviets agreed with the U.S. to get the missiles out of Cuba as the United States promise to not invade Cuba and withdraw there missiles in Turkey . The Soviets finally agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba . The United States also promised not to invade Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev was removed from office because he can not cope being a leader . Later in the years, Nikita was remove from office due to his lack of leadership .
 Fidel Castro served as Prime Minister of the Republic of Cuba from 1959 to 1976 . Castro was a Cuban politician and revolutionary . He was the first Cuban Prime Minister to be Prime Minister .
 Nikita Khrushchev met Castro to install nuclear missiles in Cuba to even there power with the U.S. Nikita and Castro met in order to install the missiles . The missiles were installed in Cuba by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 He agreed, to believing that Cuba will be safe and can continue to expand socialism . Cuba will continue to be safe, he said .
 The United States discovered the missile sites and was begging Khrushchev to threaten the United States, but instead he wanted to avoid a nuclear war . The U.S. was begging him to threaten it, but he did not want to go to war .
 The main locations that took place during the crisis was in the Caribbean Sea, and Cuba . The locations of the crisis took place were in Cuba .