 Elp_invalid_captcha: "Robot verification failed, invalid key"  "Unexpected error occurred" "You have successfully subscribed," "You've successfully subscribed" "Successful_single" is "You're trying to subscribe to a new email address .
 It took approximately 30 minutes for the Soviet missiles to reach the U.S. The missiles were launched by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 This was enough time for the Americans to retaliate with a devastating counter-strike, which was an essential deterrence for peace . The U.S. responded quickly to the threat of a nuclear war with a nuclear strike on North Korea .
 From Cuba, the Soviet missiles would have been able to destroy most of the U.S. military and urban centers in 7-10 minutes . The Soviet missiles were able to target the United States in seven to 10 minutes .
 Missile accuracy significantly increased with the proximity of the target, making the Marxist island of Cuba the perfect choice to greatly improve Soviet nuclear capacity . Another important factor was that the missile accuracy .
 Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet ambassador to Washington, said Khrushchev’s motives for the missiles deployment in Cuba was strategic . Dobrynins was a decisive figure with Robert Kennedy in finding a solution to the crisis .
 A principal factor in the Kremlin’s decision to introduce nuclear missiles into Cuba was the Bay of Pigs disaster, where John Kennedy was perceived as a weak, indecisive president who would cave in under pressure .
 The messenger was Ambassador Aleksandr Alexeyev, a veteran KGB agent and close associate of Raúl Castro . He was the ambassador to the Soviet Union, a close ally of Castro .
 U.S. aircraft took photos that provided Washington with first hard evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The photos were taken by a United States aircraft in Cuba in October . The missiles were believed to be Soviet missiles .
 For the next five days, in absolute secrecy, the president and close advisors analyzed the available options . The president and advisors analyzed options for five days . For the first time, the Obama administration was in complete secrecy .
 Babalú is social, never socialist and never socialist founding editor .
 Carlos ""Tres Fotutos"" Eire Humberto ""El Cirujano"" Fontova Rey ""El Guajiro" Fontova Rees "El Gujiro" Anthony Silvio ""El Tejano Cubano"" Canto Jr. Canto