 The decision to provide bases in this country for U.S. cruise missiles has surely to be considered together as part of a single defence posture . The future of our own ‘independent’ strategic deterrent . The extent of our provisions for civil defence should also be considered .
 No evidence emerged in the course of last Thursday’s debate that this is being done by the present Government . The present Government has not shown any evidence of this .
 The presence of cruise missiles on British soil makes it highly possible that this country would be the target for a series of preemptive strikes by Soviet missiles . Britain is the target of a preemptive strike by the Soviet Union .
 Lord Noel-Baker foreseen the scale of destruction in his columns of January 25 . These would not necessarily be on the massive scale he foreseen .
 It is more likely that the Russians would hold such massive strikes in reserve, to deter us from using our sea-based missiles as a ‘second strike force’ after the first Soviet warheads had hit targets in this country .
 Civil defence on a scale sufficient to give protection to a 9 substantial number of the population in the event of such a ‘limited’ nuclear strike is thus an indispensable element of deterrence . Civil defence is an indispensable part of deterrence, says David Cameron .
 Britain's defence posture should not be destroyed through absence of evidence of our capacity to endure the disagreeable consequences likely to flow from it, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: The credibility of our entire defence posture must be preserved .
 In the absence of a serious civil defence policy, the Government’s decision to modernise or replace our ‘independent deterrent’ will be no more than an expensive bluff . This is likely to deceive no one beyond these shores, and not very many people within them .
 Howard is the Chichele Professor of the History of War, All Soul’s College, Oxiord . Howard is a historian of the history of war . He is also a lecturer at All Soul's College, Oxfordshire .
 Those who advocate this policy are not ‘warmongers’ (or they suppose that they are not such), although they form an influential part of that lobby which advocates every kind of preparation for war .
 I find their views to be not only odd and perverse, but also exceedingly dangerous, but I do not suppose that the fearful terminus to which they are directing our history is one which they intend . I find them to be odd, perverse, and dangerous .
 I accept that Professor Howard himself is innocent of any warlike intention . Let me state clearly, then, that I accept . Professor Howard, I accept, that he is innocent, of any intention .
 His letter contains most serious assertions, and I will proceed to examine these, he writes . But 1o his letters contain most serious allegations, he says .
 Nuclear diplomacy is a theatre of theatre of nuclear diplomacy in the U.S. nuclear arms race .
 According to his scenario, the enemy will make a pre-emptive strike against Britain with nuclear missiles . The scenario is stated to be the Russians for as many years ahead as speculation can go .
 Professor Howard considers that the presence of these missiles on our soil will make it ‘highly possible’ that this country will be the target, not for one, but for a series of preemptive strikes .
 So far from ‘deterring’ the Russians, he supposes that the presence of these missiles here may provoke and draw down upon us these strikes, he said . So far . He supposes . That is not the case .
 He does not suggest that there will be any counter-strikes by British-based missiles against the Russians . He says there are no plans to counter-strike against Russia .
 The Russians will hold more ‘massive strikes’ in reserve to ‘deter us from using our sea-based missiles’ against them . And that the Russians will also hold more 'massive strikes' in reserve . Russia says it will use its sea-range missiles to
 In the absence of adequate measures of civil defence, these first ‘limited’ strikes would create conditions of ‘political turbulence’ in this country, he says .
 If a sufficient proportion of the surviving population were prevented from acts of ‘political turbulence’ by measures of civil defence, then a proper military strategy could be pursued by NATO . NATO could pursue massive second-stage nuclear exchanges .
 It will be seen that the purpose of civil defence is political and provisional . Civil defence is 'political and provisional' and 'political'
 It is to ensure the necessary degree of stability in that short interval between the first and the second nuclear strike .
 He does not tell us whether the ‘massive strikes’ of the second stage would seal the entrances to the air-raid shelters and block up their airducts . He doesn't tell us if the 'massive strikes' would seal entrances .
 We may suppose, at least, that these second strikes will be effective in bringing ‘political turbulence’ to a prompt end, and thereby in removing the necessity for further civil defence .
 At this stage the professor passes over to the consideration of the correct degree of mendacity to be exercised in our current defence ‘posture’ and we will consider that element later on .
 Professor Howard's intent is to advocate much greater expenditure and publicity on civil defence . He does not, in any single clause, indicate any detail of what such defence might consist in, nor how effective it might be .
 He wishes there to be ‘measures’ which afford ‘the greatest possible degree of protection’ and evidence of ‘our capacity to endure the disagreeable consequences likely to flow from’ our present military and diplomatic strategies .
 He does not indicate what measures might be possible, nor does he even explain what could be 'disagreeable' about the expected event .
 I have consulted the letter from Philip NoelBaker in The Times of 25 January . I have therefore consulted a letter written by Philip Noel Baker in the Times .
 Lord Noel-Baker is the recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize for his work for international conciliation over very many years .
 Val Peterson was appointed U.S. Civil Defense Administrator twenty-five years ago . He organized many exercises, national, regional and local, at the height of a previous Cold War .
 Mr Peterson drew the following conclusions from his successive exercises . Mr Peterson concluded that the exercise was a waste of time .
 In 1954 the national exercise was estimated to have had a yield of twenty-two millions of casualties, of whom seven millions would have been dead . In 1954 it was estimated that 22 millions of people would have died in the exercise .
 In 1956 fifty-six millions, or one third of the population of the United States, were presumed as casualties . The U.S. lost more than a third of its population in the war .
 In the last analysis, there is no such thing as a nation being prepared for a thermonuclear war, says David Cameron . "There are no such things as being prepared to prepare for war," he says .
 Nuclear warfare will destroy civilisation, and perhaps exterminate mankind . There is no defence against such weapons; and . . . There are no defences against nuclear warfare, and there are no plans to defend against it .
 To hope for salvation from Civil Defence is a dangerous self-deluding pipe dream . Civil Defence will not be able to save the country from a civil war . Civil defence is a self-destructive, self-defending pipe dream.
 Professor Howard has at least taken care to cover himself against this argument . Howard has been accused of covering himself up against this .
 The series of strikes envisaged in his scenario ‘would not necessarily be on the massive scale’ which Lord Noel-Baker foresees . The strikes would not be on a 'massive scale', he says .
 What he foresees is possible 13 , and perhaps even probable, but not ‘necessarily’ so . What he says is possible is possible, but it's not 'necessarily' so, he says .
 If we are to be futurist authorities on war, or even historians of war, then we should be exact as to weaponry and as to its effects . We should also be exact about weaponry and its effects, says historian .
 There is a good deal of talk around today, from ‘defence correspondents’, military strategists and the like, which leads us to suppose that the military, on both sides of the world, are capable of delivering very small nuclear packs .
 The first concern is the known power and probable effects of these weapons . The first concerns the power and likely effects of the weapons .
 The second concems the strategic assumptions of those ‘experts’ who suppose that any nuclear war could be limited in this way . ‘Experts’ say that any such a nuclear war can be limited .
 There appeared in The Times, nine days before Professor Howard’s letter, a major article by Lord Zuckerman . Professor Howard: “The Deterrent Illusion’, 21 January, is an illusion .
 The author was the government’s chief scientific adviser from 1964 to 1971 . He also draws upon the experience of eminent U.S. scientists and advisers .
 It is still inevitable that were military installations rather than cities to become the objectives of nuclear attack, millions, even tens of millions, of civilians would be killed .
 Strategists use the acronym CE P (Circular Error Probable) for the radius of a circle within which 50 per cent of strikes would fall .
 Lord Zuckerman does not tell us the presumed C EP for a ‘limited’ strike aimed at a single missile base, and this is perhaps an official secret .
 NATO's decision to base cruise missiles in the UK has been criticised by the British Parliament . But in the debate that was eventually held in the Commons, statements were made which enable an impression to be offered .
 Defence Secretary spoke in the House of Commons on 24 January of ‘an interlocking system of comprehensive deterrence... a clear chain of terrible 15 risk’ The pistol and the grenade are at one end and the MX missile at the other .
 It is generally agreed that ‘the West’ has some advantage in strategic weapons . This fact has been concealed from the Western public in recent months in order to direct attention to long and medium-range theatre weapons .
 Cruise missiles are to be introduced by NATO in Western Europe . It is to meet this ‘threat’ to parity in the middle link of the chain .
 The Soviet threat is marked in heavy dotted lines and thick arrowheads . NATO's response is delicately etched. It will be seen from this map .
 NATO’s existing, pre-modern weaponry is pitiful, and will not even be able to destroy Rome or Naples, nor any part of Greece . It will also be seen that NATO's existing weapons are pitiful and not even capable of destroying Rome, Naples or Naples .
 NATO would be reduced in a nuclear war to stinging itself, like a scorpion, to death . So that if it were not for the submarinelaunched ballistic missiles, NATO would have been reduced to death in a war .
 Present strategic thinking supposes a ‘limited’ nuclear war, with ‘theatre’ weapons . The point, however, is that present strategic thinking . It is that there is a 'limited' nuclear war .
 This limited war will be localized to a small area from the Urals to the Western coast of Ireland . Europe is such a ‘theatre’, and this limited war is localized to small area .
 In this scenario, ‘strategic’ weapons will be held back for a ‘second strike’, so that neither Siberia nor the North American continent will be under any immediate threat . ‘Strategic” weapons are held back .
 Sir Frederick Bennett affirmed in the Commons debate on 24 January that the warheads of these Russian theatre missiles ‘have at least the destructive capacity of the bombs dropped on Nagasaki and Hiroshima’ although Mr Churchill had different information .
 Two well-informed Conservative spokesmen differed in their information by a factor of one hundred . It will be seen that two well-informed Tory spokesmen .
 "When we come to hard information, the air is very much fouled up today," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The reasons for this are easy to identify, but they illuminate a part of the problem, so we will digress to explain them . The reasons are simple, but are not easy to explain .
 It is axiomatic that each military bloc has an interest in misleading the other . This is done both by concealing information and by spreading disinformation, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In general, each bloc is at pains to deny and conceal its own areas of greatest military strength, and to advertise a pretence to strength in areas where it is weak .
 Intelligence agencies which report on each other’s resources are themselves an interest-group, with high ideological motivation, and on occasion they deliberately manufacture alarmist reports . The intelligence agencies which . report on . each other's resources are often an interest group, with ideological motivation .
 Lord Zuckerman gives evidence as to the steady flow of ‘phoney intelligence’ and ‘far-fetched’ predictions as to Soviet military power .
 There is no reason to suppose that this fouling-up of information takes place only in Western capitals . It's not only in the West, it's also in the United States and Canada .
 The debate was the first to be held in parliament on the subject of nuclear weapons for 15 years . The debate lasted for about five and a half hours .
 It was distinguished throughout by the paucity of hard information, although Mr Pym imparted some new information, and more than had come at any time from the previous administration .
 Mr Pym announced the near-completion of the ‘Chevaline’ programme to ‘modernize’ the warhead of our Polaris missiles . The programme had been carried out in the deepest secrecy, and without the knowledge of the full Cabinet, and in defiance
 The House was given this information after the decision had been taken, the money had been spent, and the work had been done . Thus the decision was made after the work was done .
 I do not know how £1,000 millions was tucked away in a crease in the estimates and hidden from view . But it suggests that the level of official mendacity is today very high indeed .
 Mr Pym did give the House this information, and we may suppose that he did so in order to embarrass Mr Callaghan, Mr Mulley, Mr Healey and Dr Healey . We may suppose he did . Healey was the co-partner in this expensive deception .
 But apart from this malicious little political detonation, the yield of new information in the debate was low . The yield of the debate in the UK has been low .
 The second reason why the air is fouled-up is that the military and security elites in both blocs . Cannot pursue their expensive and dangerous policies without continually terrifying the populations of their own countries with sensational accounts of the war preparations of the other bloc .
 To be sure, the plain facts are terrifying enough without any embroidery . The plain facts of the truth are plain facts, and that's what's terrifying enough .
 But it is necessary to persuade the native populations that the other side is stealing a lead in order to justify even greater preparations and expenditure at home .
 This is as necessary in the Soviet Union as it is in the West, despite the absence of any open public debate over there on the issues . The Soviet Union is as important in the public debate as the West. This is not the same thing that is needed in the U.S
 For the Soviet military budget is very heavy, and this entails the continual postponement and disappointment of people’s expectations as to improving services and goods . For the Russian military budget, this means the postponement of people's expectations, and disappointment .
 In particular, a disproportionate concentration of the nation’s most advanced scientific and technological skills takes place in the military sector .
 The threat from the West, whether it exists or not, has become a necessary legitimation for the power of the ruling elites . The West has become an excuse for their many economic and social failures, and an argument to isolate and silence critics within their own borders . The threat has become
 In the West we have ‘open debate’ but it is contained by all-party ‘consensus’ and is not permitted to intrude in any sharp way into our major media . We have 'open debate' in the West, but it's contained by '
 An interesting example of this manipulation came out towards the end of the Commons debate .
 The Under-Secretary for Defence sought to allay fears expressed by Peter Shore that the NATO 20 programme of missile ‘modernization’ might not be large enough to keep up with Soviet missile programmes .
 The United States is planning to introduce cruise missiles, carried on B 52 bombers, for the strategic role . The U.S. plans to introduce the missiles to carry on B-52 bombers . Cruise missiles will be carried on bombers, carried by B 52s .
 It is planning an armoury of 2,000 or 3,000 missiles . It is only one part of a huge strategic triad alongside 1C BMs and submarine-launched ballistic missiles . All due to enter service in two or three years’ time .
 'I am not an expert in these matters, and I do not usually follow the specialist press. Now I am not a specialist press, I do usually follow specialist press,' he says .
 In the weeks leading up to the NATO decision, I had followed the general press with care . But in the previous three months, and especially in the weeks before the decision of 12 December, I was careful to follow the press closely .
 The United States plans are to be added to NATO's little provision . Yet this was the first mention | met with of these rather substantial U.S. plans, .
 The entire ‘debate’ in Britain prior to the NATO decision was not a debate at all, but an exercise in official information . The entire 'debate' in Britain before the decision was actually a debate in official statements .
 It was conducted in the press and television on the basis of letting the people believe that there was a massive build-up of Soviet SS 20s and Backfire bombers, all aimed at NATO, but with the United States, the dominant power in NATO .
 NATO’s programme of nuclear weapons ‘modernization’ could then be presented as a tardy and inadequate response to the Soviet threat . NATO's nuclear weapons 'modernization' was then presented as an inadequate response .
 Official 21 information has given way, in some quarters, to downright lying . Since that decision, some members of the British public have begun to ask awkward questions . The decision was made by the British government .
 Iam not complaining at the fact that Mr Pym said on 17 June that the sites chosen by the U.S. Air Force for their missiles were intended only for the ‘defence’ of our peace and our liberty, Iam .
 This is exactly what Mr Brown, Mr Ustinov or any other Minister of Defence tells his own people . This is the same thing Mr Brown tells his people .
 The Russian nuclear force threatening Europe’s cities will build up to something like 2,000— 3,000 warheads by the mid 1980s . Russia's nuclear force is expected to reach 2,500 by the end of the 1980s.
 That is from the leading editorial of the Sunday Times for 6 July 1980 . It was published in the lead editorial of that day .
 I am sorry to single out this newspaper, since it is only repeating what is said on all sides . I'm sorry to say this newspaper is repeating what has been repeated by all sides.
 A paper which pretends to objectivity and authority ought to be judged by stricter standards than those which pretend only to propaganda . But a paper which pretended to be objectivity should be judged to stricter standards .
 The SS 20 is based on land and the Poseidon is based at sea, and, until lately, it had been supposed, in the wargames rooms, that they traded off against each other . The Poseidon was based on sea and the SS 20 was based in land .
 What has happened is not the introduction of some wholly new dimension of threat, but a redefinition of the rules of the game . The SS 20 came into production in 1976, the Backfire bomber in 1974, and the SS Backfire in 1974 .
 Our Western experts have suddenly decided to hold their hands over Poseidon, Polaris, etc., and to pretend that they do not exist . Our Western . experts have decided to . pretend that Poseidon and Polaris . etc., etc. are not exist.
 This is a contemptible exercise, since the true facts could easily be ascertained by any editorial writer . The true facts of the truth can easily be easily found out by any writer, he writes .
 Any competent Russian editorialist can make a very much better case against cruise missiles than our ‘experts’ can make against the SS 20 . And, in fact, any competent Russian . editorialist . can make an excellent case against the cruise missiles .
 The critical accounting must be done, not between the Warsaw Pact and NATO, but between the two giant superpowers . For the plain fact, the truth is that the NATO and Warsaw Pact are the two superpowers, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Pershing II, from its West German bases, could descend on Russian targets in only four minutes . It could descend from its base in West Germany from its bases in only 4 minutes .
 Pym assured the British people, with tears in his eyes, that cruise missiles did not ‘escalate’ nuclear armaments — no, not at all . Mr Pym, on that same telly fireside chat , assured the . British people with tears . eyes,
 For each cruise missile, one F 1-11 or older warhead would be withdrawn . The F-1-11 warhead will be withdrawn from each missile .
 Vulcan bombers can hit Leningrad, the cruise and Pershing II can hit Moscow . The cruise bombers can also hit Moscow, and the cruise bombers have the ability to hit the city .
 If Russia had weapons which could hit Hull and Norwich, but then introduced missiles with a stretch to reach London, Bristol and Birmingham, I would feel uneasy here . It would make me feel uneasy, just as if the Russians had weapons  which could . hit Hull, Norwich, and Norwich
 I'm not suggesting that Russian missiles are not multiplying, nor that they are not menacing to us. I am not suggesting . I am . suggesting that . Russian missiles not multiplying . nor that . they are . not threatening to us .
 The mobile SS 20, with its triple warhead, is a foul, unnecessary, and threatening weapon . I hope that those who contest the introduction of cruise missiles into this country will also let the Russian embassy know their views of those weapons .
 Both sides play a never-ending game of leapfrog, justifying their actions at each stage by blaming the other . A good deal of the thrust to 'modernize' weapons is planned quite independently by the armourers of each side .
 Every official statement, on both sides, is either an official lie or a statement with direct propagandist intent . Second, I have sought to emphasize that the whole basis of our information is corrupt .
 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute gives rise to conclusions more complex than anything that we have been offered in our press or on our screens . As to the actual facts of the ‘nuclear balance’, objective research by such bodies as the Stockholm International peace research institute gives rise .
 In one count of strategic weapons, by individual bombers and missiles, the Soviet Union appears to be a little ahead of the United States . However, by a different count of actual warheads (that is, MIRVs, or independently targeted re-entry vehicles) the U.S.
 The available information has been examined with care by Dan Smith in The Defence of the Realm in the 1980s . His fourth chapter, ‘Of Numbers and Nukes’, is essential reading .
 It is becoming very clear that neither the press nor the television will do this honestly for us . Those who wish to be informed on these problems should obtain these, read them, and then pass on the information .
 We are now in a position to conclude this digression, and to return to the arguments of Lord Zuckerman and of Professor Howard . We will return to Lord Howard and Professor Howard.
 We have seen that the SS 20 is the ‘theatre’ missile which we must expect to strike Britain . The lowest estimate of its destructive capacity is ‘at least’ that of the bomb dropped on Hiroshima, says the author .
 Churchill reminded the House on 24 January that the bomb caused the death of 100,000 people within hours, and of a further 100,00 who have died subsequently, in the main from radiologically-related diseases .
 The SS 20 is reputed to be an accurate missile, although not as accurate as the cruise cruise . The CEP might be down to a few hundred yards from the missile .
 Meditated strategy of both sides is to send, not one accurate missile at each target, but missiles in clutches of thirty or forty . Both sides want to send missiles at each other's targets, rather than one at one target .
 The late arrivals will be buffeted about a good deal by the detonations of the first-comers, so that the CEP for a clutch is likely to be enlarged to several miles .
 An American officer has now, at long last, told Mr Pym where these missiles are to be based . They will be based at Greenham Common, near Newbury, and Molesworth, near Huntingdon .
 Both of the latter bases had long been disused, and, by making them operative once more, the United States Air Force is able to add them to their existing clutch in this country .
 If strikes were made against these newly-designated bases, Newbury is likely to fall within the CEP . Reading and Huntingdon may also fall without strikes, but Reading may fall without .
 Within the CE P we must suppose some fifteen or twenty detonations at least on the scale of Hiroshima, which will then discharge immense quantities of radioactive effluvia over the surrounding countryside .
 This is to suppose that the Soviet strike is homing on to clearly-defined and immobile targets . This is not the case, but the strike is likely to be aimed at immobile and clearly defined targets .
 We are told that the missiles will be carried in packs of four on mobile launching vehicles . In times of ‘emergency’ they will be dispersed from their bases into the surrounding districts .
 On the one hand, we have been told that these are defensive weapons, which could never be used for a first strike . On the other hand, the weapons are said to be used only for defensive purposes only .
 The sudden deployment of missilelaunchers from these bases would be the signal to an enemy that ‘emergency’ had come . And, equally, the sudden deployment . would be monitored by satellite observation .
 In any case, there is not much point in arguing about where these missiles are sited, since this decision has been taken, not only above our heads, but above Mr Pym’s head also .
 From the point of view of siting the cruise missiles I don’t think it makes a great deal of difference. I don't think it’s a good idea to sit on cruise missiles, he says. From the view of . siting of cruise missiles makes a
 "It is really a security and defence and strategic consideration," he says . "One must take public Opinion into account as far as one possibly can," he adds . "It's really a very important consideration for the country," he said .
 This was a politician’s way of saying that the U.S. military would take the decision, and that public opinion would go unconsulted and disregarded, he says . This was the politician's way to say that the decision would be made by the military .
 Members of Swindon had already informed him of the Official Secret that Greenham Common was being cased by the United States Air Force . Three weeks before this Mr Pym gave a somewhat more honest reply to questions from the Member for Swindons .
 "The siting of these weapons in no way affects the vulnerability or otherwise of a particular place," says CNN.com . The siting, however, "does not affect the vulnerability of a place"
 "It is a mistake for anyone to think that the siting of a weapon in a particular place makes it more or less vulnerable," he says .
 I do not know whether the citizens of Swindon find this reassuring or not. I do know whether this 27-year-old will find it reassuring, or not . I do do not think the citizens will find this 27 reassuring .
 Mr Pym was saying that the Americans intend to spread and scatter these weapons before launching them . The enemy will have to spread his strike over a very much larger area in order to have any hopes of ‘eliminating’ them .
 A person with the name of Lord Strathcona and Mount Royal announced in the House of Lords on 17 June that launchers would be scattered from the bases to a distance of 50 miles or more before firing .
 I do not intend to do all of the readers’ work for them, so may I recommend them to get out a map of Britain, and draw circles of a diameter of 50 . Find out for themselves what major centres of population — in addition to London, Bristol, Leicester,
 Russian cruise missile-launchers are dotted all across southern, central and eastern England . CEPs would have to be dotted all over southern, eastern and southern England .
 This is before we take account of Lord Zuckerman’s other variable — the 50 per cent of strikes which would fall outside the Circular Error Probable . This is not the only variable, the other variable, is the number of strikes that would fall out of the Circ
 These will be missiles whose navigational or homing devices are inaccurate or which, perhaps, may be brought down on their path . The missiles will be launched by the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 It would be overoptimistic to suppose that every one of these would fall on Salisbury Plain or that barren patch of the Pennines around Blackstone Edge .
 An SS 20 dispatched from Russia could home in on Newbury without passing directly over central London . I have taken a ruler to a map of Europe, and I cannot see any way in which an SS 20 could have arrived in Newbury .
 If by misadventure a strike outside the CEP fell on a 28 major city the damage would be considerable . A strike outside of CEP would be a major strike on a major city .
 There is no room in this island to ‘scatter’ missiles without bringing multitudes into mortal danger,’ says George Clooney . ‘Search’ without inflicting a holocaust, he says .
 There are no vast deserts in Europe, no endless open plains, on which to turn war-games into reality . War-games in which nuclear weapons are used into reality are played in Europe .
 The distances between villages are no greater than the radius of effect of low-yield weapons of a few kilotons . Between towns and cities, say a megaton, say megaton. The distances are no less than that of a small-yielding weapon .
 We are now at last prepared to cast a more realistic eye upon Professor Howard’s scenario . Professor Howard's scenario is now more realistic than ever imagined .
 According to this, the ‘initially limited Soviet strike’ might, in the absence of civil defence precautions, create conditions of ‘politica turbulence’ which would prevent ‘us’ from using our own nuclear weapons .
 This would be regrettable, since it would inhibit escalation from ‘tactical’ or ‘theatre’ to ‘second-strike’, sea-based nuclear war . This would also inhibit the escalation from 'theatre' to 'second strike�
 He envisages civil defence measures ‘on a scale sufficient to give protection to a substantial number of the population’ But he said this would enable this number to endure the ‘disagreeable consequences’ which would ensue .
 The object of civil defence is to reduce the potential for ‘political turbulence’ of those surviving the first strike, in order to enable ‘us’ to pass over to a second and more fearsome stage of nuclear warfare . Civil defence is not so much to save lives as
 We are still entitled to inquire more strictly as to what measures would be on a scale sufficient, what proportion of the population might constitute a substantial number, and what may be indicated by the word disagreeable .
 It is not as if nuclear weapons are a completely unknown quantity, which have only been tested in deserts and on uninhabited islands . Nuclear weapons have been tested only in deserts, and on islands .
 They have been tested upon persons also, in 1945, at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and to some effect . They have also been tested on persons also at Hiroshima .
 The beneficiaries of this sudden donation of advanced technology were so much struck by the disagreeable consequences that they have continued to monitor its effects to the present day . These effects have been studied with care; .
 Survivors of the two detonations were transformed into advocates of international understanding and peace . The survivors in those two cities, and the descendants of the sufferers, were turned into advocates, not of revenge .
 The mayors of Nagasaki and Hiroshima regard this work as the principal obligation of their office . To this day work for peace is regarded as a civic duty, and the mayors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki regard it as a duty .
 In 1977 an International Symposium on the Damage and After-effects of the bombing of these two cities was inaugurated, and a number of reports of this work are now in translation .
 It had been intended to remind readers of the effects of the first atomic bombings . It was meant to remind them of the impact of the atomic bombs .
 After reading these materials, whenever I approached my typewriter | I was overcome by such a sense of nausea that I was forced to turn to some other task . After reading this material, whenever . approached my . typewriter, I felt overcome with nausea .
 The second reason is that readers already know what the consego quences of these weapons are . Readers already know that, at some point very deep in their consciousness, they don't need to be surprised .
 This knowledge is transmitted to children even in their infancy, so that as they run around with their space-weapons and death-rays they are re-enacting what happened thirty years before they were born .
 There is, however, one area of convenient forgetfulness in this inherited memory . There is also a convenient forgettingfulness in his memory .
 The moment of nuclear detonation is remembered vaguely, as a sudden instant of light, blast and fire . Tens of thousands of lives were quenched instantly .
 It is thought of as a stupendous but instantaneous moment ofihilation . Without pain or emotional suffering, it is thought to be a moment of death .
 140,000 were killed ‘directly’ by the bomb on Hiroshima and 70,000 by that on Nagasaki, with an allowance for error of 10,000 either way .
 Accounts for immediate casualties were closed on 31 December 1945 . But the bombs were dropped on 6 and g August, and the accounts were closed in August 1945 .
 A great number of these deaths, especially those from burns and radioactivity, took place slowly, in the days and weeks after the event . This reflects the fact that a very great many of the deaths, including those from radioactivity and burns, happened slowly, after the disaster .
 Michiko Ogino, ten years old, was left in charge of his younger sisters when his mother went out to the fields to pick eggplants . Michiko's mother left him in the care of his sisters when she went to the field to pick eggs .
 Mamma was bombed at noon when getting eggplants in the field . Short, red and crisp her hair stood, Short, crisp and crisp .
 Mrs Ogino could still run back from the fields to succour her children . Although the clothes were burned from her body and she had received a fatal dose of radiation, she could run back to the fields .
 Sailors and neighbours heaved at the beam to release the trapped two-year-old . One after another failed to free the trapped toddler, bowing with courtesy, went on their way .
 She got into an opening under the beam, and putting her right shoulder under a portion of it, she strained with all her might . Then she put her shoulder under the opening, and put it under a section of it .
 Peeled off was the skin over her shoulder that once lifted the beam off my sister . Peeled from her shoulder was skin over the shoulder That once lifted her beam off her sister .
 Fujio Tsujimoto who was five years old, was in the playground of Yamazato Primary School, Nagasaki, just before the bomb dropped .
 Hearing the sound of a plane he grabbed his grandmother’s hand and they were the first into the deepest part of the air-raid shelter . The family was the first to get into the deep part of their shelter .
 The entrance to the shelter, as well as the playground, was covered with the dying . The entrance of the shelter was covered by the dying, as was the playground .
 Survivors made a pile of wood on the playground and began to cremate the corpses . The survivors made a stack of wood and creamed the corpses into piles of wood . Survivors made the wood pile and then creamed it .
 Mother also burned and quickly turned to white bones which dropped down among the live coals . Mother also was burned and turned to . white bones .
 Grandmother was also watching, praying with a rosary... 1 am now in the fourth grade at Yamazato Primary School . Grandmother also watched, praying .
 That playground of terrible memories is now completely cleared and many friends play there happily . That playground was now completely clear and many of his friends play happily .
 "Sometimes I suddenly remember that awful day. I play with my friends there too, but sometimes remember that . Sometimes I remember that day," she says of her friends .
 "When I do, I squat down on the spot where we cremated our mother and touch the earth with my fingers," says the author . "I squat down to the spot . where I do," she says . "We cremated her and touched the earth. When I do
 When I dig deep in the ground with a piece of bamboo, several pieces of charcoal appear . The charcoal is used to make charcoal from bamboo and charcoal from wood .
 Looking 32 at the spot for a while, I can dimly see my mother’s image in the earth . Looking 32, she said, “I can . dimly . see my . mother's image in . the earth. Looking 32 .
 "When I see someone else walking on that place, it makes me very angry," she said . "I'm very angry. So when I see . someone else . walking on there, it's very angry."
 'instant of detonation was protracted over days and weeks, and was full, not only of physical misery, but of unutterable yearning and suffering . What it makes clear is that the ‘instant’ of . detonation . was protracted . over days,
 A great river runs through Hiroshima, Japan, and each year the descendants set afloat on it lighted lanterns inscribed with the names of the family dead . For several miles the full breadth of this river is one mass of flame .
 After this, we still have to consider the future tens of thousands who have died subsequently from the after-effects of that day .
 Sufferers are known as hibakashu, a word which ought to be international . The sufferers are called hibakaashu - a Japanese word which means 'hibakoshu' Sufferers of hibashu are known around the world .
 Some hibakashu suffer from the direct consequences of wounds and burns . Others suffer from premature senility, others from blindness, deafness and dumbness . Others are incapable of working because of nervous disorders .
 We may now push this distressing matter back into our subconscious, and reconsider the possible effect of ‘a series of pre-emptive strikes’, with scores of weapons very much more powerful than those bombs, upon this island .
 The inhabitants of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were very little prepared for this advanced technology . The 'All Clear' had sounded shortly before the detonation, so that the populace had trooped out 33 of their conventional shelters .
 Two Conservative M Ps have calculated that effective measures might reduce deaths in a nuclear war from about thirty-five millions to just twenty millions, and that is a substantial number indeed .
 The death or mortal injury of even the small figure of twenty millions might still give rise to the conditions of ‘turbulence’ which Professor Howard is anxious to forestall . The first is that the death or . mortal injury might still . still give . rise to ‘
 Air Marshal Sir Leslie Mayor said ‘the main target areas would be so badly knocked about as to be beyond effective self-help.’
 There would be some total disaster areas, from the margins of which the wounded and dying would flee as refugees . Other intermediate areas would have energy supplies destroyed, all transport dislo34 cated, and persons, food and water contaminated by fallout . Yet others would be relatively immune to the
 Professor Howard would be ready to intervene to prevent the second stage of Professor Howard’s scenario . But even in these immune areas there would be some persons in a state of hysterical terror, he says .
 The second comment is that we do not yet have any realistic notion of what might be a scale sufficient to effect substantial savings, nor what measures might be taken . We do not know what measures could be taken to make substantial savings .
 We may agree with professor that no such measures are either planned or contemplated . We may certainly agree with the professor .
 Measures have been taken to ensure the survival of the high personnel of the State . The defence correspondent of The Times, Mr Peter Evans, in an illuminating survey in January, discovered that measures have been made .
 There will be bunkers deep under the Chilterns for senior politicians, civil servants and military, and deep hidey-holes for regional centres of military government .
 The population of this country, however, will not be invited to these bunkers, and it is an Official Secret to say where they are . The population will not have access to the bunkers .
 The population will be sent off, with a do-ityourself booklet, to wait in their own homes . The population is sent off with a booklet to wait for them .
 They will be advised to go down to the ground floor or cellar, and make a cubby-hole there with old doors and planks, cover it with sandbags, books and heavy furniture . Then creep into these holes with food and water for 14 days, a portable radio,
 I have for long wondered why sociologists and demographers keep writing about ‘the nuclear family’, but now it is all at length set down and explained . The new book is published by Simon Tisdall at 8.30pm on BBC Books.
 Now this might save some lives, but it will also make for an unhappy end to others . It will also save some of the lives of some people, but will make for some unhappy ends, says CNN.com .
 The principal effects of nuclear weapons are very intense heat, blast and radioactive emissions . For the principal effects are very . intense heat and blast . emissions . Nuclear weapons are highly sensitive to intense heat .
 Within a certain distance of the centre of the detonation all houses, cars, clothes, clothes and hair on dogs, cats and persons, and so on, will spontaneously ignite . At 35 the blast will bring the houses tumbling down about the cubby-holes .
 We must envisage many thousands of nuclear families listening to Robin Day’s consensual homilies on their portable radios as they are baked, crushed or suffocated to death .
 Those outside this radius might be afforded a little temporary protection . Those outside of this radius may be given a little protection .
 Food and water contaminated, roads blocked, hospitals destroyed, livestock dead or dying . But when they eventually emerge they will find contaminated food and water . Roads blocked, the hospitals destroyed and the livestock dead .
 If we are to learn from the experience of the people of Nagasaki and Hiroshima, then I think it is unlikely that many survivors will be devoting their energies to ‘political turbulence’, since, unless they know the entrances to the governmental deep bunkers, they will have
 Most will be wandering here and there in a desperate attempt to find lost children, parents, neighbours, friends . Most of them will be searching for lost children or parents .
 A few of the most collected will succour the dying and dig among the ruins for the injured . A few, most collected, will be able to help the people who are dying .
 The evacuation of whole cities, as is planned in the USA and perhaps in the Soviet Union, is inoperable here because this island is too small . The evacuation plans for whole cities in the U.S. and perhaps even in the . Soviet Union .
 One might imagine vast underground systems beneath our towns, complete with stored food and water, generating systems, air-purifying systems, etc. But one might imagine the excavation of vast subterranean systems beneath towns .
 Above ground no workplaces, uncontaminated crops or stock would be left . This might save a substantial number of lives, although one is uncertain what it would save them for .
 It is possible that, if civilization survives and continues on its present trajectory until the mid-twenty-first century, then the 'advanced' societies will have become troglodyte in some such fashion .
 There will be immense thermonuclear charges capable of concussing a whole underground city . The charges will be capable of concussing a whole underground city . There will also be immense thermonuclear charges capable of concussions .
 By the time humanity becomes troglodyte, it will then have been already defeated . And, any case, by the time that humanity becomes . become . that they will then be already defeated.
 We will now turn to the second assumption which underpins Professor Howard’s arguments . Professor Howard's argument is based on the assumption that the world is changing rapidly .
 Professor supposes a ‘theatre’ war confined to Europe, which does not escalate to confrontation between the two superpowers .
 We will not chide him too much on this supposition, since it is now commonplace in the strategic thinking of both blocs . We won't chide it too much, but it's now commonplace, it is commonplace in strategic thinking, both sides .
 Huge sums are spent on both sides to match each other’s weapons at ‘tactical’ and ‘theatre’ levels .
 We have seen that poor Mr Pym (who has now been told by an American officer what to do) is quite as simple on this matter as Professor Howard . Professor Howard is not as simple as Professor Pym .
 War may not only start at any level but it may be confined to that level, since at any point there is a further fearsome threshold of ‘deterrence’ ahead . Both suppose a “chain of deterrence’s’, according to which war may not
 Whether such wars lead on to confrontation between superpowers will depend on diplomatic and political considerations, says Peter Bergen .
 Jt is that nuclear wars between the two great opposed powers and their allies could be confined to this or that level . Jt says nuclear wars could be limited to this level .
 This is a silly notion at first sight; and, after tedious and complex arguments have been gone through, it emerges as equally silly at the end . This is the case, and it emerges equally silly in the end, as well as silly in its conclusion .
 It might very well be in the interests of either the USA or the USSR to confine a war to Europe, or to the Persian Gulf, to prevent it from passing into an ultimate confrontation . We are not dealing here with rational behaviour, writes Peter Bergen .
 Once ‘theatre’ nuclear war commences, ‘immense passions, indeed hysterias, will be aroused. Once 'theatre' nuclear war begins, immense passions will be raised .
 After even the first strikes of such a war, communications and command posts will be so much snarled up that any notion of rational planning will give way to panic . The first strike of any war will be the first strike, and the first is likely to be a disaster .
 Only one of the two great powers likely to come out of the contest as ‘victor’ must be the one which hurls its ballistic weapons first, furthest and fastest — and preferably before the other have had time to lift off .
 Lord Louis Mountbatten, shortly before he was murdered, conveyed the message to a meeting in Strasbourg . This was the commonsense message which he had conveyed .
 The belief was that were hostilities ever to break out in Western Europe, such weapons could be used in field warfare without triggering all-out nuclear exchange leading to the final holocaust .
 In the event of a nuclear war there will be no chances, there will no survivors — all will be obliterated . am not asserting this without having deeply thought about the matter .
 I repeat in all sincerity as a military man I can see no use for any nuclear weapons which would not end in escalation, with consequences that no one can conceive . I repeat, as a . military man, I| can see . no use . for any . nuclear weapons .
 They have become the alchemists of our times, working in secret ways which cannot be divulged, casting spells which embrace us all . They are working secret ways that cannot be revealed, they say . They work secret ways, which cannot't be revealed .
 Professor Howard takes his stand on these irrational foundations, and practises alchemy in his own right .
 He calls for measures which must be ‘given the widest possible publicity’ in order to ensure ‘the credibility of our entire defence posture’
 The professor supposes that he is a tough realist, who draws conclusions which others, including politicians, are too timorous to draw in public . He says he is drawing conclusions which are too time-consuming to be drawn in public.
 If we spend thousands of millions of pounds upon nuclear weapons, then we either intend to use them or we do not, says David Cameron . "If we spend millions of dollars on nuclear weapons then we will not use them," he says .
 There are no practicable civil defence measures which could have more than a marginal effect . But, as he knows, there are no practical measures which can be more effective than marginal .
 These are two distinct propositions, and it is time for them to be broken into two parts . These are separate propositions, but it's time to break them up .
 Behind the veils of ‘posture’, ‘credibility’ and ‘bluff’ it has waxed fat and now has come of age . For a long time the second proposition has been hidden within the mendacious vocabulary of 'deter
 The first proposition is that nuclear weapons are capable of inflicting such ‘unacceptable damage’ on both parties to an exchange that mutual fear ensures peace . Mutual fear of nuclear weapons ensures peace in the world .
 The second is that each party is actually preparing for nuclear war . Each party is searching for some ultimate weapon or tactical/strategic point of advantage which would assure its victory .
 It has ‘worked’ for thirty years, if not in Vietnam, Czechoslovakia, the Middle East, Africa, Cambodia, the Dominican Republic, Afghanistan, Afghanistan . It has 'worked' for 30 years, not only in Vietnam but also in the Mideast and
 Each year each year new sophistications and ‘modernizations’ are introduced . Yet we have moved upwards to 50,000, and each year we have more than 50,500 . We are still at the top of the world’s most important jobs.
 The current chatter about ‘theatre’ or ‘tactical’ nuclear war is not a sophisticated variant of the old . vocabulary of ‘deterrence’; it is directly at variance with that . vocabulary .
 Pentagon thought a 'theatre' nuclear war might be confined to Europe . NATO allies would be obliterated, but damage would also be inflicted upon Russia west of the Urals . U.S. soil of the United States remained immune .
 If world-wide nuclear war seems to be ultimately inevitable, then the sooner that can be aborted by having a little theatre war the better . This has been seen as the way to a great victory for ‘the West’
 The trouble with all this, from the Pentagon’s point of view, is that it requires rewriting the war games-plan, and in this rewriting Soviet strategists have been unaccountably uncooperative . The Pentagon has been unable to work with the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union has shown little interest in Western ideas on limited nuclear war . Unfortunately, the Soviet Union is not interested in such ideas .
 All of these reviews are designed to avoid a situation in which the President would be put under irresistible pressure to preempt, to avoid leaving the U.S. only the options of yielding or engaging in a spasmodic and apocalyptic nuclear exchange . All of the reviews are meant to avoid
 European war is to be one ‘choice’ or ‘option’ for U.S. strategists . What might appear ‘limited’ on that side of the Atlantic might appear to be spasmodic and apocalyptic .
 Cruise missiles being set up in Western Europe are the hardware designed for exactly such a ‘limited’ war . The nations which harbour them are viewed, in this strategy, as launching platforms which are expendable in the interests of 'Western’ defence .
 Russia might not wish to rewrite the games-plan, since some of its most populous and highly industrialized regions are within the ‘theatre’ whereas all of the USA is not . However her hand might be forced if faced with the alternatives of such a war or of outright IC
 If all this sounds crazy, then I can only agree that crazy is exactly what it is . If you think this is crazy, it's crazy, you can't be surprised .
 There is a dangerous tendency to craziness in the U.S. view of the world, says CNN's John Sutter . But, then, he says, as a frequent visitor to the United States, he must report .
 It is against all this that the generous and responsible American peace movement has to work . The peace movement must work against this, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 The President of the United States must sanction the use of the weapons . NATO's Supreme Allied Commander, NATO, is always an American general . Their use must be sanctioned by the president of the U.S.
 He has also made some provisos about ‘consultation’ but it is clear enough that in any ‘emergency’ (or on the plea of an emergency) such consultation will be null . It's clear enough in any 'emergency' (or
 Europe is to be transformed into a ‘nuclear Maginot line’ for the defence of the U.S. Europe will become part of a 'maginot' line for the US defence .
 The U.S. is urgently seeking for similar platforms in the Middle East for another small ‘theatre war’ war which might penetrate deep into the Caucasus . Meanwhile, the United States is desperately seeking for such platforms .
 The idea here is to extract the West, at the last moment, from this war — much the same scenario as that which went disastrously wrong in 1939 . The idea is that the West will be extracted from the war, much of the same as the disastrously disastrous scenario in 1939
 These little ‘theatre’ wars are now all on the drawing-boards, and in the Pentagon more than in the Kremlin . Any ‘tactical’ nuclear strike would penetrate deep into Russian territory .
 The plans for the European ‘theatre’ war are not only ready — the ‘modernized’ missiles designed for exactly such a war have been ordered, and will be delivered to this island in 1983 .
 The advocates of civil defence make a corresponding political intervention . And at this moment, they should make a similar political intervention. And this is not the first time they have done so .
 Advocates want to hurry the British people across a threshold of mental expectation, so that they may be prepared, not for ‘deterrence’ but for actual nuclear war .
 The expectations supporting the theory of deterrence are, in the final analysis, that deterrence will work . The expectations support the theory that deterrence works are that it works .
 Those who have supported the policy of deterrence have done so in the confidence that this policy would prevent 44 nuclear war from taking place . Those who support the policy have said it would prevent a nuclear war .
 "They have not contemplated the alternative, and have been able to avoid facing certain questions raised by that alternative," says David Cameron . The government has not contemplated that alternative, he says .
 The third question is, in some sense, new, and it is also extraordinary, in the sense that even proposing the question illuminates the degree to which the loss of our national sovereignty has become absolute, and democratic process has been deformed in ways scarcely conceivable twenty years ago .
 Professor Howard says arguments such as those of Professor Howard are designed to hurry us past these questions without noticing them . But arguments such a question is designed to rush us past this question without noticing it .
 The arguments are of an order which permit the mind to progress from the unthinkable to the thinkable without thinking . More than this, the arguments are in an order that permit the thoughtable to progress without thinking, and without confronting the arguments .
 Mutual fear and self-interest predominate on one side, but active menace and the pursuit of ‘tactical’ or ‘theatre’ advantage are the other . But mutual fear, self-interested and active menace are the two sides of the divide .
 His language — his anxiety as to possible ‘political turbulence’, his advocacy of measures which are not ‘covert or concealed’ — appeared to reveal an intention to act in political ways upon the mind of the people, in order to enforce a ‘posture
 "In order to make the country bear the burden, we have to create an emotional atmosphere akin to a war-time psychology. We need to create a war time psychology. In order to create the atmosphere, we must create an emotionally charged atmosphere,’s author says .
 For the country, that ts, tis country must now be made to bear a burden of heavy expense, loss of civil liberties, etc. But also the expectation, as a definite and imminent possibility, of actual nuclear devastation .
 It is necessary to inflame these new expectations by raising voluntary defence corps, auxiliary services, digging even deeper bunkers for the personnel of the State .
 It is also necessary to beat up an internal civil-war or class-war psychosis, by unmasking traitors, by theatening journalists under the Official Secrets Acts, by tampering with juries and tapping telephones, and generally by closing up people’s minds and mouths .
 There are tactical problems, which those who live outside All Souls are able to see . There is a tactical problem, according to All Souls boss David Moyes .
 Whitehall's reluctance to issue every householder with a copy of Protect and Survive is eloquent testimony to this . Whitehall’s reluctance to give everyone a copy is eloquently testimony .
 There is a minority of the British people who are reluctant to be harried across this threshold . For many, it is not easy to get through the threshold of the threshold .
 These people have voices, and if they are denied access to the major media, there are still little journals and democratic organizations where they are able to speak . These people are people with voices, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If the mass of the British public were to be suddenly alerted to the situation which they are actually now in — by ‘alarmist’ leaflets and by broadcasts telling them that they have indeed every reason for alarm — then the whole operation might backfire, and give rise to
 Professor Howard is regarded, by public-relations-conscious persons in the Establishment, as a great patriot of NATO and an admirable 47 fellow, but as an inexperienced politician .
 The people of this country have been made dull and stupid by a diet of Official Information, says David Cameron . The people are made dull, stupid by an official information diet, he says .
 There is still a risk — a small risk, but not one worth taking — that they might remember who they are, and become ‘turbulent’ before the war even got started . But they are not all that stupid, and there is still risk, and that they
 Professor Howard says strategy of high persons in Cabinet Office, security services, and the Ministry of Defence is rather different from that of Professor Howard .
 There is preliminary work yet to do, in softening up the public mind, in intimidating dissidents, in controlling information more tightly, and in strengthening internal policing and security .
 The arguments which Mr Howard has proposed, are, exactly, the arguments most deeply relevant to the present moment . But the arguments which he has proposed are the arguments that Mr Howard proposes, are the most deeply important to the current moment .
 I have sought, in these pages, to open these arguments up, to show what is inside them, which premises and what conclusions are open to . I have tried to open the arguments up and show what I think is inside these arguments .
 I have not been trying to frighten readers, but to show the consequences to which these arguments lead . I have also been showing the consequences of these arguments, and I'm not trying to scare readers .
 I don't suppose myself to be a more moral sort of person than he. Nor have I been trying to show that Professor Howard is a scandalous and immoral sort of . person. I do not suppose myself . to be more moral . than he .
 He cannot have put forward his ghastly scenario with any feelings of eager anticipation . It is not the first time he has put forward such a scenario in mind .
 Although I am myself by conviction a socialist, I have not been grounding my arguments on premises of that kind . And, finally, although I am . myself by . conviction a Socialist, I've not been grounded on premises that kind.
 I do not suppose that all blame lies with the ideological malice and predatory drives of the capitalist ‘West’, although some part of it does . I don’t suppose all blame is not all the blame, but some part does .
 Socialists once supposed, in my youth, that socialist states might commit every kind of blunder, but the notion that they could go to war with each other, for ideological or national ends, was unthinkable . The notion that such a war was unthinkable was unthinkable in the past .
 They can use means and arguments as bad as those of the old imperialist powers . And they can use them to get the attention of the U.S. to the world's most powerful powers .
 I have based my arguments on the logic of the Cold War, or of the ‘deterrent’ situation itself . I have made the argument based on the 'Deterrent' situation itself, or the 'Cold War' situation .
 We may favour this or that explanation for the origin of this situation . We may prefer this or this explanation . But it is not the only explanation for what happened .
 There is a common logic at work in both blocs, says David Cameron . But once this situation has arisen, there is a sense of common logic, he says .
 Military technology and military strategy come to impose their own agenda upon political developments . Military technology comes to impose its own agenda on political developments, says CNN's John Sutter .
 This is an inter-operative and reciprocal logic, which threatens all, impartially . This is the inter-operational logic, it threatens all impartially. It is the logic of the world's most powerful institutions, it says .
 The Russian state is now the most dangerous in relation to its own people and to its client states, writes Andrew Hammond . He says he would hazard that the Russian state now is most dangerous .
 The rulers of Russia are police-minded and security-minded people, imprisoned within their own ideology . They are accustomed to meet argument with repression and tanks, says Alexander Vatkin .
 Even the brutal and botching intervention in Afghanistan appears to have followed upon sensitivity as to United States and Chinese strategies . But the basic postures of the Soviet Union seem to still be those of siege and aggressive defence .
 The U.S. seems to be more dangerous and provocative in its general military and diplomatic strategies . The United States seems to have press around the Soviet Union with menacing bases, writes Peter Bergen .
 But we need not ground our own actions on a ‘preference’ for one of the other blocs, it says . We need to not ground ourselves on a 'preference' for a particular bloc .
 What is relevant is the logic of process common to both, reinforcing the ugliest features of each others’ societies, and locking both together in each other’s nuclear arms in the same degenerative drift .
 NATO's ‘modernization’ programme, and the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, taken together, may perhaps be seen as a textbook case of the reciprocal logic of the Cold War . NATO's 'modernization' programme and Soviet involvement in Afghanistan are examples of Cold War reciprocity .
 In response, the hard arguments and the hard men had their way amongst the Soviet leadership, and, two weeks later, the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan took place . The hard arguments led to the decision to intervene in Afghanistan .
 NATO ‘modernization’ was not a decisive factor, in the view of Roy Medvedev, a Russian historian . The intervention in Afghanistan had been meditated and prepared over a long period, he says .
 Throughout this essay I have been attempting to disclose this reciprocal logic of process, which is driven forward by the armourers of both superpowers . Throughout the essay, I have attempted to disclose the reciprocal logic .
 Professor Howard has been accused of being racist and anti-Semitic in the past . He says he has been trying to make a case for the right to be able to speak freely in Parliament .
 First, I have shown that the premises which underlie his letter are irrational, are irrational . The premises underlie the premises are irrational. First, he has shown that they are irrational in his letter. I have also shown that he is wrong.
 What makes the extinction of civilized life upon this island 50 probable is not a greater propensity for evil than in previous history, but a more formidable destructive technology, a deformed political process and also a deforming culture .
 It makes possible a disjunction between the rationality and moral sensibility of individual men and women and the effective political and military process, writes David Frum .
 It habituates the mind to nuclear holocaust by reducing everything to a flat level of normality . The film is a classic form of madness .
 By habituating us to certain expectations, it not only encourages resignation — it also beckons on the event . It's not only encouraging resignation, it also encourages resignation .
 As much of reality as most of us can bear is what is most proximate to us — our self-interests and our immediate affections . As much as most can bear, reality is what we can bear as much as possible .
 What threatens our interests — what causes us even mental unease — is seen as outside ourselves, as the Other . What threatens us is what we see as outside of ourselves, and what we fear is outside of us .
 Wars commence in our culture first of all, and we kill each other in euphemisms and abstractions long before the first missiles have been launched . Wars begin in culture first, and wars commence in society first, first, all the time, writes David Cameron .
 This was done in 1945, in the name of allies fighting for the Four Freedoms . It was done upon two populous cities, and it was done on behalf of allies . This was in 1945 .
 It was done by professing Christians, when the Western Allies had already defeated the Germans, and when victory against the Japanese was certain, in the longer or shorter run .
 The longer run would have cost some thousands more of Western lives, while the short run would cost the lives only of enemy Asians . The long-term cost would have been more than a million more Western lives .
 So long as we can suppose that this war will be inflicted only on them, the thought comes easily . So long . We can suppose . that this . war will only be inflicted on them .
 If we can also suppose that this war will save ‘our’s lives, or serve our self-interest, or even save us from the tedium of queuing every other day for gasoline, then the act can easily follow on . And if we can . suppose that
 The deformed human mind is the ultimate doomsday weapon . It is out of the human mind that the missiles and the neutron warheads come . The human mind can be the ultimate weapon of war .
 It is necessary to enter a remonstrance against those who use this kind of language and adopt these mental postures . For this reason, it is necessary, to enter this remonstration against these people . The world's most powerful politician has been accused of using such language .
 Our minds are preparing our minds as launching platforms for exterminating thoughts . They prepare our minds for extermination purposes, say experts . They are preparing minds as platforms for extermination thoughts .
 The fact that Soviet ideologists are doing much the same (thinking us to death as ‘imperialists’ and ‘capitalists) is no defence . It is not a defence. It is a sign of Soviet thinking of us as imperialists and 'capitalists'
 Academic persons have little influence upon political and military decisions, and less than they suppose . Academic persons are less influential than they think they are, say military officials .
 The deformation of culture is the precedent condition for nuclear war, the authors say . They do, however, operate within our culture, with ideas and language, they say .
 It is therefore proper to ask such persons to resist the contamination of our culture with those terms which precede the ultimate act . It is necessary to ask those people to resist contamination of culture .
 I am thinking of that great number of persons who very much dislike what is going on in the actual world, but who dislike the vulgarity of ‘politics’ even more . I'm thinking of those who dislike what's going on, but dislike 'politics'
 They erect both sets of dislikes around their desks or laboratories like a screen, and get on with their work and careers . They erect themselves around their work or laboratories as a screen .
 I am not asking these, or all of them, to march around the place or spend hours in weary little meetings, I said . I'm not asking them to march, or to spend hours at meetings, to spend time in the office . I’m not asking all of
 I'm asking them to examine the deformities of our culture and then, in public places, to demur . I am asking them . to examine their deformities, examine them, then, to Demur .
 I will recommend some forms of action, although every person must be governed in this by his or her own conscience and aptitudes . I will also recommend some form of action .
 Professor Howard offers a scenario of his own scenario . But, first, I should, in fairness to Professor Howard, offer a scenario .
 I have come to the view that a general nuclear war is not only possible but probable, and that is probability is increasing . I have become the author of a new book on nuclear warfare .
 We may be approaching a point of noreturn when the existing tendency or disposition towards this outcome becomes irreversible . We may indeed be approaching the point when the . existing tendency to . become . irreversible .
 The political and military conditions for such war exist now in several parts of the world . The proliferation of nuclear weapons will continue, and will be hastened by the export of nuclear energy technology to new markets . The rivalry of superpowers is directly inflaming these conditions .
 Such conditions now exist in the Middle East and around the Persian Gulf, will shortly exist in Africa, while in SouthEast Asia Russia and China have already engaged in wars by proxy with each other, in Cambodia and Vietnam .
 Such wars might stop just short of general nuclear war between the superpowers . Such wars may be just short short of a general nuke war .
 In their aftermath the great powers might be frightened into better behaviour for a few years . And in their aftermath, they might well have been frightened .
 Military technology would continue to be refined, more hideous weapons would be invented, and the opposing giants would enlarge their control over client states . But so long as this behaviour rested on nothing more than mutual fear, the behaviour would continue, say experts .
 They rest upon a historical view of power and of the social process, rather than upon the instant analysis of the commentator on events . They rest on historical views of power rather than on instant analysis .
 It may have worked, perhaps, in preventing recourse to war . Very possibly it may have been a good idea, but it may not have worked .
 In its mode of working, and in its ‘postures’, it has brought on a series of consequences within its host societies . But in its very mode, and . in its 'postures', it has . brought on . consequences within their host societies, says Dr
 Deterrence has repressed the export of violence towards the opposing bloc, but in doing so, the repressed power of the State has turned back upon its own author . Deterrence is repressing violence against the opposition bloc .
 The repressed violence has backed up, and has worked its way back into the economy, the polity, the ideology and the culture of the opposing powers, says David Cameron . Cameron: "The repress violence has backpedalled, and is working its way into the world's
 "The Catterpiller and Fly Feed on the Mystery. Soon spreads the dismal shade Of Mystery over his head."
 The Raven's nest bears fruit of Deceit, Ruddy and sweet to eat, 54 And it bears the fruit of Ruddy . 54 And the Raven his nest has made In its thickest shade. 54 And he has made a nest in the middle of the sun .
 In this logic, the peace of ‘mutual fear’ enforces opposing self-interests, affords room for ‘Cruelty’ to work, endangers ‘Mystery’ and its parasites, brings to fruit the ‘postures�
 Millions are now employed in the armed services, security organs and military economy of the opposing blocs, and corresponding interests exert immense influence within the counsels of the great powers .
 " hideous cultural abnormalities have been nurtured and are growing to full girth," the author says . And within this normality, hideous cultural abnormality has been nursed .
 The menace of nuclear war reaches far back into the economies of both parties, dictating priorities, and awarding power . The threat of a nuclear war is far back in both parties' hands, writes David Frum .
 In failing economies, the most secure and vigorous sectors will be found in the most advanced technological skills of both opposed societies . Here, they will tap into the advanced technology skills of those opposed societies, says David Cameron .
 Research into safe energy supplies from sun, wind or wave are neglected because they have no military pay-off . Here also will be found the driving rationale for expansionist programmes in unsafe nuclear energy .
 ‘capitalist’ and ‘socialist’ powers compete to feed into the Middle East, Africa and Asia more sophisticated means of kill . Here, in this burgeoning sector, will be found the new expansionist drive for 'markets' for arms .
 "The menace of this stagnant state of violence backs up also into the polity of both halves of the world," says the author of the book . "It's a state of instability that back into the world's polity," he says .
 Permanent threat and periodic crisis press the men of the military, industrial interests, by differing routes in each society, towards the top . Permanent threat is a constant source of concern for the military .
 Crisis legitimates the enlargement of the security functions of the state, the intimidation of internal dissent, and the imposition of secrecy and the control of information. Crisis legitimizes the enlargements of security functions, the . Author says crisis legitimates .
 ‘natural’ lines of social and political development are repressed, and affirmative perspectives are closed . So internal politics collapses into squabbling interestgroups, all of which interests are subordinated to the overarching interests of the state .
 It may be observed even in failing Britain, across whose territory are now scattered the bases, airfields, camps, research stations, submarine depots, and submarine depots . The bases are secure and expanding employment in an economic climate of radical insecurity .
 Three decades of ‘deterrence’, of mutual fear, mystery, and state-endorsed hostility, have backed up into our culture and ideology . What we cannot observe so well — for we ourselves are the object which must be observed — is the manner in which
 Imagination has been numbed, language and values have been fouled, by the postures and expectations of the ‘deterrent’ state . Imagination is numbed and language is fouled by postures of the state, says author .
 The probability of great power nuclear warfare is strong and increasing, he says . These, then, are among the strategic considerations which lead to the view that the probability is strong .
 I argue from a general and sustained historical process, an accumulative logic, of a kind made familiar to me in the study of history . I argue for the world's first time in a long-term history, I say .
 The episodes lead in this direction or that, but the general logic of process is always towards nuclear war . The episodes often lead to nuclear war, but always towards the end of the war .
 The local crises are survived, and it seems as if the decisive moment — either of war or of peace-making and reconciliation — has been postponed and pushed forward 56 into the future . The decisive moment has now been postponed .
 The weapons are more terrible, the means for their delivery more clever . The weapons were more terrible than the means of their delivery, says author .
 The notion that a war might be fought to ‘advantage, that it might be ‘won’, gains ground . The notion of a war being fought to 'advantage' is gaining ground in the US .
 There is even a tremour of excitement in our culture as though, subconsciously, human kind has lived with the notion that expectations without actions have become boring . Expectations without actions are boring, but expectations without action are exciting .
 The human mind, even when it resists, assents more easily to its own defeat . "The human mind is more easily able to accept defeat," says the author .
 "If my arguments are correct, then we cannot put off the matter any longer," says David Cameron . But if that is correct, he says, 'If I am correct, I am not going to give up'
 We must throw whatever resources still exist in human culture across the path of this degenerative logic . We need to throw whatever . resources still . exist in our society, we must throw them across .
 We must generate an alternative logic, an opposition at every level of society. We need to generate an opposition to everything in society, he says . We must create an alternative .
 This opposition must be international and it must win the support of multitudes, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela's government must be 'international' and 'international', says Mandela .
 It must act, in very different conditions, within each national state; and, in occasion, it must confront its own national state apparatus . The U.S. government must act within very different circumstances within each state . It must also confront itself with its own state apparatus, which is
 The Campaign for European Nuclear Disarmament is gaining active support in many parts of Western Europe . It has as an objective the creation of an expanding zone freed from nuclear weapons .
 Its opposition to the use of nuclear weapons by its own state will be absolute . It will be an absolute opposition to any nuclear arms use by the state .
 Each national movement will exchange information and delegations, will support and challenge each other . In the international, and especially in the European context, each national movement .
 "The national movements will not grow at the same pace, not be able to express themselves in identical ways," says Ravi Agrawal .
 Each success of a unilateral kind of unilateral kind will be met with an outcry that it serves the advantage of one or other bloc . Holland in refusing NATO cruise missiles, Romania or Poland in distancing themselves from Soviet strategies, is met with outcry .
 It cannot be expected that initiatives on one side will be met with instant reciprocation from the other . It is not expected to expect reciprocity from the two sides, says the author .
 Both blocs will seek to turn the movement to their own advantage . Very certainly, strategists of both blocs are seeking to turn it around .
 The logic of peace-making will be as uneven, and as fraught with emergencies and contingencies, as the logic which leads on to war . Peace-making is as uneven and fraught as it is with emergencies, contingencies . The logic will be the same as that of war,
 In particular, the movement in West and East Europe will find very different expression . The movement will find different expression in both Europe and West .
 In the West we envisage popular movements engaged in a direct contest with the policies of their own national states . The West envisages popular movements engaging in direct contests with its own national policies .
 Soviet ideologues may look benignly upon this, looking forward to weakening of NATO preparations which are matched by no actions larger than ‘peace-loving’ rhetoric from the East . At first, this is likely to be seen as a result of a weakening NATO preparations .
 "We are confident that our strategy can turn this rhetoric into acts," says President Obama . "But we are also confident that we can turn our rhetoric into action," says Obama .
 In Eastern Europe, there are profound pressures for peace, for greater democracy and international exchange, and for relief from the heavy burden of siege economies . Eastern Europe is under pressure for peace and greater democracy, writes Andrew Hammond .
 For a time these pressures may be contained by the repressive measures of national and Soviet security services . The pressures of the Soviet state may have been contained for a time, but may not be contained .
 Only a few courageous dissidents will, in the first place, be able to take an open part in our common work . Only a small minority of dissidents will be allowed to take part in the common work. Only a handful of courageous dissidents should be allowed in the work of democracy .
 Peace movement in the West can afford support and protection to our allies in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union . Peace movement will be seen to be effective, says David Cameron .
 It will provide those conditions of relaxation of tension which will weaken the rationale and legitimacy of repressive state measures . It will allow the pressures for democracy and detente to assert themselves in more active and open ways, he says .
 As an instrinsic part of the European campaign, the demand for an opening of the societies of the East to information, free communication and expression, will be pressed .
 We are going to find devices which will symbolize that pressure and dramatize that debate . We're going to use them to symbolize the pressure on the government, the government says .
 We propose to make in Europe a theatre of peace, rather than a 'theatre of 'limited' nuclear warfare'
 "This will not, even if we succeed, remove the danger of confrontation in non-European theatres," he says . "This is not the only solution to the problem," he adds .
 If the logic of nuclear strategy reaches back into the organization and ideologies of the superpowers, peace-making might reach back also, enforcing alternative strategies, alternative ideologies . Peace-making may enforce alternative strategies also enforcing alternative ideologies, says David Cameron .
 European nuclear disarmament would favour the conditions for international detente . European disarmament is a key part of detente between Russia and the West .
 As to Britain, there is no need to doubt what must be done to protest and survive . Britain must do what it must be to survive and survive, says David Cameron .
 We must close down those airfields and bases which already serve aircraft and submarines on nuclear missions . Airfields must be closed down to serve planes and submarines .
 We must contest every stage of the attempt to import U.S. cruise missiles on to our soil. And we must contest all attempts to import United States cruise missiles. We must also contest every attempt to bring them on our soil .
 When I first sat down to write this essay, in February 1980, it seemed to the handful of us in Britain, France, West Germany and Eastern Europe who were then discussing such a campaign that we were only whistling in the dark .
 Only in Holland and Belgium did it seem that a popular movement of conscience could still bring any influence to bear upon political decisions . Only in Belgium and Holland and Holland it seemed that a public movement could still influence the government .
 The movement has taken off, and it is, already, too large and too various for any group or interest to manipulate it for sectional ends . It is already too large, too various and too numerous for any interest to exploit it for sectionsal ends, says author .
 In every part of the country groups have been forming themselves, under many auspices and names —CND, World Disarmament, END, local councils of peace, and local campaigns .
 "It is a confused and confusing scene, developing too fast for any central organization," he says . "It's developing too quickly for any major organization," says the author of the book .
 We hope in this book to provide a service to these hundreds of groups — and also to all readers who not only wish to act, but who know that clear argument and sound information are actions in their own right .
 See the essays by Dan Smith, Mary Kaldor, David Holloway and Emma Rothschild below . The essays are published by Dan and Mary Smith .
 For the history of the concept of ‘theatre’ warfare, see Alva Myrdal’s essay below .
 Since I wrote an earlier version of this, in the form of a pamphlet, Professor Howard has told me, with courtesy, that I have misrepresented his views on some points . Professor Howard tells me with courtesy of courtesy, he thinks I have misjudged him .
 He is not an advocate of cruise missiles, but intended in his letter to draw necessary conclusions from the decision to bring them here . He does not think cruise missiles will 'do much good'
 No doubt he will defend his own views more fully in due course, and also explain further objections to cruise missiles .
 Former Air Force intelligence analyst worked as an intelligence analyst for the Air Force . He worked with the Air Targets Division of the Air .
 I helped select targets in the Soviet Union at which, in the event of a war, Air Force officers would fire nuclear warheads . I was in charge of the Air Force during the Cold War in the USSR .
 Analysts in other offices were busy identifying different types of strategic targets — petroleum depots, airfields, or industrial centres . While I worked at selecting and justifying political targets, fellow-analysts were busy with identifying strategic targets .
 Like myself, my colleagues were graduates of liberal arts colleges . Many were taking evening graduate courses in fields such as international relations or economic theory .
 Most of us had vague hopes of a college teaching job some day . But, meanwhile, taking courses meant improving our professional credentials . This made it easier to live with the more mundane aspects of our nine-to-five life .
 As a professor in a small liberal arts college, I am frequently visited by haunting memories of my work with Air Targets . Today, as a professor at a small college, he is frequently visited .
 Worked in a grey, creaking two-storey temporary barracks-like building, anchored to Constitution Avenue by the weight of a large, heavy cinderblock room .
 I and my colleagues, with whom I shared a large office, drank coffee and ate lunch, never experienced guilt or self-criticism . I and colleagues drank coffee, ate lunch and didn't feel self-competitiveness or guilt, he says .
 Our office behaviour was no different from that of men and women who might work for a bank or insurance company. Our behaviour was similar to that of those of the bank and insurance companies. We are happy to clarify that our office behaviour is no different than that of women who may work for
 At least no signs of moral revulsion surfaced when we were having an extra martini or two at lunch to celebrate the inclusion of some of our government control centres in a Joint Chiefs list of prime Soviet targets .
 The Cold War made selecting targets for attack in the Soviet Union seem respectable . The Soviet Union was attacked in the Cold War .
 Within the Defense Department one was struck by the atmosphere of a war to be waged and won . The atmosphere of the war was striking within the defense department, officials say .
 Crisis conditions made targeting seem imperative, which, in turn, made it morally acceptable . Crisis conditions in the U.S. made it seem imperative to target people, even though it was morally acceptable to target .
 The complex vastness of the Defense Department prevented any intelligence analyst from determining how his work might be used by higherranking officials . Another factor was that the vast amount of Defense Department's vastness prevented any analyst from knowing how his research might have been used by officials .
 Analysts were permitted to know something only if it was needed to complete an assigned task . This meant that analysts were allowed to know only if they were required to complete a task .
 In the case of the Air Targets Division, I had access to targeting information pertaining to Soviet government control centres . But I did not have access to data concerning other categories of targets, such as Soviet petroleum depots or air bases .
 Working on tasks of limited yet clearly defined scope appealed to analysts who might otherwise have felt at sea in the vastness of bureaucracy .
 Need to know, initially designed to help reduce intelligence leaks, restricted each analyst’s appreciation of the larger context of which his job was a small part . Needed to know was designed to reduce leaks, but it has since been restricted . Needing to know restricted analyst's appreciation
 Some administrative arrangements prevented analysts from grasping how all the parts fit together . Others helped analysts achieve a sense of professional security and personal gratification .
 Analysts usually worked as members of a committee, team or task force . For example, analysts usually worked for a committee or team . Analysts were often members of committees, teams or task forces .
 Group-think often blunted the expression of individual insights and diluted strong conclusions, it offered something of value to individual team players . Although this group-think process often blundered, it often offered something to individual players, it also offered value to others .
 A wellreceived team product provided reinforcement through shared, mutual congratulations . In the case of a negative reaction, individual player could absolve himself from personal responsibility by blaming less insightful team members .
 The team made it possible to savour the gratification of praise and muted the unappealing impact of criticism . The team's performance was the perfect way to get around the world's best .
 It was not only the protective structure of the team that shielded the individual analyst from serious challenges or the ignominy of being proven wrong . The broad theoretical or conjectural context within which research was carried on offered security .
 It was difficult if not impossible for any potential critic to prove that a colleague was incorrect, or put him on the spot, if the study consisted of speculative generalizations .
 DOD research was the practice of developing reports in terms of the so-called ‘worst case’ situation . Another facet of the research was developing reports of the 'worst case' situation .
 Analysts strained to depict the most extreme and threatening dimensions of the Soviet Union’s ability to develop the full resources of its military potential . With regard to assessments of Soviet military capabilities, for example, analysts struggled to depict most extreme dimensions .
 The worst case approach to ‘research’ was encouraged by the Department of Defense . The Department strengthened its chances to motivate Congress to provide increased defence funds . The worst-case approach to 'research' was encouraged .
 The worst case approach imposed no constraints on the analyst’s imaginative freedom to estimate future levels of enemy weaponry . Furthermore, the analyst's imaginative freedom was not constrained by the worst case .
 Under these circumstances an analyst’s conclusions were less susceptible to effective challenge . Again, under these circumstances, an analyst's conclusion was less susceptible .
 Each analyst’s conclusions, or those of his team, would be classified and classified . Access to the finished product was restricted to those who held proper clearances and the need to know .
 This encouraged the view that America’s interests were best protected through superiority in arms . It was a view that the U.S. best protected was best protected by superior arms .
 The analyst's world-view came to colour the analyst’s world view, an outlook that was buttressed by compatible attitudes in the Defense environment . Thus, what was initially only an approach to intelligence research (the worst case) came to .
 The worst case inevitably disposed Defense analysts to concentrate on assessing enemy capabilities, primarily military, without ascertaining what enemy intentions might be . Defense analysts have been unable to assess enemy capabilities .
 Worst case thinking implied that enemy intentions were known and that a concentrated effort to list enemy capabilities was required . The worst case scenario was that the U.S. government would try to find out the enemy's intentions .
 This could be best done through the acquisition of more weapons since, of course, the only thing the Russians respected was force . Russia's only thing to be respected in Russia was force, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 Defense analysts focused on the state of military technology, the numbers game . The numbers game was the focus of analysts' workaday concerns, they say .
 Assembling, or at least being familiar with, lists, tables, and catalogues of the estimated number and characteristics of enemy weapons was an essential part of being an intelligence analyst .
 As the arms race continued, the U.S. and the Soviet Union acquired more and more weapons, there were more than 100 items to count and describe .
 The strong technological and quantitative orientation of these tasks held the attention of analysts . The relationship of weapons to human life was an incidental consideration, analysts said .
 During a NATO war game I remember the surprise expressed by an Air Force colonel when he was informed of the number of casualties that resulted from striking an ‘enemy’ urban centre with a one-megaton weapon .
 It took the simulated reality of a war game to bring home the human dimensions of this act . It took a simulated reality to bring the human dimension of the act .
 The colonel quickly regained his composure, reassuring himself that this was, after all, only a game . He quickly regained composure and reassured himself that it was only a matter of time .
 In the anxious atmosphere of the Cold War, thinking about the social characteristics of an enemy society constituted an unrewarding, almost irresponsible pursuit . In retrospect, in the setting of the Department of Defense, arms were considered the means of survival .
 The significance of military power in determining the behaviour of government officials was illustrated by remarks made by Pham Van Dong, Premier of North Vietnam, and Henry Kissinger, then President Nixon’s national security affairs adviser .
 Richard Barnet contrasts the capacity of the leaders of North Vietnam and America to comprehend each other’s political motivations .
 Vietnamese politician understood Nixon’s character and situation as well as the pressures that operated on him . "I was struck by how well the Vietnamese politician understands Nixon's character," he says .
 Kissinger, on the other hand, seemed to have no genuine understanding of what motivated him . Kissinger, while evidencing respect and even a little admiration for his adversary’s skill, . Kissinger seemed to lack genuine understanding for his opponent's motives .
 In Hanoi, Nixon was a human being, not liked, but seriously considered . Nixon was considered seriously considered by the Vietnamese government . He was not liked but considered seriously by the people he met in Vietnam .
 Those with power easily convince themselves that they do not need to understand their adversaries, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A circular three-step form of logic offered comfort to Defense bureaucrats . Defense bureaucrats used it as a way to get around the Pentagon .
 Superior military power disposed defence planners not to take the trouble to comprehend their victims . Superior defence planners tend to not take the time to comprehend victims, says the author .
 Not knowing whom one was planning to kill made the sombre prospect of using weapons much less onerous . Not knowing who one planned to kill was the most onerous task of killing a person .
 It is possible to think of arms superiority as the best means of achieving national security . Therefore, it was possible to consider arms superiority for national security, he said .
 Also contributing to the atmosphere of intelligence work 67 was the stress given to security clearances .
 Every analyst was required to have a security clearance and with a clearance was granted access to documents bearing security classifications up through Top Secret . With a clearance, an analyst was granted the ability to access documents bearing classifications .
 Clearance usually required a sixto twelve-month probe of an applicant’s past — where he had lived and worked, whom he knew, and organizations he had joined . Clearance required a 12-month investigation of the applicant's past . It also required a twelve-
 I can recall how we criticized the clearance process, pointing out how subjective the process was because of the weight given to impressions of neighbours and casual acquaintances . I can remember how we . criticized the . process .
 Despite the many critical comments about clearances, I also had the impression that being cleared had its rewards . Despite the negative comments, I was impressed by the rewards of being cleared .
 These are personal and had to do with being confronted by a screening process, passing the test, and then enjoying final acceptance . These were personal experiences that had to be dealt with by a screener .
 Being cleared represents a flattering experience sharpened by the quality of selectivity, not unlike acceptance by a fraternity or country club . Being cleared represented a flattering . It was the feeling accompanying acceptance by the feel of acceptance .
 Being included confirmed that you had been found worthy by those unseen and unnamed officials somewhere in the upper reaches of the bureaucracy who managed America’s security needs . Being included confirms that you were found worthy .
 Most analysts quietly savoured the fact that someone had considered them fit to share vital national secrets . It was a perverse gratification in a way — to feel rewarded simply for things one refrained from doing in the past — .
 Among those finally cleared for work at Defense, there were some who were given a higher, more selective, spectal clearance .
 'When I was ‘chosen’ for a special clearance, my immediate feeling was one of achievement and pleasure. When I was 'chosen' to be chosen, I was proud to be a member of the 'special clearance' 'The feeling of being chosen was one
 I also remember the earlier feeling when I was not cleared for special intelligence and how important it seemed to me to be one of the three or four who were cleared among the twenty or so analysts .
 The chosen few would leave their office several times a day to check the 'take' in the 'back room' The windowless, windowless cinderblock cubicle filled with combination safes . With subdued envy, I would watch those chosen few leave our office several .
 These special people would periodically read over my work to see if some fact or point of emphasis should be altered . "They were privileged to see and I was not," he says . "I was not."
 Intelligence community decorum made it inappropriate to question any changes made by this select few, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 "Levels of clearance represent just another dimension of information fragmentation," says author . "I realize that levels of clearance ... are just more information fragmentation"
 When | was denied access to special information I felt that I was not as fully informed as others . 'I was not fully a part of, or as responsible for, the ongoing work,' she says . 'Because of this, I felt not as well as fully part of or as
 Special intelligence clearances also helped establish a hierarchy within the office . If nuclear weapons were being assigned to a section of Kiev or Kharkov, I imagined that someone else was more responsible than I .
 Hierarchical relationships, wherever they exist, create a distraction of their own by causing one to think about where one stands in relation to others . Hierarchic relationships create their own distraction by causing people to think .
 Within the intelligence community, not everyone had the special clearance and, largely because of this fact, one came to want it . Not everyone had a special clearance .
 If this sign of more complete acceptance was not extended, one wondered why . If this is not extended it would have been a sign of greater acceptance .
 There was no way to determine why, nor was there any way to correct the situation . Yet there is no way of determining why or how the situation occurred .
 Doubts and hopes were generated which distracted attention from the substance of one’s work, says the author .
 A preoccupation with the structure, process, and mechanics of day-to-day existence was encouraged by the atmosphere of the Department of Defense . One quickly became absorbed by these concerns .
 What was done with the end product of work assumed a secondary importance . The end product, however, was a secondary issue for the artist .
 There was consolation to be found in the Defense environment of devel69 .
 America’s victims deserved their fate and that it was the victims who were responsible for bringing a nuclear holocaust down on their own heads . The victims deserved the fate of their own .
 Describing the Soviet leadership as evil, corrupt, immoral, sadistic, power-mad and inhuman — plus being communists — provided at least a partial justification for their elimination .
 Vilifying the enemy, describing him in demeaning terms, is a longstanding government practice intended to legitimize the killing of others . Vilified the enemy is a long-standing government practice . Vilifying enemies is a way of legitimizing the killing, killing others .
 Later, in the Vietnam War, the North Vietnamese were seen as aggressive communists and were therefore evil . Later in the 1970s, North Vietnam was seen as an aggressive communist and therefore evil. The North Vietnamese are now seen as evil .
 If the Vietnamese were seen as caring less than Americans about this temporal life, if they didn't mind dying all that much, killing them became a less traumatic experience . Besides, if the Vietnamese cared less about this temporary life, it would be easier to kill them .
 America emerged in the 1950s as a world power committed to the use of military capabilities for national security . New words became part of the language of the foreign affairs bureaucracy .
 Language in Defense helped to obscure the reality of what the work was all about, it says . Language was used to distract attention from the homicidal reality and give a brighter hue to the ominous .
 Presumably certain words and expressions ‘took hold’ because civil servants felt comfortable with them . Civil servants ‘felt comfortable with’ using them, it was said .
 Certain words helped link Defense work with familiar and positive experiences of each individual’s past and thereby reinforce the innocuous quality of ongoing 7O projects . Certain words help . link Defense . work . with familiar, positive experiences .
 The Air Force’s use of the maxim ‘peace is our profession’ is examples of this . Changing the name of the War Department to the Defense Department, Strike Command to Readiness Command, and the Air Force's use of . the maxim 'peace is . our
 PAL is an electronically controlled DOD system of interconnected locks used to prevent the unauthorized launching of an inter-continental ballistic missile . PAL is a system of electronically controlled locks . PAL was designed to prevent an unauthorized launch of a ballistic missile.
 The vocabulary of Defense, to the extent, had the ring of respected and predictable laws of the physical sciences that had nothing to do with such things as war and annihilation .
 Weapons were called military ‘hardware’, evoking impressions of something familiar, useful, and available in a neighbourhood store . Weapons were known as military 'hardware' in the 1930s .
 The term “baby H-bomb’ was commonly used in referring to low yield, small tactical nuclear weapons suitable for use in limited wars . I recall the term in the late 1950s when the term was used in . referring to small tactical weapons .
 The Hiroshima bomb was named ‘Little Boy’ and it was the weight of ‘Fat Man’ that fell on Nagasaki . The weight of the 'Fat Man' bomb was the same weight as the 'Little Boy' bomb . The practice of referring to nuclear weapons
 Defense vocabulary expanded and displayed an even greater imaginative and anaesthetizing flair . As America’s involvement in the Vietnam War grew deeper, the vocabulary expanded .
 Bombing raids became ‘surgical strikes’ and the forced movement and 71 impounding of Vietnamese citizens were part of America’s ‘pacification program’ — terms suggesting images of the hospital operating room or a Quaker meeting . Bombing raid raids became '
 The enemy was not killed, but, instead, was ‘taken out’, ‘wasted’ or ‘blown away’ as a consequence of ‘executive action or a ‘protective reaction’ foray .
 In Washington the semantics of the military muted the reality of war for the civilian policy-makers . The semantics of war muted the fact that the U.S. is engaged in war in Iraq and Syria .
 In quiet, air-conditioned, thick-carpeted rooms, such terms as ‘systematic pressure’, ‘armed reconnaissance’ and even ‘body count’ seemed to breed a sort of games-theory detachment . ‘Systematic
 Americans are no longer fighting in Vietnam but the use of language for political purposes continues . The use of political language continues to be used by Americans in Vietnam .
 I have been back to Washington a number of times to talk with old friends. I've been back in Washington to talk about old friends . I'm not afraid to return to Washington, but to talk to old friends, he says. I'm proud to be able to do so,
 Each time I visit the Pentagon or wait in the visitors’ lobby at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, I catch myself staring at the men and women .
 "I overhear snatches of conversations and am struck by the amount of laughter," she says . She overhears snatches from conversations and is struck by how much laughter there is .
 It’s all very much as I remember it — people whose speech and behaviour suggest their sociability, but also their strong conviction that they are doing what needs to be done and it is therefore right . It's all very similar to the people I met in the 1960s,
 Hannah Arendt explains why few Nazis or Germans were able to express a sense of guilt for the monstrous crimes they committed in the final solution to the Jewish question . Eichmann in Jerusalem is published by the London School of Psychology .
 Arendt’s explanation was that the Nazi bureaucracy provided mechanisms for establishing distance between the individual and the reality of genocide . The Nazi bureaucracy established distance between individuals and reality, she said .
 It was important for those who did the actual killing to know that they were not responsible for the planning . It's important to remember that those who planned the killing did not have to blame .
 The Nazi state was administered by ordinary men and women performing routine acts no one of which seemed, in itself, unacceptably sinister . The Nazis were not the most sinister, but they were the most successful Nazis .
 "Things have changed. What I look for when I return to Washington and talk to former colleagues is the reassurance that things have changed," he says .
 Public statements coming from the highest levels of government indicate that this is the case . Public statements from the government indicate this is not the case, according to reports .
 There is a holding back from the risks of detente and I wonder if things have really changed . But within the heart of the bureaucracy, among the career civil servants of ten or twenty years, there is a hold back from detente .
 I fear that my memories of the Air Targets Division are more relevant than I wish to believe . I also fear that I may have been a member of the air force .
 Analysts should be able to stand back from their day-to-day activities and examine the implications of their work with more objectivity . My memories of my experiences in the intelligence community would become less relevant .
 Thought can sensitize men and women to the implications of their actions and this could impose new inhibitions on the behaviour of the foreign affairs bureaucracy . Thought can lead to a change in attitudes to foreign affairs in the world .
 The tentative move toward a policy of detente offers a setting within which this could begin to happen . There are forces within the system that work against such self-examination .
 To the extent that critical self-examination does not occur, the individuals comprising the bureaucracy are abandoning a human undertaking which she considers to be of the highest value, the activity of thinking .
 Many of the tragedies of the past are attributable less to the evil or stupidity of man than to his thoughtlessness . Many tragedies are attributable to the thoughtlessness of man, says historian John Sutter .
 The history of the superpowers’ antagonism has been interrupted occasionally by the seeking of accommodation in the act of balancing each other . Running from an uneasy war-time alliance through an almost immediately following sharply hostile cold war .
 The arms race was pursued by both sides under the assumption of an imminent risk of a military showdown between the two systems, or, at least, of a constant danger of encroachment from the other ideological camp .
 Dr Myrdal’s study was completed in 1976, and preceded NATO's decision to ‘modernize’ its ‘theatre’ weapons (cruise missiles and Pershing IIs) This essay sets the scene for that decision, and analyses the strategic arguments
 The detente of recent years has led to a more polite choice of vocabulary as well as some, though limited, approaches to freer economic, scientific, and cultural relations .
 Helsinki Conference held in the summer of 1975 represented a kind of codification of the ideas of detente, but without any firm commitments regarding implementation . The Helsinki Conference was held in summer 1975 .
 Detente, however, did not lead to a reversal or even a cessation of the arms race . Detente led to a detente, but not a reversal, or even an end to the arms war .
 The main new element was rather the institutionalization of the continuous character of the arms race. The arms race was institutionalized in the 1970s, the author says .
 The two superpowers now stand more armed than ever with gigantic arsenals . Their arsenals continue to be increased .
 The history of postwar disarmament endeavours can only be told as one of repeated lost opportunities, in which the crucial and determining factor has been sparring by the superpowers . The world's leading superpowers have sparred with each other over disarmament efforts .
 Both have excelled in high rhetoric about the goal of disarmament, often employing acrimonious polemics against each other’s positions . From the beginning of the . beginning of . the . talks, both men have been vocal about disarmament .
 Underneath the surface they have increasingly acted as if there were between them a conspiracy not to permit a halt, still less a reversal, of the arms race . But beneath the surface, they have acted as though there were . between them not to allow a halt or a reversal of the
 NATO formed in 194g and WTO in 1955 . NATO was established and solidified after the Soviet bloc had already been established . Europe was more firmly structured by the formation of NATO .
 In other parts of the world, various regional or bilateral accords usually created less tightly regulated arrangements . In other countries, the arrangements are often less closely regulated .
 Despite all pronouncements of mutuality and partnership, the power has remained firmly in the hands of the two superpowers . Within these alliances, despite all . Despite all . pronouncements . and partnership .
 Spurred on by the superpowers’ arms race, most other countries have militarized unprecedentedly . Underdeveloped countries have also become militarized, not least the underdeveloped .
 The superpowers have actively contributed to this militarization by military aid and by the politicization of development aid, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 The Charter of the United Nations prescribes that the great powers should do . They have not acted in concert to prevent or stop wars in 78 parts of the world, as the Charter says .
 In these wars, as in the Middle East, they have often taken sides, even when they have not got themselves involved in active warfare . The United States did in Indochina, as did the United States in Vietnam .
 Still, they have until now been careful not to let their contributions to and involvement in these wars lead to an open military confrontation between themselves . Still, the U.S. has until now not allowed its contributions to these wars to lead to military confrontation .
 Talking disarmament while relentlessly building up their own armaments to dazzling levels . Prodding and aiding allied countries to do the same, though on a necessarily more modest scale; making the world more dangerous . compelling even nonaligned countries to keep their defences high . This is how peoples and governments
 The two superpowers in their competitive antagonism are fixated on each other . While these repercussions are played out all over the world, these are played by the world's superpowers .
 Viking fighters were required to carry on their knife-duel hitched together by a belt around their waists . Their posture is, I believe, well illustrated by the old Viking tale of the fighters .
 The primary motivating force for the superpowers has been that each must be second to none, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 That this is their absurd ambition can be concluded from their constant measuring and comparing of military might . That is the case, they are constantly comparing and comparing military might, and that this is an absurd ambition . It is not the only reason for this absurd ambition, it is the level of
 Pentagon propaganda machine releases news about an approaching bomber gap or missile gap or megatonnage gap . Whenever the will of the U.S. Congress falters regarding military expenditures, the Pentagon reports a gap gap .
 The Soviet government is not dependent on a scrutinizing congress and the internal debate there is muted . The internal debate is muted in the Soviet government .
 Those responsible for the Soviet budget are egged on by their military establishments which deliver correct or incorrect information about threatening changes in U.S. capabilities . But it can be safely assumed that those responsible for Russia's budget are .
 The main motivation of the arms race between the superpowers is for each to match the other in destructive capacity . The idea is continuously revealed in official statements on both sides .
 Initially the Soviet Union started from a position of inferiority, but it has gradually advanced towards equality in the gross kill-effect of nuclear weapons deployed or in production .
 In regard to technology, the United States has always been and for all foreseeable time far ahead . The U.S. is always far ahead, says President Obama .
 The two superpowers have acknowledged that what they possibly can agree upon is the establishment of essential parity — which each of them then attempts to surpass in order to reach superiority . But in practical terms, especially from the beginning of the SALT negotiations in 1969, they've acknowledged that .
 Fear of what the opposite side may be aiming for then acts on both as a force to drive the arms race onward . Fear of an opposite side then acts as a driving force for both arms race .
 The military planners exploit this situation, the politicians do not oppose them, and the citizens therefore allow the two defence systems to spiral upwards in an actionreaction pattern . The situation has been described as an 'actionreaction'
 As long as the arms race is permitted to go on, more than momentary stability can never be secured . The arms race must be allowed to continue to be permitted to continue .
 Such are the questions left unformulated by the superpowers themselves in bilateral negotiations and official statements to the public in their own countries . Such questions are left unformed by the powers themselves .
 Experts have often approached these prob80 lems and effectively pointed out how vast is the overkill capacity of both superpowers . Independent experts have often pointed out the huge power gap between the superpowers in the world .
 The immediate aim of such observations has been to demonstrate the need to reach an agreement between the two countries to scale down their nuclear ambitions . The aim of the observations is to demonstrate that such an agreement is needed .
 Seldom is raised whether one of the superpowers could unilaterally and safely cease the competition and even decrease its nuclear arsenal without risking its deterrent effect . Seldom, however, is the question raised whether a superpower could cease competition and reduce its arsenal .
 Often this argument is made in the form of estimating their ability to kill each human inhabitant so many times over . The argument is often made in an attempt to prove that they are capable of killing so many people .
 The survival of the combined populations of the superpowers depends on the goodwill and the good sense of the separate leaderships of the two superpowers . It is most important . . . to have clearly in mind what the current technical situation means .
 If the Soviet leadership chose to destroy America as a nation, it is unquestionably capable of doing so in less than half an hour . There is literally nothing we could now do to prevent it, says author .
 The only thing we 81 could do is to wreak on them an equally terrible revenge. The only one thing we could do could be 'revenge' for them.
 The extent of expected damage is the question of most vital concern to the people living under what they believe is the protection of the terror balance . People living under the 'terror balance' are concerned about the extent of the damage .
 In the event of an exchange of blows by strategic nuclear forces of the United States and the U.S.R., most of the urban populations of the two countries could be killed . Most of the industry and commerce could be destroyed by the direct and immediate effects of nuclear explosions .
 The towns and rural areas of the two countries would at the same time be subjected to varying amounts of radioactive fallout . Rural areas would be exposed to radioactive fallout at the time .
 The details of what would happen to the people living in such areas depend on the weather conditions prevailing at the time and on the details of the attack pattern . Well over one-half of the town and country populations could be killed by the fallout .
 The living standards and the life expectancy of the survivors would be substantially reduced by secondary effects, including the effect of less-than-lethal levels of fallout and the general breakdown of civilized services .
 Few visualize the tragic reality that the price, in terms of destruction, is going up all the time, without the concomitant increase in security which the arms escalation was intended to buy . The price of the arms arms is going higher every time, but few visualize the reality .
 The military power of the United States has been steadily increasing since WWII . Ever since shortly after World War II the U.S. military power has increased .
 The national security of the United States has been rapidly and inexorably diminishing, says President Obama . The U.S. national security has been steadily declining in recent years, he says .
 The U.S.R. could have launched an attack against the United States with bombers carrying fission bombs . In the early 1950s, the U.N.R., on the basis of its own unilateral decision and determination to accept the inevitable retaliation, could have attacked the U
 Some of these bombs would have penetrated our defenses and would have numbered in the millions of U.S. casualties . Some of the American casualties would have been in millions, says President Obama .
 In the 1950s, the U.S.R. could have launched an attack against the United States using more and better bombers, this time carrying thermonuclear bombs . In the later 1950s it could have used a similar bomber to carry out an attack on the US using ther
 Some of these bombers would have penetrated our defenses and could have numbered in the tens of millions of U.S. casualties . The American casualties could have been in the hundreds of millions .
 Today the U.S.R. could launch an attack on the United States using intercontinental missiles and bombers carrying thermonuclear weapons . The United States could launch such a strike on its own decision and accept retaliation .
 The military power of the U.S.R. has been steadily increasing since it became an atomic power in 1949 . It has steadily grown steadily since becoming an atomic superpower .
 Hypothetically, the United States could unilaterally decide to destroy the U.S.R. and the .S. would be absolutely powerless to prevent it . Hypothetical, the . United States would be powerless to . prevent it from destroying the .
 That country could only, at best, seek to wreak revenge through whatever retaliatory capacity it might then have lett. That country would only seek to seek revenge through retaliation, it might not be able to .
 The clearly predictable course of the arms race is a steady open spiral downward into oblivion, says the U.S. State Dept. of Energy .
 A full nuclear exchange between the United States and the U.S.R. would result in 10,000,000 casualties from cancer and leukemia in countries situated well away from the two main protagonists . Long-range or world-wide fallout would endanger those living in even remote countries .
 Genetic problems that are even more difficult to calculate would affect many, many millions of others . In addition, genetic problems that would affect millions would also affect millions more .
 Civilization would survive somewhere, but probably not in the U.S. or the Soviet Union . It would probably not be in North America or Europe, but perhaps not elsewhere .
 The increasingly unthinkable danger to both the contesting superpowers of a head-on war explains their interest in planning for a ‘limited’ war .
 Such wars do not imply the use of available strategic nuclear weapons against each other, the U.S. says . The U.N. cannot use nuclear weapons in such wars .
 The homelands of the superpowers become ‘sanctuaries’, while wars, if and when they would occur, are to be fought in the territories of lesser powers .
 For historical reasons ‘limited war’ primarily has been discussed in regard to Europe . ‘Limited war' has been a major topic of discussion for historical reasons .
 The only possible origin of war would arise from a superpower conflict . The only possibility of war is from a superpowers conflict .
 A ‘European war’ would be categorically different from wars started independently in other parts of the world . A 'European war' would be different from a war started independently by other countries .
 In these, superpower interests might be involved, but not involved to the level of confrontation with each other . In these cases, superpower interest might not be involved in these conflicts .
 A few reminders of European history, though abridged to bare essentials, are needed here for an understanding of how the present situation has evolved . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September 2015 .
 When World War II ended, the larger part of Europe, as well as the Soviet Union, was utterly devastated, suffering all sorts of social and economic disorganization . The Soviet Union was devastated by the end of the war, and suffered from all kinds of disorganizations .
 East European countries, including the then Soviet zone of East Germany, became satellites of the Soviet Union . The process ultimately took several years, though it took several months .
 There was never any attempt by the U.S. to suppress similarly the political independence of the West European countries . The West European nations are independent from the United States .
 West Germany emerged at the end of the war from its humiliating defeat and material misery . These were conceived of as democracies, including West Germany emerging from its defeat .
 There are early moves by some West European countries to join a defensive military alliance . There are also early moves to join in a defensive alliance .
 The Western European Union was formed by Britain, France, and the Benelux countries in response to the Soviet coup in Czechoslovakia the same year . The United States was recognized in 1948 as a protector of the Soviet Union .
 NATO was created for85 mally in April 1949 . The United States joined the alliance . The Berlin blockade provided an additional warning of Soviet attitudes .
 Spain under the Franco dictatorship was never formally accepted as a NATO ally . Through bilateral arrangements involving military bases and other priorities it became included in the Western defence system .
 West Germany was incorporated in NATO in 1955, following a long struggle within Germany and among NATO members over its rearming . West Germany underwent transformation from occupation to partnership in 1955 .
 NATO was from the outset conceived as a protective shield for Western Europe . The United States with its then monopoly of nuclear weapons was to provide a nuclear umbrella . The U.S. provided the nuclear umbrella, NATO was conceived as an umbrella for Europe .
 In September 1949, the Soviet Union exploded its first atomic bomb, this created in many quarters of Western Europe an apprehension that it was becoming engaged in a contest between the superpowers . The Soviet Union detonated its first bomb in September 1949 .
 The military strategies that evolved became more and more clearly a reflection of the mutual contest between the superpowers, dominated by their shifts in strength . The U.S. military strategies evolved as a result of the growing strength of the world's two superpowers .
 The American military policy was from the outset one of containment, which presumed the active threat of a Soviet military move against the West . The U.S. military policy from the start of the Cold War was containment, the author says .
 As long as the U.S. had the monopoly of atomic bombs, the threat of counteraction implied security for Western Europe . "Counteraction" implied security in Western Europe, author says .
 When the Soviet Union acquired a nuclear arsenal, the security of Europe changed into the insecurity of being dragged into a nuclear confrontation between the superpowers . The risk of a confrontation between superpowers increased in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The U.S. nuclear umbrella kept the worries from surfacing publicly . Still, the reiterated promises to Western Europe of protection by the United States kept the concerns from being raised .
 Some disquietude was often felt, as when John Foster Dulles in the early 1950s enunciated the doctrines of massive retaliation and roll-back . The U.S. has been in touch with the world since the 1950s .
 East Germany in 1953 and 86 Hungary in 1956 were uprisings . East Germany and Hungary in 1953 were not the same cases . The West did not see the uprising as a result of the upririals .
 No military countermeasures had been resorted to in Czechoslovakia in 1948 nor were used later in 1968 . In 1948, the Czech Republic was occupied by the Soviet Union, but was not invaded .
 The United States by then had apparently accepted the division of Europe as West European governments had done much earlier . The U.S. had accepted Europe's division in Europe .
 From the beginning the NATO alliance resulted in contributions from the United States other than the promise of an ultimate defence with its nuclear weapons . From the start the alliance was only a promise of the ultimate defence .
 For many years the United States provided large-scale military aid and seemingly permanent garrisons of American troops to Western Europe . The U.S. has been involved in Western Europe for decades .
 The question of how far the defence of Europe should rely on conventional forces is, in reality, a crucial issue in NATO strategic debate .
 The decision was to rely on nuclear weapons deployed in Europe . European allies in NATO were unwilling to make a contribution in conventional forces that would match the Soviet bloc .
 Sweden, Switzerland, and Yugoslavia have proven to be more willing to build up strong defences with conventional weapons and to rely on their own strength to be independent .
 They have continued this policy of strong national defence, forsaking not only alliances but nuclear weapons as well . They have also forsaken alliances and nuclear weapons, they say .
 The real crossroad for the Western European defence strategy, signalled by deployment of nuclear weapons in Europe, came when the United States, in the face of rising Soviet nuclear capabilities, no longer wanted to be committed to a near-automatic release of nuclear retaliation .
 During the Eisenhower administration the pos87 sibility of fighting a more limited war with tactical nuclear weapons was envisioned . The Eisenhower administration envisioned the possibility of a limited war using tactical nukes .
 Large numbers of tactical nuclear weapons began to be shipped to Europe in 1954 . They were intended for use in a local battlefield .
 Their deployment there was not negotiated, particularly with the major recipient, West Germany, not yet yet a NATO member . The deployment of the U.S. troops in West Germany was never negotiated, especially with West Germany .
 U.S. strategies for nuclear warfare did not necessarily serve Europe's best interests . American strategies for nukes were not necessarily served Europe’s best interests, author says .
 These tactical nuclear weapons deployed in Europe remain, like the strategic ones, under U.S. control .
 The very quality of deliberation which makes this strategy militarily desirable for the U.S. creates a sense of impotence or pressures for autonomy among our Allies . The U.K. has been criticized for its lack of transparency in the Middle East .
 The central command and control system, which is the key feature of the new doctrine, is American . The new doctrine is based on the U.S. Central Command and Control system . The U.N. has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 With Sputnik in 1957, the Russians demonstrated the possibility of Russian missiles with nuclear warheads reaching the United States . The credibility of the American nuclear umbrella was shaken by the discovery of the Russian missiles .
 The shock of the Soviet testing of a ballistic missile that could cross the Atlantic led the U.S. to install intermediate-range 88 missiles in Britain, Italy, and Turkey .
 The IRBMs were never a real threat to the Soviet Union because of its strategic retaliatory force . However, they were not effective protection for the Western countries either . The Soviet Union was never a threat to Western countries .
 They were removed in 1963 in a political bargain, part of the price paid for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . The missiles were removed from Cuba in 1963 as part of a political deal .
 Europeans experienced growing anxiety when the U.S. announced new strategic doctrines such as that of ‘flexible response’ or ‘realistic deterrence’ were announced from Washington, Europe experienced .
 The prospect of the superpowers fighting a limited war in Europe produced disaffection . But this was played down in public discussion and papered over in NATO compromises . The idea of their mutually establishing sanctuaries at home at home is played down .
 The initial premise about Soviet intentions, against which the capabilities had to be built up, became less and less a part of European thinking, though it spread rapidly in the U.S.
 UNESCO chief says he had wide contacts in Europe, U.S. and the United States . He says he was able to reach out to many of the world's most important countries .
 There was a degree of understanding in the Western European countries that, after all the sufferings the Russians had sustained during the War, they could have a valid reason to establish a belt of buffer states against Germany .
 The division of Germany was not felt by its neighbour countries to be entirely unfortunate . In addition, the division was felt by Germany's neighbours as unfortunate .
 The Soviet Union would not attempt to cross the line dividing the two Europes, Western Europe thought . Still, overriding such considerations there was in Western Europe the widely shared conviction that the Soviet Union wouldn't cross the border .
 Active planning by the Soviet Union for a military push westward was not perceived as realistic by most Europeans . Active planning was not believed to be realistic by many Europeans .
 The Marshall Plan aid for reconstruction and development of Western Europe was, from 1947, of a scope and generosity greater than any aid afforded the underdeveloped world, and it continued for many years .
 The basic American motivation was certainly human solidarity with the distressed European nations from which so many Americans reckoned their ancestry, while their own country had been spared . Europeans acknowledged this was gratefully acknowledged by Europeans .
 The United States’ motivation for providing aid increasingly reflected an anticommunist, antiSoviet policy . But as the cold war between the superpowers gathered momentum, the U.S. motivation for aid reflected an anti-Russian policy .
 Western European governments for a time accepted this attitude as being necessary to secure passage of aid bills in the U.S. Congress . Western European countries have since accepted this .
 Western European governments who included in their cabinets included representatives of indigenous communist parties paid the price and excluded them . Those governments who in the immediate postwar years had included . included in . their cabinets representatives of . indigenous communist . parties .
 Western countries, including some nonaligned, paid the price of cooperating with the United States in a strategic licensing policy . The policy was aimed at stopping exports to the Soviet sphere of a comprehensive group of commodities .
 In the United States this policy was widely publicized as being aimed at hurting economic development in the communist world . In the U.S. it was well publicized as an attempt to hurt economic development .
 The West European nations had, in fact, been ready for a detente with the Soviet Union and its allies long before this could be advocated as policy in the U.S. The West was ready for detente long before it was advocated by the United States .
 Stalin’s death in 1953 signalled, from the West European point of view, an important political change . Stalin died in 1953, but his death signalled important political changes .
 At about the same time Marshall Plan aid was being terminated and U.S. military aid also decreased . Marshall Plan was terminated at the time .
 The West European governments used this greater political independence to quietly liquidate the export embargo policy . Almost go immediately, the West European government liquidated the embargo policy.
 What remained of the licensing procedures became more of a bureaucratic nuisance than a serious trade barrier . The licensing procedures were more of an administrative nuisance, rather than a trade barrier, officials say .
 East-West trade in Europe increased, but the U.S. continued its discriminatory trade policy . The United States continued to discriminate against all of its trade partners .
 These historical glimpses, despite omissions, point up the differences of political developments on the European and the American scene .
 After the War, relations between the two Europes in trade, travel, and cultural contacts have been much closer than those between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . After the war, relations with the two countries were much closer .
 Europe must be understood to have been reliably cured from any propensity to war . Europe must have been cured of war, writes David Frum .
 Boundaries between its countries had been increasingly accepted as settled even when peace treaties had not been signed . Boundaries were increasingly accepted in countries with no peace treaties signed .
 The division of Germany and the demarcation between East Germany and Poland was the result of Willy Brandt’s Ostpolitik at the beginning of the 1970s . The division was solemnly countersigned at the European Security Conference in Helsinki on 1 August 1975 .
 As the available nuclear-weapons strength between the two superpowers grew more equal, it was inevitable that the idea of using these weapons against each other’s homelands lost its appeal .
 The strategy of preserving the Soviet Union and the U.S. as sanctuaries is viewed differently by the superpowers than it is by Europe . Europe's strategy is to preserve the Soviet and United States as sanctaries .
 The use of tactical nuclear weapons in Europe is likely to lead to an escalation, experts say . Use of tactical nukes in Europe could lead to escalation, they say .
 By itself, the idea of introducing ‘rules of engagement’ and artificial restrictions ‘by agreement’ is illusory and untenable . The idea of ‘Rules of Engagement’ by agreement is also untenable, says Simon Tisdall .
 It is difficult to visualize that a nuclear war, if it is unleashed, could be kept within the framework of ‘rules’ and would not develop into an all-out war .
 Soviet proximity to European countries where U.S. nuclear weapons are stationed makes its territory more vulnerable than the territory of the United States . The most important of these is that proximity to Europe makes it more vulnerable .
 The limited-war concept was part of the U.S. official strategic doctrine of flexible response . It is endorsed by its allies in Western Europe . Also, the United States .
 The Russians are suspicious that the U.S. might pretend to engage in a limited war, and then use the occasion to escalate it . As such it makes the Russians suspicious of the United States .
 Reflection on policy statements from Soviet sources raises the question of whether these statements are merely g2 propaganda threats, a warning to the United States that it will not be allowed to wage war in Europe without risking a nuclear onslaught at home .
 The Soviet Union must, equally with the United States, fear annihilation of its own country in case of a direct intercontinental confrontation . The U.S. and the Soviet Union are equally equally at risk of annihilation in a confrontation .
 Underlying both strategies is a definite, joint interest in preserving their own territories .
 The fundamental difficulty with the sanctuary theory is that the limitation of warfare must rely upon an understanding between the potential main enemies . The solution to this problem is that it must rely on understanding between potential enemies, not understanding .
 Henry Kissinger insisted that limited war is only possible if the contestants agree to view it as a chance to emerge from the war without too heavy material and human damage and without too much injury to their prestige . Henry A Kissinger, when still a professor, said limited war can only be limited war
 In this utterly unclarified situation, it may be surmised that the Soviet Union probably holds all conceivable scenarios open as alternatives, including that of a limited war in Europe . The Soviet Union may be holding all possibilities open, including the possibility of limited war, according to the
 There seem to be two fundamental differences as to how the two sides view its course . But in regard to such an eventuality, there seem to have been a fundamental differences .
 The prevailing view in the USSR has always been that any war should preferably be limited to the use of conventional forces . A hitch is that a smaller or larger part of them may already be concentrated at other frontiers, a hitch being being . The hitch being that a larger or a smaller
 Upgrading a war to the nuclear level would mean ‘unlimiting’ it to the bitter end . It would be 'unlimited’ by the end of a war, experts say . Upgrading nuclear weapons to the level of nuclear power would mean 'limiting
 A second difference is that we can deduce from all that is known about the deployment 93 and composition of Soviet forces that their aim, different from the United States’, would be a massive attack .
 The USSR could then abstain from a nuclear assault on the United States, lessening the risk of assault on itself . The U.S. could then avoid a nuclear attack on the U.K.
 The Soviet Union might use nuclear weapons for an early decisive victory on a European battlefield . Alternatively, the Soviet Union may use nuclear arms for a decisive victory in a European battle .
 The Soviet arsenal of nuclear weapons for war-atre use is concentrated on systems with higher yields, many in the megatonnnn class, and with higher radioactive fall-outs than the corresponding United States weapons deployed in Western Europe .
 Soviet strategists do not make the same categorical distinction as the U.S. does between strategic and tactical nuclear weapons . They are evidently ready to use a part of their strategic arsenal on targets in Europe .
 U.S. policy in Europe is to try to keep any war limited, says U.K. diplomat . U.N. has long been sceptical about the possibility of conducting limited war in Europe with nuclear weapons .
 The posture of ‘defence for Europe’ relies more and more on tactical nuclear weapons, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: ‘Defence for European security relies on nuclear weapons’
 In current doctrines there is an ever clearer preference for, or belief in, limiting a war with strategic offensive weapons to selected targets . The U.S. has a clear preference for limiting its weapons to targeted targets .
 Kissinger: Our current military policy is based on the doctrine of massive retaliation . Kissinger: "We threaten an all-out attack on the Soviet Union" Kissinger: We threaten an attack on Soviet Union in case the Union engages in aggression anywhere. Kissinger:
 "This means that we base our policy on a threat that will involve the destruction of all mankind," says President Obama . This means that the U.S. base its policy on the threat of destruction, he says .
 In every crisis an American President will have to make the choice whether a given objective is worth the destruction of American cities . What it will mean is that in every crisis, an American president must make the decision to destroy American cities, he says .
 The American President will have to decide whether Beirut or whatever the issue may be is worth thirty million American lives . The U.S. President has to decide if Beirut is worth 30 million lives .
 In spite of considerable inconsistencies, he repeated his warning and continued to see Europe as becoming directly involved in war . He recognized that war would be a Superpower contest .
 As Secretary of State, Kissinger did not change his view on this particular point, although his pronouncements were adjusted so as not to appear to retract . Kissinger made the U.S. promise to hold a protective nuclear umbrella over Western Europe . Kissinger's views were adjusted to avoid appearing to
 For good reasons this scheme is not often presented officially in clear terms . The scheme is often not presented officially, but it's important to be clear terms.
 "We continue to deploy our own theater nuclear forces in both Europe and Asia," says U.S. president .
 Europe has three basic reasons for deploying troops in Europe . The European Union has deployed troops in the past two decades .
 NATO is essential to deterrence as long as the Warsaw Pact deploys theater nuclear forces of its own . The maintenance of theater nuclear capabilities in NATO is important to deterrence, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 They help to deter the use of nuclear weapons by the Pact and, along with our strategic nuclear and conventional forces, provide a general deterrent across the spectrum of possible aggression .
 U.S. theater nuclear capabilities provide "limited and controlled options other than the early use of United States and allied strategic forces," says President Obama .
 The U.S. intention has been that the defensive forces in Europe should be built up, not for a quick victory, but for more enduring operations . Different from likely Soviet strategy, the United States has been building up .
 Reinforcement from the U.S. would require time . The logistics have usually been planned for some sixty days before a war would reach its peak . Reinforcing from the United States .
 The vagueness about what might be the fate of Europe is reflected in the attitudes and opinions of U.S. political leaders, editorial writers and public opinion .
 It is fairly certain that neither the United States Congress nor American citizens in general would be in favour of letting such a war escalate to nuclear attack on the Soviet Union . Such a war would initiate what has aptly been called mutual collective suicide .
 Public opinion polls suggest it might even be difficult to bring the nation along in active participation of a limited war .
 This brings into doubt what is really meant by the loud exclamations that the U.S. stands firm behind its commitments . The United States is standing firm behind the commitments, it has said .
 The entire doctrine of what is meant by limited war in Europe remains hazy, and ideas of what might trigger such a war are equally hazy if not actually erroneous . The idea of what may trigger a war is also hazy .
 Viewed from the angle of Europe — whether East or West — there are no possibilities for a major war to be launched by a major European power on its own initiative .
 A major war could only originate from the protectors of the two blocs, the gaming superpowers . The two superpowers are the world's two biggest players in the gaming industry .
 If war comes to Europe, it will be because one or the other of the superpowers wishes a contest to be played out there . War probably would be ignited outside Europe, for example, in the Middle East .
 A military test of strength between the superpowers might then be transposed to Europe .
 War machines may well begin to roll over Europe as a main battlefield . Thus, the war machines may soon begin rolling over Europe .
 This kind of incidental war in Europe would not be less gruesome than a deliberate one, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: 'This kind of transferred incidental war would be more gruesome than deliberate one'
 No Europeans, East or West, would have their hearts set to win it, only to avoid or delimit it . No Europeans would have hoped to win the World Cup, but would want to avoid it, say experts .
 The possible origins of a war befalling Europe are not discussed very openly in Europe . The origins of the war not discussed in Europe very openly .
 The nature and consequences of a limited war are not analysed in Europe . Likewise, the nature of a war is not studied in Europe. The nature of the war is also not analysed .
 This is natural for Eastern Europe, as such a war has never been announced as plausible strategic doctrine by the Soviet Union . Such a war would not have been a plausible strategic strategy by the U.S. This is not the case, as it was never announced as a plausible strategy by
 There has not been much public discussion in Western Europe of such a war either . The United States has declared flexible response, with the employment of nuclear weapons, to be NATO strategy .
 Some experts, mostly German authors, have been quite outspoken about the possible effects . Some experts have expressed concern about the effects of the climate change .
 Even a brief and locally limited war could mean ten million deaths and cause total destruction of West Germany as an industrial society . Even a small and local war could kill ten million people and destroy West Germany .
 Escalation to blind utilization of existing weapons capabilities could mean the extinction of all life in Germany . Escalating to blind use of existing weapon capabilities could kill all of Germany's life, experts say .
 Von Weizsacker is reported as having testified elsewhere, in studies for the NATO Nuclear Planning Group, that an input of just 1o per cent of the nuclear weapons now stationed in Europe could practically annihilate both East and West Germany .
 The corresponding Soviet nuclear weapons are designed for tactical use, about half the number but of higher average yield . They are said by the Soviets not to be intended for an attack on the West . Soviet officials add that if NATO should use nuclear weapons they will be repaid .
 York has elaborated in considerable detail what would be the consequences of the use of Soviet weapons . York has written extensively about what would happen if the Soviet weapons were used .
 There is a difference in the targeting pattern of all these 99 superpower weapons, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Several less potent types are meant strictly for use in an ongoing battle and are kept in reserve for Western Europe . The less potent type is kept in Western Europe — that is to stave off advances over bridges, etc.
 The larger NATO weapons are in the main targeted on Eastern Europe, with a few of longer range targeted or targetable on the Soviet Union . NATO weapons have been targeted in the past but are not longer range .
 If such weapons come to be used locally in Western Europe, efforts must be made to limit collateral damage . Obviously, if such weapons are used locally, they must be used wisely .
 Eastern European countries probably have few or no nuclear weapons stationed on their territory . It is reasonable to assume that those targeted Eastern European nations would attempt to avoid massive civilian damage .
 Western Europe cannot avoid itself providing suitable targets for a retaliatory attack by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union would strike first in a systematic attempt to pre-empt the larger weapons and to destroy command and communication centres .
 The projected result is very similar to von Weizsacker’s, which York presents in pictorial form . York presents the projected result in a pictorial format .
 In another he describes the possible results of the use of an even smaller number of one-megaton bombs on Western European cities with more than 200,000 population .
 There has been a carefully kept official silence as to the consequences of the decision . There is still no word as to what will happen next .
 It is necessary to remember that Europeans had not asked for tactical nuclear weapons when they were first introduced in Western Europe in 1954 .
 They were reluctant to approve the United States’ strategic doctrines . They were also reluctant to . approve the U.S.’s strategic doctrines.
 NATO members exerted considerable pressure to have greater influence over the use of nuclear weapons . When finally in 1967 they accepted the flexible-response doctrine, the European NATO members were pressured to have more influence . The flexible response doctrine was adopted in 1967 .
 The only concession they could obtain was the establishment of a Nuclear Planning Group in NATO for joint consultations in regard to, for instance, targeting of possible nuclear weapons operations . The group will meet in NATO to discuss possible nuclear attacks .
 West German leaders in particular have wanted a considerably stronger role for the European allies in the control of nuclear weapons in Europe . The West German leader has wanted a significantly stronger role .
 Since 1967 there has been little of the early clairvoyant anxiety of Helmut Schmidt . Public discussion about any fundamental change in the policies of nuclear defence for Europe has been lacking .
 West European official postures have become frozen in a kind of silent approval of the status quo . West European postures are frozen in kind of silence approval of status quo, writes David Frum .
 NATO governments often appear to back continued deployment of tactical nuclear weapons in their countries . In recent years, it has often appeared as if the NATO governments were backing continued deployments of tactical weapons .
 West Germany fears withdrawal would mean a lessening of the United States commitment to act in the defence of Western Europe . West Germany particularly seems to fear that withdrawal would signify a lessened U.S. commitment .
 In 1975 I conducted a seminar at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology on tactical nuclear weapons in Europe . In 1975 he was conducting a seminar on tactical nukes .
 The debate became nonconclusive as most of the participants cut off pursuit of the subject by asserting that any change in the present situation was totally impractical for political reasons . A nuclear-weapon-free Europe being altogether out of the question was also out the question .
 Western Europeans have chosen to buy political stability by placing the awful risks described above over their lives and their future . In summary, today’s Western Europeans are choosing to buy current political stability .
 Perhaps their choice was inadvertent; perhaps they did not and even today still do not realize what they have done . Perhaps they didn't realize what it was, perhaps they still don't realize .
 The discussion of the potential damage nuclear weapons would inflict now centres around the substitution of lower-yield, shorter-range, more accurately targeted missiles for those now deployed .
 Plans to introduce a new generation of tactical nuclear weapons into the defence system of Western Europe are being met by criticism in many quarters . NATO councils have not been audible outside of NATO councils .
 In academic debate on strategy, there is open advocacy of using mini-nukes for rapid first use to fortify the sanctuary of the U.S.
 The strategy proposed in this article ... calls for immediately engaging an attacker with low-yield nuclear weapons for all but the most trivial incursions . The strategy calls for immediate engagement with .
 U.S. strategic nuclear weapons are key to dealing with threats of irrational attacks to destroy NATO . NATO allies must deal with threats without relying on nuclear weapons, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Due to European malaise, there has been little discussion and no public uproar about the plans for a superpower battle over European territory . I find it necessary to speak frankly about the limited-war concept being in reality little more than a plan for sanctuary .
 Though there is open discussion of the risk of American découplement from Europe, that is not a grave risk at present . What is a risk is the existing couplement of superpower conflicts with the potential sacrifice of Europe, he says .
 Some other dangers also need attention, although more marginal in this dramatic context . Some of the dangers are more marginal, but more marginal than that .
 If mini-nukes should become standard equipment, deployed interchangeably with conventional weapons, this would blur the distinction between nuclear and conventional weapons . Mini-nuke weapons could blur distinction between weapons and weapons .
 If the present distinction between nuclear and conventional weapons becomes blurred, it will be impossible to believe in limited war and to avoid uncontrollable escalation . The present distinction will be blurred, says David Cameron .
 Discussion of the wisdom of withdrawing all or certain types of them, the more vulnerable or more offensive, has not reached the peoples of Europe . Discussion of questions raised in expert circles is not reaching Europe, it has not yet reached the people .
 There is definitely no interest in public discussion of the implications of drawing nuclear fire on to the European countries, or of the extent to which these countries and peoples would be devastated .
 The ostrich attitude became apparent again when the barter offer in the Vienna negotiations to withdraw a small part of the tactical nuclear weapons from Western Europe became known .
 Many allies in Europe, including West Germany, have previously expressed uneasiness over the proposal .
 European partners in NATO have preferred to have little public attention directed towards the possible consequences of their NATO allegiance . As was already customary in earlier periods, the European partners have preferred not to have public attention .
 Even in the nonaligned Western countries there has been astonishingly little discussion of these awkward issues or studies examining the consequences of various scenarios, for example, those involving the use of tactical nuclear weapons .
 These nonaligned neighbours to NATO countries have demonstrated a kind of discretion in questions which concern the destiny of the continent as a whole .
 There are often the political consequences of presently relevant scenarios and damage estimates are ominous . There is often understood that the political . consequences of such scenarios are ominous.
 Europe devastated while the United States and the Soviet Union remain intact . But this conjures up for Europeans the picture of a devastated Europe while the U.S. remains intact .
 The idea that tactical nuclear weapons furnish a plausible ‘option’ for defending Western Europe (as distinguished from their escalatory role) has had a lingering half-life .
 The use of hundreds of atomic weapons could cause so much collateral damage to the area being ‘defended’ that the inhabitants might prefer surrender as a lesser evil .
 Even if NATO so limited its weaponry, an enemy might not . This would be less true of certain low-yield or ‘clean’ weapons .
 The use of these weapons in Europe evokes a potential conflict of perceived interest between elements of the attentive publics in Europe and the U.S. U.N. officials say .
 Nowhere so far are views heard from the citizens of Europe, who will, after all, be the victims if there is a superpower war in Europe . Europe's citizens will be victims if Europe is attacked by a superpower .
 "The United States does not need to have these weapons in Europe," Obama says . "In fact, and that should be the overriding concern," he says . The U.S. should not need the weapons, he says.
 If it maintains its strategy of using its nuclear strength to defend Western Europe, it need only detach some of its submarines, equipped with nuclear warheads on ballistic missiles, to do so .
 Richard Nixon's address to a joint session of Congress, 1 June 1972, immediately on his return from Russia after SALT I Congressional Quarterly Almanac, g2nd Congress, and Session, 1972, Vol. 1972, . Richard Nixon, . address to . a joint . session of
 ‘How to Reduce the Overkill’, in Fred Warner Neal and Mary Kersey Harvey , Pacem in Terris (Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, Santa Barbara, Calif, 1974), Vol., 25. How to Reduce The Overkill .
 Jerome B Wiesner and Herbert F York, ‘National Security and the Nuclear-Test Ban’, Scientific American, October 1964, 35, 35. The ban on nuclear tests was lifted in 1964 .
 Eastern Europe refers to those countries allied to the Soviet Union, the membership of W TO being seven; and Western Europe to the U.S. refers to the membership in NATO being fifteen . Eastern Europe is Eastern Europe . Western Europe is Western Europe, with membership of NATO allies being fifteen
 Sweden, Switzerland and Switzerland remain neutral in the war . Yugoslavia and Austria joined the nonaligned ranks later, like Yugoslavia after 1948 and Austria after the 1955 State Treaty .
 There are great difficulties involved in any such comparison, depending on important asymmetries between the superpowers in composition of forces and also in regard to the difference in distances for bringing up reserves .
 A Reappratsal of the Atlantic Alliance, Atlantic Policy Studies, Council on Foreign Relations , 11t. The Atlantic Alliance is a reappratation of the Alliance . The Alliance is based on the Atlantic Treaty Organization .
 Henry A Kissinger, “The Search for Stability’, Foreign Affairs, July 1959, 548. Kissinger: ‘The search for stability’ is a search for the stability of the U.S. State Department . Kissinger’s ‘search for stability'
 Heinz Trettner, ‘Tactical Nuclear Weapons for Europe’, Military Review, Vol., No, 7, July 1971, 48. Heinz Tritner: 'Tactical nuclear weapons for Europe for Europe'
 Belgium and the Netherlands are marked down to take 48 cruise missiles each . But, because of popular pressure, it looks as if neither of these two countries will take them .
 Cruise missiles fly all the way to their targets under power — essentially, they are pilotless aircraft . Unlike ballistic missiles, cruise missiles fly under power . Cruise missiles are pilotsless aircraft, not pilots .
 The missile’s guidance system works by matching radar readings of the ground over which it is flying with a pre-programmed contour map . The missile's guidance system is based on radar readings from the ground .
 Flying at low altitude at just below the speed of sound, it can take as direct or circuitous a route to its target as its programmer wishes .
 Low-level flight and small size mean it will be hard to detect on its way to the target . Guidance system will be able to provide such accuracy that on average half the missiles launched would fall within a few yards of their targets .
 At this stage, however, it is not clear that their technology will actually work reliably . The technology is not yet clear that it will work reliably.
 The United States Air Force announced it planned to purchase 3,400 air-launched cruise missiles over the next seven years at a cost of $4,000 million in 1980 . The U.S. Air Force said in March 1980 the United States planned to spend $4 million on
 The airlaunched missiles are to be produced by Boeing, whereas Tomahawks are a General Dynamics product . These are different cruise missiles from the ones coming to Europe .
 Boeing’s product will be carried, twenty at a time, on B 52 bombers, while Tomahawks will be mounted in fours on trucks . Boeing's product will also be carried on B-52 bombers .
 Each truck with its four Tomahawks will be a small target, but the area in which they deploy will be one big target . The area where they deploy is also a big target for the U.S.
 These missiles, in Britain as elsewhere in Europe, will be completely under U.S. control . The missiles will be in the hands of the United States, the U.K. says .
 At the time the decision was announced, and in all government statements and most press discussion since, the new missiles represent no more than a response to a new threat from the USSR . Without them NATO is virtually defenceless .
 In military policy and in the arguments used to legitimate major decisions, distortions, half-truths and downright lies are common currency . In this case, distortions of half truth and half truth are common in military policy .
 NAT O’s December 1979 decision was made by NAT O in December 1979 . But in the period just before and since, new standards have been set .
 Europe remains the main site of the military confrontation between the U.S. and the USSR and their respective allies in NAT Oand the Warsaw Pact . Europe is the main focus of the confrontation between Russia and the USA .
 Detente in Europe removed some of the main bones of regional contention, but military confrontation continued through the 1970s . Military confrontation continued and escalated through the 1980s .
 European members of NATO now mount armed forces employing 2,779,000 personnel in uniform . The USA has 276,700 military personnel in Europe III plus the sailors in its Mediterranean Sixth Fleet . Canada chips in with 3,000 soldiers, while the U.S. is the second largest
 Non-Soviet members of the Warsaw Pact have 1,105,000 people in uniform . The USSR has 618,000 soldiers in the countries of East Europe, plus airmen and ground crew at airfields . The Soviet Union has 1,100,000 troops in uniform, plus
 This all adds up to well over 5,000,000 people in the regular armed forces of the two alliances in Europe and the seas around it . The two NATO alliances are based in the Middle East and Russia .
 The numbers of people serving in the military forces in Europe do not tell the whole story . But the numbers of those serving in Europe's military forces are not telling the full story .
 Of these, about 7,500 are deployed by NATO, while around 3,500 by the Warsaw Pact . Of these NATO troops, about 3,000 are deployed to the West . About 7,000 NATO troops are deployed around the world .
 The exact figures on either side are not publicly available . Estimates for Warsaw Pact nuclear warheads for use in Europe have ranged from 1,750 to 5,000 . Warsaw Pact warheads are estimated to have been used in Europe .
 NATO's tactical or theatre nuclear warheads, were vastly outnumbered by the Warsaw Pact’s . NATO's nuclear warheads were vastly outnumber those of Warsaw Pact's . These figures may surprise readers who had been led to believe that NATO's . tactical or . theatre nuclear . warheads, however
 The figures are taken from impeccably militaristic Western sources . They are taken by one means or another from U.S. intelligence, like most .
 Many NATO's TNWs are mounted on relatively short-range weapon systems . Many of NATO’s TNW systems are mounted in relatively short range weapons systems .
 The picture is rather different from the overwhelming superiority the Warsaw Pact is usually claimed to have . Even here we shall find that the picture is different . The Warsaw Pact was often claimed to be one of the strongest in the world .
 Some further points should be made about these misleading presentations . But before looking a little closer at the weapons and the numbers, some further points were made about the misleading presentation .
 In the mid-1950s NATO took the decisions which built the TN W arsenal up to its present size . NATO's decision to expand the arsenal in the 1950s led to the creation of the new arsenal .
 NATO has always had numerical superiority over the Warsaw Pact in this respect . Not only did NATO deploy TNW in Europe first, but it also had a large numerical superiority .
 NAT O’s emphasis on relatively shortrange weapons systems is due to its own preferences and decisions . At any time since the mid-1950s, NAT O had the technology and capability to deploy long-range missiles for TNW .
 The USSR has had longrange nuclear missiles targeted on Western Europe since the early 1960s . It has done so, not because there is a qualitatively new threat from the USSR in the form of the SS 20 .
 NATO has come to different views about how it wants to prepare for nuclear war in Europe . Decade ago, NATO decided not to use nuclear weapons in Europe as a nuclear weapon . The decision was taken in December 1979 .
 NATO was not forced into the decision by the Warsaw Pact; it moved into it of its own volition . NATO was forced into decision by Warsaw Pact, not forced by Warsaw pact . NATO moved into decision to join NATO in the Cold War, NATO says .
 NATO cannot deny that it is NATO rather than the Warsaw Pact which has given this particular aspect of the arms race its latest new twist . NATO spokesmen and government ministers are right that the new missiles represent an important new capability for NATO .
 The comparable TN W on the Warsaw Pact side are today much the same as they have been for many years, but rather more modern . The comparable Warsaw Pact sides are much more modern than they were in the past .
 NATO's decision bears a particular burden of responsibility for the dangers we now face . NATO is dealing not with more modern versions of the same weapons, but with a totally new capability, the author says .
 The term ‘modernization’ used to describe the decision is thoroughly inappropriate . This also means that the term 'modernization' used to . describe the . decision is completely inappropriate .
 It is a gentle word which implies nothing more than routine procedure in the arms race, not something which is qualitatively new . The arms race is a routine procedure, not a new thing, it is said .
 It is almost totally aUS programme which the other NAT Ostates have accepted . It is a US programme which has been accepted by all of the world .
 It has included efforts to introduce ‘mini-nukes’ (referred to by Alva Myrdal in her contribution to this book) and the neutron bomb .
 In both cases, the basic theme was that the greater precision of the weapons permitted realistic options to be developed for fighting a nuclear war in Europe .
 Other aspects of the programme include the ‘hardening’ of airfields and other military facilities . The development of communication systems which would not be blacked out by nuclear explosions .
 The accuracy of the cruise missiles is the counterpart of the supposed precision of mini-nukes and the neutron bomb . The accuracy is the equivalent of the accuracy of mini nukes and neutron bombs, according to experts .
 Unless the Warsaw Pact decides to join in the rules of this macabre game, none of it will do anything to reduce the destructiveness of nuclear war . The Warsaw Pact was supposed to be the main problem for NATO in planning to fight a nuclear war, which was meant to be NATO
 NATO war planning amounts to preparing to defend Europe by blowing it up, NATO says . As it has done for at least twenty-five years, NATO has done this for decades . NATO has been preparing to prepare for war by blowing up Europe, he says .
 The main difference today is that the planning appears to be more enthusiastic . The planning is more enthusiastic than ever before, according to the mayor .
 The picture is further confused because both blocs possess ‘dual capable’ systems — systems capable of delivering either nuclear or non-nuclear munitions . Both blocs have 'dual capabilities' systems that can deliver either non or nuclear munitions .
 I am using estimates from the International Institute for Strategic Studies of how many of the total number of systems available would actually be used to carry nuclear weapons .
 SS 4 and SS5 missiles were first seen publicly in 1961 and 1964 respectively . SS 4 has a range of about 1,200 miles, while the SS 5’s is about 2,300 miles . Both carry single one-megaton warheads .
 Unlike the older missiles it is mobile on the ground and carries three warheads, each independently targeted, over a range of between 3,000 and 4,000 miles . Unlike the old missiles, the missile is mobile and can be carried by mobile on ground .
 We might estimate that another 40 SS 20s may have been produced by October 1980, of which perhaps 25 would be targeted against Western Europe, raising this figure to 85 . We might also estimate that perhaps 25 of these may have targeted Western Europe .
 SS 20 would be augmenting rather than replacing the SS 4s and SSs5s . NATO thought in NATO that, since the lead-up to NATO's decision to deploy new American missiles to Europe, the USSR has stopped phasing out older missiles .
 Since early 1975 the USSR has also deployed a supersonic bomber, Backfire, with a range above 3,000 miles . Backfire was also deployed by the USSR in 1975 .
 These aircraft are based not only in the USSR but also, in varying numbers, in every other Warsaw Pact country . The planes are based in various countries, including the USSR and the USSR .
 These have a range less than 40 miles, and are capable of having nuclear warheads . They are deployed in all the Warsaw Pact countries .
 NATO does have long-range submarine-launched missiles, which are usually forgotten when the time comes round to moan about Warsaw Pact superiority and convince us we need the new missiles . NATO has long range submarine missiles, but they are usually conveniently forgotten .
 It has a little less than 1,000 bombers with a range of 3,000 miles . The U.S. Air Force has a total of 1,500 bombers with ranges of between 1,200 and 3,500 miles .
 Among several types included are British Vulcans, now rather aged, and the American F r-11s .
 Britain is introducing Tornado multi-role aircraft into its forces . Some will be used to replace Vulcans and some will be replaced by new aircraft .
 The way NATO and the Warsaw Pact military strengths are compared by Western commentators is extremely misleading, very often incompetent and occasionally downright dishonest . The way in which the military strengths of NATO and Warsaw Pact are compared is often misleading, dishonest .
 NATO says it has more forces in the region than any other NATO member state . NATO has more than 1,000 troops in Afghanistan, more than 20 per cent of the total .
 NATO's overall numerical superiority in TNW is approximately 7,500 to 3,500 . NATO has a numerical superiority to NATO's forces in the U.S. I have already pointed out that NATO's numerical superiority is about 7,000-3,500.
 NATO strategists have broken the total down into different categories in order to reveal the Warsaw Pact superiority in land-based missiles with ranges over 1,000 miles . Tomahawk and Pershing II are presented as a defensive response .
 If one took all missiles and aircraft able to deliver TNW over ranges above 1,000 miles, the picture is a little different . IISS estimates of how many missiles would carry TNW and how many would be serviceable at the right time .
 NATO has numerical superiority, not a large one, in precisely that category . Tomahawk cruise missiles and Pershing IIs will fit into that category into which Tomahawks cruise missiles will fit . That is, NATO has a numerical superiority .
 This is a far cry from the crippling NATO inferiority we hear bemoaned so frequently and furiously . This is far from NATO's crippling inferiority to the U.S.
 The ratio of about 1-3 or 1-1 to 1 is not large, but the lower ratio that includes the French on NATO side is within the margin of error for estimates of this kind . But the ratio is about 1 to 1 .
 I should repeat that this is really an interesting exercise rather than a genuine comparison of military strength . I should again say this is a 'interesting exercise' rather than an exercise .
 I think I shall not reveal yet yet yet the way in which I will play that particular numbers game if and when the time comes. I think it will not be revealed yet yet, but I'll play a numbers game .
 All this fooling around is interesting, necessary given the way in which government justifications for the new NATO missiles are presented, says Peter Bergen .
 First, these weapons represent an enormous amount of destructive power and the potential for many millions of deaths within the first few hours of a nuclear war in Europe, with many millions more of horrible casualties . Second, the basic structures of society apart from the authority of the central state will totally collapse
 The appeal for European nuclear disarmament launched in April 1980 is directed against these weapons, against that war, and against that superpower dominance . The appeal was launched against the weapons in 1980 .
 The idea and the campaign for it are discussed in more detail in other contributions to this book . The idea for it is discussed in other parts of the book .
 When the problem is closely studied, N AT O’s inferiority in non-nuclear forces is extraordinarily elusive . The point about the first objection is that, when the . problem is . closely studied . The problem is that when . studied, . NAT O's inferiority
 In the 1960s and again in the 1970s, the U.S. Department of Defense conducted analyses of both sides’ non-nuclear forces . It showed that Warsaw Pact superiorities in some categories were more than offset by NATO advantages in other categories it thought were more important .
 These studies never received the kind of coverage from either official spokespeople or the press which is given to the more common reports of Warsaw Pact superiority . Naturally, these studies did not receive the same coverage as those of the Warsaw Pact .
 Warsaw Pact’s military build-up through the 1970s was at least matched by NATO's own . IISS estimates need to be treated with a great deal of care, says IISS .
 NATO has expressed its anxieties about the much larger number of tanks held by the Warsaw Pact . NATO has been anxious for years about the presence of Warsaw Pact tanks . NATO is concerned about the size of the tanks held in the Soviet Union .
 NATO’s extremely accurate anti-tank weapons are accurate weapons, NATO says . NATO also forgot to mention NATO's extremely accurate weapons . NATO says it has no plans to use the weapons against the Taliban .
 NATO had 193,000 antitank guided missiles by late 1978, excluding short-range types carried and fired by individual soldiers . By late 1978 NATO had more than 200,000 anti-tank missiles .
 This represented an increase of one third over its inventory two years previously . This represented a one third increase over the previous two years .
 By early 1979 there were over 17,000 ground-based launchers for these missiles, with yet more on helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft . The missiles were launched by the U.S. in the early 1980s .
 The age and quality of Warsaw Pact tanks are not usually mentioned either . The age of the tanks is also not mentioned in the history of the Warsaw Pact .
 The Soviet tanks produced in the 1960s are almost universally agreed to be of lower quality than the tanks NATO deploys . These constitute the bulk of Soviet tank forces in Europe .
 Britain, USA and West Germany are now in the process of developing and producing new types of tanks . The newer Soviet tanks probably are superior in some respects to NATO’s current tanks .
 NATO took a deliberate decision at the start of the 1970s not to match the Warsaw Pact tank for tank . NATO also has a policy of going for weapon systems of higher quality, which reveals further dishonesty .
 NATO may be wrong to have decided not to match its adversary tank for tank . NATO may not have decided to match the Russian tank with the Russian one .
 The current situation is always incompletely described by the British government and several others . The point is that the current situation, usually presented as the result of the USSR’s unilateral military build-up, is actually the result also of a series of specific and deliberate decisions by NATO .
 If NATO and Warsaw Pact forces are examined in this kind of detail across the board, two main conclusions emerge . NATO forces are seen as a threat to Russia and the United States .
 As far as it can be quantified there is a rough balance of forces in Europe, neither side has an important advantage overall . Neither side has a major advantage overall, but neither does .
 Even without nuclear weapons, these forces would be immensely destructive of each other and everything around them if war came . Second, they would be extremely destructive if war broke out, even without weapons, they said .
 Neither conclusion forms the basis for objecting to European nuclear disarmament on the basis of a NATO inferiority in nonnuclear forces . Neither conclusion should be based on the fact that NATO has inferior forces .
 I think it is essentially correct to say that European nuclear disarmament would weaken NATO’s unity . In fact, there is much to be said for this objection, but there is a lot to say for this .
 In the Warsaw Pact it would have a similar effect, though perhaps weaker in the short term . In the long-term, it would be weaker in short term, but perhaps weaker than the short-term .
 This objection provides an important insight into the role of nuclear weapons in the current constitution of NATO and into the type of unity we are talking about. This objection actually provides an interesting insight into NATO's role in nuclear weapons . The objection to NATO's nuclear weapons is a key part of the
 They provide strategic and thereby political leadership over the West European NATO states . They provide the USA with important strategic and therefore political leadership . The U.S. has a strong presence in Europe's NATO allies, writes Peter Bergen .
 American leadership is sharply challenged in other arenas that one might expect it to strengthen its strategic leadership in NATO . The most obvious way of doing this would probably be to plan to deploy more U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe .
 NATO Nuclear Planning Group is supposed to involve the rest of NATO in this aspect of strategic planning . Meeting of NATO's nuclear planning group is largely taken up by American lectures .
 U.S. unity in this context means acceptance of United States leadership . Unity means acceptance in the United States, President Obama says .
 U.S. plans for nuclear war in Europe, for fighting a limited nuclear war, limited in the sense that the USA’s own territory is not directly involved . And that brings with it acceptance of United States plans for a limited nuke war, says author .
 Whether the USSR would permit war to remain limited in this sense is very dubious, but beside the point . The USSR would allow war to be limited in a limited way, but that's beside the issue .
 NATO unity means agreeing to be an expendable American asset, a forward line of defence, a battlefield for the two superpowers . The issue is of overriding importance for West Europeans is that NATO unity .
 The movement for European nuclear disarmament thus gets to the heart of the matter . The movement is called for the end of European nuclear weapons .
 It could create the space for developing new and safer ways of ensuring some degree of security in a dangerous world . Precisely because it does challenge NATO’s unity it could create a space for new ways .
 It is the confrontation between the USA and the USSR which is leading us towards war, says Vladimir Putin . Putin says confrontation between Russia and the U.S. will lead to war .
 European nuclear disarmament offers a possibility for Europe to disengage from that confrontation with the superpowers . Europe can challenge the right to have the power over our fate that they now do, and eventually to eliminate that power .
 European nuclear disarmament threatens U.S. and Soviet hegemony . European nuclear weapons could be used to counter American and Soviet dominance .
 It demands seeing a challenge to NATO unity as positive as positive . It therefore demands the rethinking of some of the basic and most cherished precepts in both NATO and the Warsaw Pact .
 NATO would have us believe are the basic ‘facts of life’ of international politics . It thus involves a head-on collision with what NATO would say are the facts of life . The U.S. should not be allowed to engage in any of NATO's 'facts of
 Unless we undertake that task, we are all too likely to have those ‘facts of life’ draw us over the brink into nuclear war .
 These figures are taken from The Military Balance 1979-1980 (International Institute for Strategic Studies, London, 1979), with the exception of the figure for Soviet troops in Europe, which was not given .
 USSR unilaterally withdrawn 20,000 troops from the German Democratic Republic by the USSR since . I therefore took the figure given in the previous year’s edition and subtracted from it .
 This issue is discussed in more detail in my The Defence of the Realm in the 1980s , Chapter 4. This issue was discussed in a further chapter of The Defence Of the Realm .
 Guardian, International Herald Tribune, 15 October 1979; International . Herald Tribune . International Herald . Tribune . Guardian . Guardian, 15 Oct. 1979 .
 These issues are those in the following paragraph are discussed in detail in Chapter 4 of The Defence of the Realm in the 1980s . These issues were discussed in . detail in . Chapter 4 in The Defence . of the . Realm in . The . 1980s.
 They mount the two largest military efforts and between them account for one half of the massive resources which the world devotes to arms and armed forces . Between them, they mount one of the biggest military efforts in the world .
 There are, it is true, considerable differences between the military forces of the Soviet Union and the United States, but these are insignificant when compared with the differences between them and the forces of other states . The U.S. military forces are the most powerful in the world .
 From the armed forces it maintains and weapons it produces, it is clear that the Soviet military effort is large . From the military effort, it's clear that it is a large effort .
 The Soviet government publishes a figure for the defence budget each year . But this is of little help in estimating the military burden because it is not clear what the budget covers .
 Observers outside the Soviet Union agree that the Soviet armed forces could not be paid for by the official defence budget without the help of very large hidden subsidies .
 This article was prepared for the Demilitarization Working Group of the World Order Models Project . It is published by the World War Order Model Project .
 A military effort of this scale necessarily has a far-reaching impact on the Soviet economy . The Soviet military effort is expected to have a major impact on Russia's economy .
 An extensive network of military research and development establishments is required to develop armaments, while a major sector of industry is needed to produce them in quantity . The country needs to develop its own armaments .
 The Soviet Union has amassed military power roughly comparable to that of the United States . But its Gross National Product is only about half as large as the U.S. military .
 A higher rate of extraction of resources has been necessary, with consequences which will be examined below . Consequently a higher rate is necessary to extract resources from the region .
 Institutional arrangements exist to draft a substantial proportion of each generation of young men into the armed forces .
 A considerable effort is made to ensure that reserves are available for mobilization if necessary . The U.S. government is making an effort to ensure reserves are ready for mobilization .
 Voluntary military societies provide moral support for the armed forces and military training for the population at large . The society provides moral support and training for all of the population .
 Secondary schoo] children are given pre-induction military training from the age of 15 . Secondary school students are given military training as a result of their education .
 In recent years there has been a growing campaign of militarypatriotic education . The campaign tries to insti] in the population the values of patriotism .
 Marxist thought has traditionally been marked by a strong antipathy to militarism . Marxist thought traditionally sees war and armies as the product of the world capitalist system .
 Before 1917 socialists agreed that standing armies were instruments of aggression abroad and repression at home . The proper form of military organization for a socialist state would be the citizen army . Citizens would not degenerate into a military caste or create military realm separate from other areas of social life .
 Lenin never succumbed to the worship of things military or tried to enhance his own authority by the paraphernalia of military command . Lenin had to lead the young Soviet republic against the White armies and foreign intervention .
 This claim is not usually argued at length, and is based on a general statement about the nature of socialism rather than on a specific analysis of the Soviet system . The claim is usually made in general, but not at length .
 In this view Soviet military policy is purely a response to external stimuli . Soviet military policies are based on external stimuli, according to the author .
 The settlement of major political disputes in Europe in the early 1970S was not accompanied by any significant moves towards demilitarization . This is why the settlement was not followed by significant demilitaristization, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: The settlement in the 1970s was not
 This argument points not to specific features of socialism or Russian history, but to characteristics which the Soviet Union shares with the U.S. It points to characteristics of socialism and Russian history .
 The Soviet Union has been subjected to this kind of critical analysis primarily since its emergency as a fullyfledged military superpower . The former Soviet Union was a major military superpower in the 1980s, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 The attainment of strategic parity with the United States has made the Soviet Union seem to share full responsibility for the continuing arms race . U.S. has achieved strategic parity, making it seem like it has made it seem that it is responsible for the arms race.
 Soviet arms policies in the 1970s have proved profoundly disappointing to those who hoped that the SALT I agreements would lead to a slackening of the arms race .
 The problem of militarization is, however, wider than that of disarmament . The problem is not only militarization, but it's also wider than disarmament, experts say . The U.S. has been in touch with the U.N. since 2001 .
 The similarity that exists between socialism and the war system is obvious, says Julian Zelizer . The war system has similarities to socialism and war system, he says .
 The second factor is the inheritance by the Soviet state of the military-political tradition of Tsarism . The Russian state is the inheritor of the tradition of the Russian empire .
 Odom sees the militarization of Soviet society as primarily a product of Russian history and the Soviet system . Odom: "Militarization is primarily a result of Russian . history and Soviet system"
 There are many who see the militarization of Soviet society as a consequence of both external and internal factors and explain it in terms of the Cold War rather than the Russian past .
 Many of the distortions of Soviet socialism could be explained in terms of the international pressure under which socialist construction had to be carried out in the Soviet Union . In other words, many of the distortion of socialism can be explained .
 It was a critical part of our advocacy that with each effective movement of detente there would follow a relaxation in military and bureaucratic pressures within the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The United States and Soviet Union has been at odds for decades .
 The relaxation of Cold War tensions was a precondition for further destalinization . The relaxation was a pre-condition for resuming socialist and democratic advances, East or West .
 Thompson: Detente with the West allied with sharper repression of dissidents at home . Thompson went on to ask whether Soviet policy in the early 1970s invalidated this argument . Thompson: It's not clear whether detente with West and repression at home were more important .
 Some see the arms race and detente coexisting for a long time . Others see detente falling victim to tensions generated by the military-industrial complexes .
 This is not a comprehensive, much less an exhaustive, survey of the approaches that have been taken in examining the obstacles to disarmament and demilitarization in the Soviet Union . It is not an exhaustive look at the approaches taken in looking at disarmament .
 It does provide some helpful pointers to the relationships that have to be analysed . But it also provides some useful pointers to how to analyse relationships .
 The first of these is the interaction of internal and external factors, says Dr. John Defterios . He says the first of this is an interaction between the two worlds .
 Socialist construction cannot be understood without reference to the international context in which the Bolsheviks undertook the transformation of Russian society . The particular form which socialist construction has taken in the Soviet Union can't be understood .
 The militarization of Soviet society has to be examined in the light of international, as well as of domestic, relationships . Consequently the militarization has been examined in light of the international and domestic aspects of the Soviet society .
 Some attempt must be made to discuss what is specific to militarism in the Soviet Union, and what it shares with militarism elsewhere . The Soviet Union's militarism is not only specific to Russia, but it is also specific to other nations .
 Different historical perspectives — some rooted in the Russian Empire, some in the Cold War — have been adopted . This raises interesting questions about the way patterns of political relationships are reproduced in a given society .
 There is the danger that the Russian tradition will be presented as monolithic, and that militarism will be seen as a genetic inheritance, transmitted from one generation (or even one social formation) to the next . Although it is important to provide a historical perspective, there is also the danger
 This would be disheartening in its suggestion that no change is possible, and also wrong . It would be wrong to say no change could be possible, but also wrong. This would suggest that no changes are possible.
 The Russian political tradition is diverse, embracing not only militarism, but also the anti-militarism of Tolstoy and Kropotkin . Russia's political tradition embraces both militarism and anti-militaryism .
 The Soviet tradition too contains various strands, and the diversity is very wide if the views of contemporary dissidents are taken into account . The diversity of the Soviet tradition is also wide, says the historian .
 It would be a mistake to begin this analysis by portraying this militarization as inevitable or allembracing . Consequently it would be wrong to portray this as inevitable .
 The history of the Soviet state is intimately bound up with war and the preparation for war . The Soviet state has a history of preparing for war and preparing for it, says historian .
 Armed force has established the territorial limits of the state and secured internal rule, says historian . War and preparation for it have profoundly affected the internal structure of the country, he says .
 Russia's rivalry with other, economically more advanced, states has provided a major stimulus to economic and political change . It is one of the striking features of the history of Tsarist Russia and the Soviet Union that rivalry with . other . more advanced states .
 This was true of Peter the Great’s reforms, and of the reforms which followed the Crimean and Russo-Japanese wars . It was a major factor in Soviet industrialization too. This was the case in the Soviet Union .
 One consequence of this pattern has been the role of the state as the dominant agency of change . Social and economic relationships were altered with the aim of mobilizing resources to increase the state's power .
 When the Bolsheviks seized power they faced the problem of consolidating their rule in the face of enemies at home and abroad . The Bolsheviks were faced with the problem .
 The early experience of the young Soviet state — civil war, foreign intervention and internal unrest — had a profound impact on Bolshevik ideas about military organization . The Soviet state was formed from the ashes of the Soviet Union .
 The early vision of militia-type forces did not survive the realization that the Bolsheviks faced considerable opposition from inside Soviet society and from foreign powers .
 The military reform of 1924-5 created a mixed system, with the main emphasis on standing forces . The territorial-militia element was retained for economic reasons .
 Trotsky’s project of combining labour with military training was not implemented . Trotsky's project was never implemented . The project was based on combining labour and military training .
 By the late 1920s the Red Army did have features which distinguished it from the armies of bourgeois states . However, it was far from embodying the earlier socialist ideas of military organization .
 With the failure of revolution in Europe, the Soviet Union was left largely isolated in a hostile world . The Soviet Union became isolated in the world after the fall of communism in 1968 .
 The policy of industrialization which was embarked on towards the end of the decade was the practical offspring of this marriage . The policy was the result of the marriage between industrialization and industrialization .
 Stalin justified the intensity of the policy by referring to the need to overcome Russia’s backwardness and thus prevent other powers from beating her . In 1931 Stalin, now the dominant leader, had set his own brutal stamp on the industrialization drive .
 If you do not want this you must put an end to its backwardness in the shortest possible time and develop genuine Bolshevik tempo in building up Socialist system of economy .
 Industrialization was made possible by a massive extraction of resources from the population and their investment in heavy industry . Industrialization is made possible through a massive extract of resources .
 The defence sector was given high priority in the allocation of investment funds, scarce materials, able managers and skilled workers . Defence sector was prioritised in allocation of the allocation .
 During the 1930s a powerful defence industry was created which produced large quantities of weapons, some of which were of high quality . Some of these weapons were of the highest quality .
 The Soviet Union rejected the idea of building a small, highly mechanized army . It sought instead to marry mass and technology to create a mass army equipped with the best possible armaments . Soviet Union had rejected idea, which was popular in the West at the time .
 The territorial-militia element of the armed forces was gradually abandoned by the Soviet Union . The territorial force was gradually gradually abandoned .
 Winter War of 1939-40 with Finland exposed serious weaknesses in the Red Army, some of which resulted from the great purge which Stalin had inflicted on Soviet society in the late 1930s . Yet for all that had been done, the Winter War was done .
 The German invasion of 22 June 1941 took Stalin by surprise, and found the Red Army in a state of unreadiness . The Red Army was unprepared for the German invasion .
 The opening months of the war proved disastrous, with the German forces advancing to the outskirts of Moscow . German forces captured the city of Moscow in 1941 .
 Only by an enormous effort over the next four years was the Soviet Union able to halt the German advance . The Soviet Union was able to turn the tide of war and push the German armies back to Berlin . Only by a huge effort over four years, the Soviets were able to stop the
 The degree of industrial mobilization was much greater in the Soviet Union than in the other belligerent states . Soviet losses of people and material goods were immense . The Soviet Union suffered much greater losses than any other major belligerent state .
 The Soviet name for the war with Germany –~ the Great Patriotic War – symbolizes the appeal which Stalin made to the Soviet people’s patriotism . The name is the name of the war, which was called the "Great Patriotic" War .
 Victory brought the Soviet Union gains of territory and influence which had seemed inconceivable in the early months of the war .
 Victory also brought political conflicts with the war-time allies . It soon found their expression in intense military rivalry . It centred on the development of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery .
 After Stalin’s death the implications of this ‘military-technical revolution’ became more pressing . The implications of the 'military-technological revolution' were more pressing after Stalin's death .
 The existence of nuclear weapons in growing stockpiles raised fundamental questions about the relationship of war to policy, and about the appropriate structure for armed forces . Questions have dominated Soviet military policy ever since .
 Khrushchev now put greater stress on peaceful coexistence between East and West, and set in motion major changes in military doctrine and military institutions . Khrushvic now put stress on peace between the two countries .
 In the late 1g50s and early 1960s he tried to devise a new military policy, based on nuclear-armed missiles, that would be militarily and diplomatically effective, while freeing resources for civilian purposes . In the 1960s and 1960s, he was trying to devise
 He even floated the idea of restoring the territorial-militia element in the armed forces . The territorial-military element is a key component of the military .
 Khrushchev’s efforts were defeated by internal opposition . But internal opposition was strengthened by a succession of international crises, including the U 2 incident and the Berlin crisis .
 His successors devoted considerable attention to the all-round strengthening of Soviet military power . His successors have devoted considerable . attention .
 A major increase in strategic forces has brought parity with the U.S. with the United States . The U.N. has increased the number of strategic forces in the region .
 Arms transfers to third world countries have grown substantially in this period . Arms transfers have grown significantly in the past decade . Arms transfer to third-world countries has grown substantially .
 Soviet policy has been subject to many rash and alarmist interpretations in the West . Evidence does point to a steady increase in Soviet military power since the early 1g60s .
 In the first ten years after the end of the Second World War a clear bipolar structure emerged in world politics, with the U.S. and the Soviet Union as the dominant powers . The United States and Soviet Union were dominant powers in the first decade after the war .
 Since that time new forces have emerged to transform the international system . Since then, the world has seen a dramatic change in its approach to international relations .
 The creation of the third world as a political force was helped by the existence of the Soviet bloc . The Soviet bloc provided a counterweight to Western power .
 Fissiparous tendencies, both East and West, have further complicated international politics . The world's most powerful nations are divided by their political tendencies .
 By the late 1960s Japan and the EEC had become major centres of economic power . The rivalry between the Soviet Union and China had assumed military form .
 From the Soviet point of view the international environment had become more complex, with the ever-present danger that the various centres of power would combine in opposition to it . The Soviet government was worried about the threat posed posed by the growing threat of the Soviet Union .
 Soviet leaders wanted to offset growing Soviet military power in the 1970s . In turn, this countervailing power has provided the Soviet leaders with further reasons for military forces . The Soviet leaders have also sought to offset the growing power of the West .
 The Soviet Union now possesses large armed forces, an advanced defence industry and an extensive military R and D network . It now possesses a large defence industry .
 The law of comparative advantage seems to operate in Soviet external policies, giving a major role to the military instrument . As a consequence, the law of competitiveness applies in Soviet policies .
 The Soviet Union conducts its relationship with the NATO powers from a position of military strength but economic weakness . The U.S. conducts its central relationship with NATO powers with economic weakness, analysts say .
 Soviet relations with China have now acquired an important military dimension . The build-up of forces along the Chinese frontier is now a major factor in relations .
 In the third world the Soviet Union has used arms transfers and military advisers as a major instrument of diplomacy . The Soviet Union used arms transfer and military advice as a key diplomatic tool .
 The Soviet concept of the ‘correlation of forces’, in terms of which international politics is analysed, does not place primary emphasis on military force . Military power has become a basic instrument of Soviet external policy, according to the author .
 It is not surprising that the present generation of Soviet leaders should see military power as the main guarantee of Soviet security and of the Soviet position in the world . It's not surprising . The present generation should see power as a guarantee of security .
 Brezhnev and Ustinov are only the most prominent members of this generation to have had a direct part in managing the development and production of arms . The men now at the top levels of leadership came to positions of some power in the late 1930s .
 Victory in the war with Germany, the attainment of strategic parity with the U.S. and the long period at peace since 1945 — these are regarded by this generation as among its greatest achievements .
 When one considers the course of Soviet history from 1917 to 1945, it is No surprise that this should be so. No surprise, this should not be so .
 It should be clear from this brief outline how important war and the preparation for war have been in the formation of the Soviet state . The Soviet state was formed in the wake of the Second World War in 1968 .
 This is not to say that the course of Soviet development has been determined by forces outside the Soviet Union, or that every event in Soviet history is to be explained in terms of external conditions . The Soviet Union has been ruled out of Russia by the West .
 The rise of Stalin and his system of rule cannot be explained without reference to social, economic and political conditions in the Soviet Union . Stalin's rise of Soviet Union can be explained by social, political and economic conditions in Soviet Russia .
 Not everything in the Stalinist period can be seen as a response to external threats, says historian . Not everything is seen as an answer to outside threats, he says .
 The great purge of 1936-8 was justified in this way, but the justification was patently false . The purge greatly weakened the Red Amy. The purge was justified, but it was not, and the purge was false .
 The rate of extraction was very high, leaving the mass of the population with minimal living standards . Not even those even those of the people .
 Victory in the war seemed to show that, whatever the ‘mistakes’ of Stalin’s policies in the immediate prewar years, the general emphasis on industrialization had been correct . The general emphasis was correct, says Stalin .
 High rate of extraction continued as industry was reconstructed and military rivalry with the West pursued . After the war the high rate of extracting continued .
 Since Stalin’s death important changes have taken place which have a bearing on the questions of disarmament and demilitarization, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: Since Stalin's death ‘important changes’ have been made in Russia .
 The first is that the rate of economic growth has slowed considerably, provoking intensive debate about economic reform . The second is that economic growth is slowing, prompting intensive debate .
 It has been widely argued inside and outside the Soviet Union that the system of economic planning and administration was suited to the industrialization drive . But it has now become a brake on industrial development and technological innovation .
 More and better goods and services are being delivered to the mass of the population, says David Cameron . This is through the provision of more and better services, and through appeals to nationalist sentiments .
 Third, as a result of the greater attention that has been paid to the living standards and welfare of the population, the priorities of resource allocation have become more complex than they were under Stalin .
 The enterprises that produce arms and equipment are controlled by a series of ministries which have responsibility for the different branches of the sector .
 Defence sector activities must be coordinated with those of the rest of the economy . The work of these ministries is in turn planned by the central planning agencies .
 There are special institutional arrangements in the defence sector designed to ensure that military production has priority claim on scarce resources .
 In this sense the defence sector is distinct from the rest of the economy . Defence sector is a key part of the defence industry, says David Cameron .
 Since the war some important changes have taken place in the defence sector . The UK has seen significant changes in defence industry since the war .
 It has expanded to include new branches of production, including nuclear weapons, rockets and electronics .
 Along with this expansion has come the creation of an extensive network of research and development establishments to provide the basis for innovations in weapons technologies .
 The establishments are controlled by the production ministries in the defence sector .
 Research institutes from outside the defence sector have also been drawn into military work .
 Military R and D is more effective than civilian R & D in the Soviet Union . Military D and D was more effective in Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 The defence sector is well suited to the development and production of follow-on systems (for example, of tanks) where no great shift of mission or technology is required . Defence sector is best suited to developing follow-ons where no shift of missions or technology required .
 The Soviet Union has also been able to organize large-scale innovation when political leaders have deemed it necessary . The R and D system is well suited to the concentration of resources on specific goals such as the development of the atomic bomb or the inter-continental ballistic missile .
 Evidence suggests that there is considerable stability in the defence sector and that this has a major influence on its mode of operation . In spite of the flexibility recommended by these principles, the available evidence suggests that this is very stable .
 Research institutes and design bureaux, where new weapons are created, are funded from the budget . Their finances do not seem to depend on orders for specific systems .
 A strong tendency to create ‘follow-on’ systems can be discerned . Consequently a strong tendency can be seen to create follow-on systems . The system is designed to be successful and successful .
 Stable production appears also to be a feature of the defence sector, with no major variation in output from year to year .
 Defence sector is marked by the continuity of its leading managers . Defence sector has a history of stability, stability and stability .
 Ustinov, the present Minister of Defence, became People’s Commissar of Armament in 1941 . Until his appointment to his present position in 1976 he played a major role in weapons development .
 P Slavskii, the Minister of Medium Machine-building (in charge of nuclear weapons development and production) has held that position since 1957 and has been involved in the nuclear weapons programme since 1946 . He has been in charge of the weapons programme for more than 60 years .
 The managers of the defence industry form a coherent group, with interlocking careers . They include managers of defence industry managers and managers of international companies .
 There is little evidence that they have acted together as a lobby. There is, however, little evidence .
 The one occasion they seem to have done so was in the period 1957 to 1965 when they took part in resistance to Khrushchev’s decentralization of the system of economic planning and management, with some success .
 In the post-Stalin period there have been intensive debates about the need to reform the system of economic planning and administration . In order to stimulate technological innovation, the system should be reformed .
 The present Soviet system of economic planning and management cannot be said to be entailed by the level of defence expenditure . The Soviet system cannot be compared to the current defence spending, writes David Cameron .
 This is not to deny, of course, that the managers who have been used to working the present system might be fearful of changes on the grounds that their position would be jeopardized .
 In any event the choice of market socialism has not been made in the Soviet Union . In any case the choice was made in any event .
 The Czechoslovak crisis of 1968 was a major setback for the Soviet advocates of far-reaching reform . Political developments in Czechoslovakia were widely seen as the consequence of economic reform .
 The problems of economic growth and technological progress have not vanished in the Soviet Union, however, and piecemeal reform has been under way . The Soviet Union is still struggling to cope with economic and technological problems .
 The trend of reform in the 1970s has been to take the defence sector as a model for the rest of the economy . The defence sector has been taken over by the British government in the past .
 This marks an attempt to use the defence sector as a model or dynamo of technological progress in the economy as a whole . Defence sector is a model for the future of the economy .
 This was clearly illustrated by an article in Literaturnaya Gazeta in 1972 and the correspondence it provoked . It provoked a flurry of correspondence between the two sides of the issue .
 Light industry fared worse than heavy industry, says author of the article . Heavy industry fared better than light industry, the author said .
 The best conditions are given to the so-called ‘leading’ branches, correspondents wrote .
 The most highly skilled cadres — workers, engineers or technicians — find jobs or try to find them where the pay is highest . So they are concentrated in the ‘leading’ branches of industry .
 The Soviet system of economic planning and administration has not been altered fundamentally since it was first established . The Soviet economic planning system has not changed fundamentally since its first establishment .
 It remains a relatively effective mechanism for extracting resources from the economy and directing them to the goals set by the political leaders . One of the most important of these goals has been the creation of military power .
 The defence sector occupies a key position in this system, not only in terms of central priorities, but also in the organization of industry and the attitudes of workers and managers .
 The debates about economic reform have resulted in partial and piecemeal changes, rather than in a fundamental transformation of the system, says Simon Tisdall . The debates have been led by some of the world's most powerful politicians .
 In terms of the militarization of the Soviet economy, this is an ambiguous development . The Soviet economy has been militarized in the past, but it's not clear what exactly happened .
 It testifies to a political concern about the performance of civilian industry . On the one hand, it highlights the special position and performance of the defence sector .
 The Armed Forces and the Rationales for Military Power . There is little evidence of opposition inside the Soviet Union to Soviet military policy .
 This contrasts with the Khrushchev period, when military outlays did provide a focus of political argument . The Soviet Union's military spending has never been a focus for political debate .
 Few voices have been raised against the military policy of the Soviet state . And in dissident samizdat literature, although sharp criticism has been made of many features of Soviet life, few voices were raised .
 Andrei Sakharov’s background in nuclear weapons development makes him in this instance a very special case . Almost the only exception is the warnings given the West of the growing military power of the Soviet Union . Sakharova's background in developing nuclear weapons has made him a very
 The situation is rather different from that in the United States, where militarism and racism formed the chief targets of protest in the 1960s and 1970s . Thus the situation is not the same in the U.S. as it is in Europe .
 The Soviet military effort is widely seen as legitimate and as pursuing legitimate goals . There are many reasons for this difference, but the chief one appears to be that inside the Soviet Union it is seen as a legitimate military effort .
 The burden of military expenditure is greater than in the NATO countries . This is in spite of the fact that there are many competing claims for the resources which are devoted to defence .
 The Soviet armed forces have seen very little combat since 1945 — certainly nothing to compare with the military role of the American, British and French forces . The Soviet military has seen little combat in the Soviet Union since 1945 .
 The Soviet claim that Soviet military strength is conducive to peace does not, therefore, fly directly in the face of reality . The claim is not true, however, as it is not the case for peace .
 This is one reason why there has been, in the Soviet view, no contradiction between the processes of political detente and the growth of Soviet military power . The Soviet view of detente is that it is not a contradiction between politics and power .
 Soviet military power is regarded as a crucial element in detente because it makes it impossible for the West to deal with the Soviet Union from a position of strength or to use its armed forces in an unfettered way throughout the world .
 Soviet forces have engaged in relatively little combat since 1945 . Military power is seen by Soviet leaders as contributing to their political purposes .
 The main object of that policy has been to prevent the West from conducting offensive actions against the Soviet Union and its allies . The West has been unable to conduct offensive actions — whether military or political — against Russia .
 Soviet military aid to third world countries is to be seen in the same context as Soviet aid to the same country . The Soviet state of support for third world nations is seen as a precedent .
 Since the 1g60s the Soviet Union has come to use its military power more frequently as a way of gaining influence and undermining Western power . The Soviet Union uses advisers and arms transfers to gain influence .
 The Soviet Union used military force in Hungary in 1956 and in Czechoslovakia in 1968 in order to maintain its dominant position in Eastern Europe . Hungary was invaded by the Soviet Union in 1956 to maintain dominance .
 The position is underpinned by the ever-present threat of military force, even though that threat is not voiced openly . That position is underlined by the threat of a military force .
 In the 1g60s the confrontation with China assumed a military form with the build-up of forces along the Chinese frontier . In the 1960s, China began building-up forces along its frontier .
 As Soviet military strength has grown, new roles have been found for it, particularly in the projection of power outside the Soviet frontiers . Moreover, as Soviet military power has grown .
 The intervention in Afghanistan illustrates the Soviet Union’s growing ability to use its military power in this way . It also illustrates the willingness to do so, and more important, it does so .
 In the late 1960s the Soviet union attained strategic parity with the United States . The Soviet union entered into negotiations to limit strategic arms with the U.S. In that basis negotiations were held in the Soviet Union .
 Accepting of the principle still leaves great scope for disagreement both within and between the negotiating states . Of course, it remains extremely difficult to say what constitutes parity or equality .
 The principle of parity provides a basis for negotiation between the Soviet Union and the U.S. Only because they have so many more nuclear weapons than other states . The other nuclear powers can be left largely out of account .
 The NonProliferation Treaty is a commitment to stop the spread of nuclear weapons . It's a commitment of a kind to stop spread of nukes, but not to stop them, it says .
 Negotiations between the superpowers on the basis of parity goes along with the attempt to prevent other states from attaining that status . The talks are aimed at preventing other superpowers from becoming superpowers .
 The Soviet Union and the U.S. are using arms control negotiations in this double-edged way . They are likely to stimulate other states to acquire nuclear weapons of their own . The United States and the Soviet Union are using this to encourage others to get nuclear weapons .
 Arms control negotiations on the basis of parity are by no means the foundation for a process of radical demilitarization . Consequently arms control negotiations will not be the foundation of radical disarmament .
 American thinking has laid particular emphasis on the ability, under all circumstances, to inflict widespread destruction on the enemy’s society . U.S. thinking has placed emphasis on inflicting widespread destruction .
 Soviet thinking, on the other hand, has been concerned to limit the damage to Soviet society in the event of nuclear war . Soviet thinking has been worried about limiting damage to society in event of a nuclear war.
 Soviet policy has been directed towards limiting the vulnerability of the Soviet Union to nuclear attack, and ensuring the viability of Soviet society in war-time . Even in a relationship of parity, Soviet policy aimed at limiting vulnerability of Soviet Union .
 Whether this can be achieved seems very doubtful, but it does appear to be the rationale behind important elements of Soviet military, military-economic and civil defence policies . It does have important implications for the militarization of Soviet society .
 Construction Troops carry out construction work for the armed forces and on high-priority civilian projects . Academic City near Novosibiirsk, for example, where the Siberian Division of the Academy of Sciences was built by them .
 The Railroad and Road Troops play an important part in building and maintaining the Soviet rail and road communications system . The Troops are part of the Soviet Union's mainstay in Russia .
 Three elements of the Soviet military system which are of greater interest from the point of view of the militarization of Soviet society . But there are three elements which are more important to look at in the view of a militarized society .
 DOSAAF (Dobrovol’noe obshchestvo sodeistviya armii, aviatsii i flotu — the Voluntary Society for Cooperation with the Army, Aviation and the Navy) and the system of military-patriotic education
 All are designed to strengthen the ability of the Soviet Union to defend itself . All have political functions beyond that goal, and all have political function beyond that .
 The effectiveness of the civil defence effort is very difficult to judge because it would depend so much on the way in which nuclear war was initiated . The effectiveness would depend on how the nuclear war started, says Dr. David Perry .
 It could not prevent widespread destruction, although it could reduce its scale . It could also reduce the damage caused by the earthquake .
 There is an extensive programme of education and training designed to enable the population to carry out civil defence measures should the need arise .
 DOSAAF has clubs and sports facilities and is organized at factories, farms, educational institutions and so on . DOSAAF is organized in factories, schools, factories and educational institutions .
 It seems clear that DOSAAF’s activities are of substantial help to the armed forces in providing recruits with skills which will be useful during military service, and also raising the physical and technical level of the Soviet population .
 DOSAAF is a non-military organization in the West . Much of what DOSAAF does is done in the U.S. The organization is based in the United States and Canada .
 It is nevertheless significant that in the Soviet Union it is the goals of military preparedness and defence capability that provide the justification and the driving force for this kind .
 Both civil defence and DOSAAF contribute to the Soviet Union’s ability to defend itself . They also contribute to a more diffuse process of military-patriotic education .
 Military-patriotic education is called upon to instil a readiness to perform military duty, responsibility for strengthening the defence capability of the country, respect for the Soviet armed forces, pride in the Motherland .
 Militarypatriotic education is carried out in the teaching process in secondary and higher educational establishments, in the system of political education, by means of propaganda in the press, on radio and television, and with the help of mass-political work .
 Of great significance for military-patriotic education is the mastery of basic military and military-technical skills which young people acquire in secondary schools, technical schools, higher educational establishments .
 The Great Patriotic War occupies a key position in the programme of militarypatriotic education as the source of examples and illustrations of the desired qualities .
 In this context, it can be seen as a response to the problems of legitimation that the Soviet state has faced in the post-Stalin period . The state of the Soviet Union has faced similar problems since the Soviet era .
 This military-patriotic education does not amount to a glorification of war and should therefore be distinguished from Fascist militarism . This is not the same as Fascism and should not be glorified war .
 It will help to sustain the Soviet military effort and the special position which the defence sector and the armed forces enjoy in Soviet society . In this way it will help .
 Since 1945 the post of Minister has, more often not, been held by a professional soldier . The present Minister, Ustinov, has spent most of his life in the defence industry .
 Special mechanisms of control exist in the armed forces . Main Political Administration is both an administration of the Ministry of Defence and a department of the Central Committee . The Central Committee is also a department for the Central Military Administration .
 The Soviet Union embodies the apparent paradox of a militarized social system in which the military, while an important political force, are not the dominant one . The military is a key part of the Soviet Union's social system .
 This is not to say, however, that the armed forces have played no role in the political crises of the post-Stalin period . The armed forces — or, more particularly, members of the High Command — have played little role in political crises .
 Military support was one factor among others, but probably not the decisive one . Military support is one factor, but it's not the only one .
 The spectre of Bonapartism was conjured up by Khrushchev as a major justification for Zhukov’s removal from office . Khrushov was forced to step down from the post in 1961 .
 To say this is not to minimize Stalin’s brutal treatment of the armed forces or to deny that Khrushchev often pursued policies that were to the distaste of the High Command . It's not to say this .
 The officer corps have been generally well served, especially in the allocation of resources to defence and in the opportunities for career advancement . Finally, the professional interests of the officer corps are well served .
 Since Stalin’s death in 1953, officers have been given greater freedom to discuss questions of military policy . Officers have also been given a greater voice in the policy-making process since Khrushchev's fall from power in 1964 .
 This has resulted from the general diffusion of power at the centre of the Soviet state . It has parallels in other areas of Soviet life where vigorous debates have been conducted about matters of policy .
 Brezhnev Politburo has placed great emphasis on ‘scientific’ policy-making and on expert and technically competent advice . The Breznevites have placed great . emphasis on 'scientific' policy making .
 Armed forces and defence industry occupy a special position in the armed forces and the defence industry . In this respect, it is important to ensure the security of the country .
 Armed forces enjoy wide prestige as the embodiment of national power and integrity . The armed forces have an extensive programme of militarypatriotic education . This is enhanced by the extensive programme .
 The Ministry of Defence and General Staff are institutions of undoubted competence, with a monopoly of expertise in military affairs . There are no civilian institutions able to challenge this expertise, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The high priority given to the defence sector remains embedded in the system of economic planning and administration . Defence is a key part of the economy's economic planning .
 Key aspects of military policy are shrouded in secrecy, and this limits criticism of the priority given to defence in resource allocation and of the way in which those resources are used .
 The final decisions on military policy rest with the Politburo, and with the Defence Council . The Defence Council comprises several leading members under Brezhnev’s chairmanship .
 All the evidence points to a set of shared assumptions among the leaders about military power and military expenditure . The evidence points out that the leaders share a shared assumptions about military spending .
 It is possible that this state of affairs will change in the post-Brezhnev leadership . It is also possible that the level of military effort will become a contentious issue as it was under Khrushchev .
 The institutional power of the armed forces and the defence industry might be important in determining the outcome of the argument . Then the institutional power in the military might be crucial in the argument, writes Andrew Hammond .
 It is true that there is a large military establishment and a large defence industry . But it is not the only military establishment in the world, it is the defence industry itself .
 Sometimes it suggests a degenerate pluralism in which the balanced interplay of interests has been undermined by links between the armed forces and industry . In this sense it seems not to be appropriate because it implies too great a degree of pluralism for the Soviet Union .
 Sometimes it is implied that the driving force of arms policies is the pursuit of profit by capitalist enterprises . This too would be inappropriate, and for this reason Garaudy has argued that the Soviet Union has a ‘bureaucratic-military complex’ — that is,
 The history of the Soviet Union is so bound up with military power that it seems wrong to speak of a separate militaryindustrial complex acting within the state . This is too sweeping a statement, but it does make the point .
 Whether or not the armed forces and the defence industry constitute a military-industrial complex in the Soviet Union matters less than whether or not it was a military industrial complex . The Soviet Union's armed forces exhibit many features that are identified as a characteristic of such a complex, the author says .
 Because of the way in which the Soviet economic system is organized it does exhibit these features in the same way, or to the same degree, as the American defence sector . But it does share them nevertheless .
 Competition is to be found in weapons development process between offensive and defensive systems, with new technology in one area stimulating innovation in another . For example, new technology will stimulate innovation in other areas of the military .
 The military R and D system shows considerable inertia in its operations, thus generating strong pressure for follow-on systems . Second, the military R. and D . system shows significant inertia in operations, so there is strong interest in follow-up systems .
 Third, the R and D system does not appear to have a strong innovative dynamic of its own. Third, it does not seem to be having a strong innovation dynamic .
 Fourth, the military R and D system is not especially conducive to the cross-fertilization of technologies to produce new weapons . This may happen as designers search for ways of meeting new requirements .
 The steadiness of Soviet arms policies may be accounted for, in part, by the planning to which weapons development and production are subject to .
 The Soviet military effort, created in the course of international rivalry, is now rooted in the structure of the Soviet state . The Soviet state is now the foundation for the military effort .
 This is not to say, of course, that the external stimuli have vanished . This includes external stimuli, such as the threat of terrorism and terrorism .
 It is clear that foreign actions do impinge on Soviet arms policies . This can be seen both in the histories of specific weapons systems and in the direction of overall policy .
 The advanced capitalist powers have set the pace in making major weapons innovations, and this has served to stimulate Soviet military technology . This has led to the development of Soviet weapons technology, according to experts .
 Military power rests not only on quality of military technology, but also on quantity and the way in which the troops are trained to use it . Of course, it must be borne in mind that military power rests on quality and quantity .
 The arms race has never been a question of one of these elements to the exclusion of the other . The arms competition between East and West consists of both qualitative and quantitative elements . The balance of the two may change, although the balance of these may change .
 Western military technology has spurred Soviet weapons development, but has often been justified in terms of superior Soviet numbers . Western technology has been used to develop Soviet weapons since the Cold War . Russia has been accused of using Western technology to develop its own weapons .
 It would be wrong to deny the effects of foreign actions on Soviet arms policies . The Soviet arms policy is based on the fact that foreign actions have affected arms policy .
 It would be equally mistaken to see Soviet policy as merely a reaction to Western actions . But it would be also mistaken to think Soviet policy was merely a response to Western action .
 Foreign influences are refracted through the Soviet policy-making process . Soviet perceptions, military doctrine, foreign policy objectives and domestic influences and constraints come into play .
 The effect of foreign actions on Soviet policy is complex and not at all automatic . The effect on foreign policy is not always automatic .
 The very existence of large armed forces, a powerful defence industry and an extensive network of military R and D establishments generates internal pressures for weapons development and production .
 The interplay of demands and invention gives rise to proposals for new and improved weapons .
 As a system progresses from conception to development, military and design bureau interests become attached to it, building up pressure for production .
 The principle of ‘configurative causality’ states that the overall configuration of the complex can be seen to give rise to pressures for arms production . These pressures may vary from case to case and cannot be identified .
 The second principle is that of ‘overdetermination’ or ‘redundant causation’; to remove one cause or set of causes is not to eliminate the policies themselves, since other causes remain sufficient . ‘Redundant causality’ is the principle of
 It is not enough to tackle the international causes of the EastWest arms competition; the domestic roots too must be eradicated . This principle lies behind the argument that it is not only to tackle international causes, but also the domestic causes of arms competition .
 These principles are both helpful in understanding Soviet arms policies . The principles are important to understand Soviet arms policy .
 Much of Soviet military policy-making is shrouded in secrecy . But enough is known about structures of the military-industrial-scientific complex to suggest that internal pressures are generated .
 The removal of external stimuli might alter Soviet arms policies in some important respects, but would not eliminate its driving-force entirely, because much of that force is derived from domestic sources . It seems clear too that removing external stimuli, while it might alter some important .
 This essay has tried to outline in general terms the domestic sources of the Soviet military effort . Conclusion: This essay is an attempt to outline the domestic source of Soviet military efforts .
 It has suggested that these sources are deeply embedded in Russian and Soviet history . The sources are thought to be deeply embedded with Soviet history.
 Disarmament and demilitarization would involve more than the surgical removal of some element of the Soviet state; it would have far-reaching effects throughout the whole society . Disarmment would involve far-ranging effects throughout society, including the entire Soviet state .
 The Soviet Union has one of the most powerful and extensive state apparatuses in the world . And although the ‘withering away of the state’ is one of anticipated consequences of communist construction .
 This essay has tried not to present them as absolute, or to suggest that there is no scope for initiatives for demilitarization . Yet, although the sources of Soviet militarism are strong, this essay does not suggest that this is not the case .
 There are some developments in the Soviet Union today which suggest that a change of direction is possible .
 It would be a serious error to overestimate their importance or the degree of which they can be influenced from outside the Soviet Union, writes David Frum .
 It would be a mistake to suppose that no change is possible or that its direction could not be influenced from afar . But it would be an even greater mistake to think no change could be possible .
 Soviet military policy contains contradictions which may, with time, become more apparent and exert an influence on Soviet politics . The contradictions may become apparent and influence Soviet politics in the future . The Soviet military has a history of contradictions .
 The Soviet leaders have said that they are not striving for superiority, but they have made it clear that they will not fall behind the United States in military power . The U.S. has said it is not seeking superiority .
 The Soviet Union has thus locked itself into a relationship of parity with the United States . The U.S. is now in a relationship with the Soviet Union .
 At one level the maintenance of parity provides the justification for Soviet military policy . At another level the arms control negotiations which it underpins provides the . justification for the . policy .
 The attainment of parity has meant that the Soviet Union has come to share full responsibility for the continuing arms competition . At another level, however, it has also meant that .
 This has had a subtle, yet profound effect on the attitude of many people in the West to Soviet military policy . It has had an effect on people's attitudes to the West, especially in Russia .
 Many of those sympathetic to Soviet policy deemed it legitimate for the leading socialist state to catch up with the leading capitalist power . But sharing responsibility for the arms race is not regarded so favourably by Soviet leaders .
 The continuation of a high level of military effort, even after parity has been attained, may help to breed opposition inside the Soviet Union to the amassing of more military power . In a similar way, the continuation of high level military effort may help .
 It is possible, for example, that Soviet militarism may emerge as a more important focus for dissident criticism . The strength of nationalist sentiment (including dissident Russian nationalism) and the deep roots of legitimation should not be forgotten .
 The Soviet Union shares with the United States the contradiction that growing military power does not bring greater security, even for superpowers . Growing military power doesn't bring security, says the U.S.
 The accumulation of military power may only spur other governments to increase their own forces, thus nullifying the original gain . It may also lead to the increase of other governments' military power, says author .
 It is true that military power can further foreign policy, but it cannot ensure complete security in the nuclear age . Military power can help foreign policy but it can further security in nuclear age, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The ‘Soviet military build-up’ of the 1960s and 1970s has brought the Soviet Union political gains, but it has also helped to stimulate countervailing actions . It is highly doubtful whether, in the last analysis, Soviet security is more assured now than it was
 These contradictions would be of little importance if there were no possibility of giving them political significance, says David Cameron . Cameron: 'These contradictions would have little importance'
 The last fifteen years have been a period of consolidation and conservative reform in the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union has been consolidating and reforming in recent years .
 Underneath the stable surface changes are taking place in Soviet policy . But beneath the surface changes have been taking place which could result in major shifts of direction .
 The rate of economic growth has been declining, thus increasing the prospect that pressure for far-reaching reform will reemerge . Pressure for reform is likely to be reemerged as a result .
 Agricultural performance has improved greatly, but at a very high cost, again raising the prospect of reform . Agricultural performance improved greatly but at the cost of many of the country's major industries .
 Other pressures exist for changing the priorities of resource allocation, such as to speed up development of Siberia or to raise living standards .
 The cumulative effect of such pressures might be to weaken the position of the defence sector, or involve it more deeply in non-military functions, may weaken the defence industry .
 Discussion has also been taking place about the Soviet Union’s proper relationship to the rest of the world . The economic system has been the focus of debate in recent years .
 Some have pressed for as great a degree of autarky and isolation as possible . Others argue for a more outward-looking approach which would recognize that the world faces many problems which can be solved only by common and concerted action .
 The present leadership, as has been seen, has given immense importance to military power . It has also given importance to the country's military power, it has been said .
 In pointing to these developments one should not forget the militarizing pressures that were analysed earlier in this paper . In this paper, we should also point to the militarization pressures that we have already seen in recent years .
 A change of course undertaken by the Soviet leadership would amount to radical disarmament or demilitarization . Nor should one suppose that a change . of course . undertaken by a . Soviet leadership . would amount . to radical . disarmament . The Soviet leadership should not have a radical disarm
 Peace movement should be the aim of the peace movement to try to influence that change in the desired direction . But the possibility for some change does exist and it does exist, says the author .
 The first of these is directed at Western governments and should aim at ensuring that they do not foreclose the possibility of Soviet moves towards disarmament and demilitarization .
 This course is a natural concomitant of efforts to press Western governments in that direction too . The course will be a natural response to efforts to push Western governments to adopt it .
 The causes of Soviet militarism, and the ways in which pressure on Western governments can also serve to influence the Soviet Union, need to be analysed . But some attempt is needed to take the Soviet dimension consciously into account .
 Such influence need not necessarily be directed solely at disarmament, but could try to draw the Soviet Union into cooperative efforts to solve such problems as the world food supply .
 This might make it easier subsequently to work out cooperative, non-military security arrangements . This might also help the U.S. work out cooperatively with other nations in the world .
 The second course is directed at the Soviet Union and should try to engage people there in a dialogue about the problems of disarmament and demilitarization .
 The variety of political views and currents in the Soviet Union is very wide . Dissident and official views overlap and shade into each other . There are, for example, strong nationalist tendencies in both official and dissident thinking .
 The importance of this course is that vigorous debates about Russia’s destiny and the proper path of Soviet development are taking place inside the Soviet Union and among Soviet émigrés . In Eastern Europe too there is such argument about the future of state socialism .
 The issues of disarmament and demilitarization scarcely figure at all in these discussions, even though militarism and the lack of democracy are linked in the Soviet case . The issue is important for everyone’s future, but it is not all about disarmament .
 If these issues could be injected into the discussions, they would then be subject to a great deal of creative political thinking . This would be more attuned to the specific problems and conditions of the Soviet Union, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The military burden in the Soviet Union is very heavy, but that its legitimation is also strong . Besides, it has been seen that it has seen that the military burden . Besides that, it was seen that . Besides .
 Debate about the problems of Soviet militarism might help to weaken that legitimation . Debate and discussion about the issues might help weaken that legitimacy .
 It should not be supposed that everyone will welcome such discussion, and the attempt to generate it may well be regarded as unwarranted interference in the internal affairs of the USSR .
 In the nuclear age we are all affected by the military policies of the superpowers . We surely have the right to try to influence them. We are affected by their military policies, and hence we surely have a right to .
 The figures available on arms production and force levels give only the roughest indication of Soviet military production .
 The late 1950s and early 1960s appear to be the period of lowest effort . The late '50s and '60s were a period of low effort for the U.S. government .
 Western estimates of Soviet defence spending as a proportion of GNP seem to fit this pattern, with Khrushchev years as the period when the proportion was lowest . Western estimates show the Khrushchev era was the period of the lowest .
 Most estimates, derived by whatever means, fall into the range of 8 to 14 per cent . The lower estimates for the late 1950s and early 1960s .
 Military Balance each year gives a figure for the manpower in the Soviet Armed Forces . The Military Balance is based on the strength of the Soviet armed forces .
 On top of these figures there are 400,000 troops who engage in construction, railroad, farm and medical work .
 This is not to deny that there was opposition to the Soviet state during the war . But the memory of the war is very potent, says the historian .
 It is also possible to trace the ‘Soviet military buildup’ to the Central Committee resolution ‘On the Defence of the Country’ in 1929 . The resolution was passed by the Soviet Central Committee in 1929.
 The present phase has its roots in the ‘revolution in military affairs’ which was the subject of much discussion in the early 1960s .
 For a discussion of marginal shifts of resources see J Hardt, ‘Military-Economic Implications of Soviet Regional Policy’, prepared for Colloquium at NATO Economic Directorate, Brussels, April 1979 .
 Soviet Thermonuclear Research’, International Security, Winter 1979/80. ‘’ was International Security’s Winter 1979-80 . ‘The USSR’ published the book, ‘Tunami’ and ‘Thermonuclear Engineering’
 Medvedev, On Socialist Democracy, discusses the role of Russia in Russia's political transition to power . Medvedvedev is the prime minister of Russia .
 The first is an economic decline of the sort that comes about once or twice in a century . The second is a decline of economic decline that comes only once or maybe twice a century. The first was a decline in the economy .
 This country is in the early years — not, despite the new shine of the Carter Doctrine, at the very beginning — of the most expensive military boom in history . The U.S. is in its early years of a military boom, writes David Frum .
 In the process, the distinction between the military and the non-military modes of the American economy is being suppressed, says John Avlon . "In the process of the . . the distinction . between the . military and . non . military modes of . the U.S. economy
 The continuum of money and destruction is being projected, through investment in military research and development, into the far future .
 The expansion in military science and technology is the most ominous component of the defence budget . The budget is dense with the ghosts of past and future wars .
 The new defence boom has been welcomed — in the United States Congress, for example . It is a response to recent events in South-West Asia and elsewhere .
 Spending on strategic and other nuclear weapons increases particularly fast . Research at the ‘leading edge’ of military technology also increases .
 With its research boom, it is defining a revised American doctrine of science-intensive war . The U.S. is redefining a revised doctrine of war, it's defining a new doctrine .
 This effort is not new, and it is scheduled to persist for the balance of the five-year defence plan . The effort is set to persist, and will continue for the rest of the next five years .
 The proportion of defence spending devoted to research and the procurement of new weapons has increased steadily since 1976 .
 First sustained U.S. military investment since 1960-63 . Investment in South-East Asia aside . Report shows first sustained military investment boom since 1960/63 .
 The MX missile — the race track track of Ozymandias — is its most expensive item . MX missile is the world's largest and most expensive missile .
 This allocation for the M X is only part of a build-up in research on nuclear, anti-nuclear, and post-nuclear weapons systems .
 It is as though the years of obscurity, of the bargain-basement, low-technology Vietnam war were over, as though military scientists can now step out into the clear light of particle beams, space optics, and blue-green lasers . It is like though the . years of
 The military doctrine that Brown outlines is suited to the epoch of innovative war . Brown outlines a military doctrine suited to an era of innovative warfare .
 He returns to concepts of flexibility, precision, ‘selective and measured’ attack and calibrated retaliation . He returns again and again to concepts that ‘flexibility and precision’ are key to success .
 The notion of ‘flexibility’ is a leading piety of American strategic doctrine . The idea of 'flexibility' is a key part of American foreign policy .
 There is nothing new to the idea of a ‘continuum’ of nuclear weapons . Nor is there anything new about the idea, it is not new .
 It is elevated by Brown into the writing on the wall of future destruction, from bazookas to particle weapons, he says . But it is not the first time the U.S. has considered particle weapons .
 Next in the continuum come the varieties of intercontinental retaliation dictated by the doctrine of ‘countervailing’ force . ‘Countervailing force’ is a form of response to the threat of terrorism .
 What is remarkable about the doctrine of the continuum from non-nuclear to nuclear conflict is the cool and precise rhetoric in which it is described . What is most remarkable is that the doctrine is cool, precise rhetoric .
 We no longer find the pious disclaimers, the epithets (of course, terrible’s) which earlier Defense Secretaries once appended to the words describing nuclear war . This is a departure from the usual disclaimers .
 The phrase ‘total war’ is used casually in a discussion of defence spending .
 Report puts forward three types of arguments in favour of increased defence spending . Report: Increase in defence spending would be good for the UK .
 The first, and most familiar, suggests that because the Soviet Union is spending much more than the United States on its military effort, the U.S. must now rearm . The second, and third, suggest that because of the United. States is spending more .
 The argument relies on the simple reiteration of relative expenditures . But the argument relies in general upon the fact that relative expenditures are more important .
 The shortcomings of such comparisons are well-known, as the Report itself comes close to acknowledging .
 They are selective, in that they sometimes measure the Soviet Union against the U.S. and sometimes NATO against the Warsaw Treaty Organization . The Soviet Union and NATO are sometimes measured against each other .
 Russian military efforts are directed not against NATO but against China, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin says Russian military effort is directed towards China, not NATO .
 SIPRI detects ‘rather startling asymmetries’ in U.S. and Russian strategic submarines . They move past sharp qualitative advantages enjoyed by the US .
 One has only to imagine the reverse exercise to see the tenuousness of such calculations . One of the world's most powerful statesmen is the president of the United States .
 A Russian ‘estimate’ of American military research would start, to be sure, with the published budget figure of $16-5 billion . A Russian estimate of U.S. military research costs $16 to $5 billion per year .
 To this would add the $1-3 billion which the Department of Energy will spend on nuclear weapons and other defence research, and a sizeable part of NASA's $56 billion RD budget .
 Some such sequence may indeed have helped to determine the present arms race . Some such sequences may have helped determine the current arms race.
 The Soviet Union reacted to the U.S. military build-up of the late 1960s by investing in military research . It was directed in large part at South-East Asia, the Soviet Union .
 The weapons that Russians are building now are the products of that research . The weapons they are building are the weapons that Russia is building now, the author says .
 The Americans in turn react by increasing their own research, which will produce an arms race of the early 1ggos . Such are the dynamics of comparative weaponry, such as the development of the arms race .
 The second argument in favour of the military boom suggests that the ‘growth in international turbulence’ in Afghanistan, Africa, the Caribbean, Thailand, and elsewhere makes such an effort essential .
 There are relatively few wars under way under way, and revolution is distinctly on the retreat . Revolution is on the decline in the Middle East, but revolution is still on the rise .
 It is questionable whether acquiring the capacity to construct particle beam weapons in the 1ggos is likely to reduce turbulence in the third world in 1980 .
 One of the major new projects, the CX airlift plane, is recommended for ‘contingencies outside of Europe’, yet it is some years from being deployed . The CX plane is one of the most ambitious projects in the world .
 Brown’s report, meanwhile, demonstrates a far more muscular attitude to U.S. military imtervention outside Europe than has been seen for some years . Brown's report also shows a more muscular approach to the United States military outside Europe .
 The immediate crisis shouldn’t deflect us from other areas of potential danger, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The crisis should not deflect from other potential dangers, he says .
 Morocco remains under attack from adversaries armed with Soviet weapons . Morocco has been attacked by Soviet-backed adversaries in the past . Morocco is still under attack by adversaries in Morocco .
 Even those who accept this argument — I do not — should ask themselves whether the U.S. is buying the right power and the right perceptions with its new defence dollars . The United States should ask whether the United States is buying right power .
 Report’s calculus of ‘perceptual’ costs and benefits is bizarre, it should be added . It should be said that the report's calculus is bizarre .
 The Brown position is based on a view of the American economy and American society as organized around knowledge and science . Brown's position is that the economy and society are organized around scientific knowledge .
 The obvious strategy, thus, is to lead from strength or from comparative advantage; to prepare to fight an automated and innovative war . It is to prepare for an automated, innovative war.
 We learn of production problems in constructing nuclear attack submarines, of ‘shore processing software, computer loading and array reliability problems’ with Navy sensor systems . The Air Force finds it difficult to maintain ‘their increasingly complex equipment’, given ‘maintenance backlogs’
 The military has assumed that because it can afford the most elaborately redundant controls, its operations are isolated from the messiness of real-life clinics and sewage tunnels, it is thereby free from such tribulations .
 There is a related and deeper contradiction in the notion of knowledge-intensive war . The idea of knowledge intensive war is a contradiction, he says .
 The United States is practising a variety of ‘la guerre savante’, the stylized struggled which has dominated European wars since the sixteenth century . The U.S. has been practising the style which has been dominant in Europe for centuries .
 The arms race implicit in the new military boom requires the most precise coordination of national scientific emotions . The United States and the Soviet Union move together toward the MX, to ‘invulnerable’ missiles for the Russians, pressureon SALT, new missile defences, pressure on the AB
 That America's leaders should choose, now, to evoke the last war fought in this country is itself awesome . That America’s leaders should chose to invoke the last wars fought in the U.S.
 The last, striking contradiction of the doctrine, has to do with its economic costs . The doctrine has to deal with the costs of the state of mind, he says .
 These are determined by the technology-intensive character of the projected boom . The boom is likely to be based on the technology intensive nature of the project .
 Defense Budget discussions have been to an extraordinary extent forgotten in discussions of the Defense Budget . Yet they have been forgotten in the discussions of Defense Budget talks .
 Just as it is assumed that investment in lasers will somehow encourage the loyal Pathans, that the incantation of numbers is itself useful, so too are the economic consequences of the boom ignored .
 There seemed nothing, as in 1950 and 1966, that could so fortify business confidence as a vigorous defence effort . The defence effort was a major success in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Even the most rosy expectation does not deny that military spending will stimulate inflation . Military spending is likely to stimulate inflation, even though the most optimistic view is that it will reduce inflation .
 Previous arms booms began in years of moderate price increases . United States inflation early in 1980 reached an annual rate of 16 per cent in 1980 .
 It is much less likely that the boom will provide extensive new employment for U.S. workers . The boom is unlikely to provide new jobs for American workers .
 The character of defence spending is increasingly capitalintensive, says Mr Brown . Defence spending is following Brown’s dictum and the exigencies of the times, increasingly capital intensive .
 By cutting into other government programmes, military spending may jeopardize the most precarious of existing jobs . Military spending may also jeopardise the most vulnerable jobs, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Employment has continued to increase in the United States since the 1970s in the U.S. employment crisis . Employment has increased since the crisis began in 1970s, but employment has increased .
 This is in part because manufacturing industry there — far more than in France or West Germany — has maintained jobs . The manufacturing industry in France and West Germany has also maintained jobs in the country .
 Employment in social and public services, particularly health services, has increased . But it is also because employment in social services, such as health, has also increased .
 There is one problem of the U.S. economy which the military boom may be expected to alleviate . The military boom is expected to ease the problem .
 This is the decline in rates of growth of labour productivity in the 1970s, with an actual reduction in 1974 and 1979 . The decline in growth of productivity in 1970s was actually a decline .
 It seems likely that shifts in the economy away from the production of goods for military consumption have reduced growth in productivity . The shift in production of social services may have reduced productivity .
 Many industries that are dependent on defence enjoy high levels and high rates of growth of productivity . Defence industries have a high rate of growth in productivity .
 They buy components, intermediate inputs, from other equally vigorous sectors . Buy components and intermediate inputs from other vigorous sectors.
 The service industries tend to buy paper, construction, other services . The service industry buys paper and construction, but not paper .
 Perhaps modern defence contractors behave, economically speaking, like business services or technology consultants . Perhaps they behave like business consultants or business services consultants .
 U.S. military expenditures started to increase in the mid1970s . United States military expenditures increased in the 1970s .
 Military contracts for goods and services increased from $458 billion in 1976 to $556 billion in 1977 . Yet this boomlet has done little for productivity growth .
 The Soviet economy, of course, is a poor example of the economic benefits of militarization, writes David Frum . Frum says the Soviet economy is an example of how militarization can be beneficial to the nation .
 The Defense Department Report is generous with its estimates of Soviet economic growth in the 1980s . The defense Department Report estimates the Soviet economy in the 80s .
 It is perhaps the most ominous of the ghoulish economic indications of the past several weeks . It reveals what it reveals about the perversity of capitalist economies, he says .
 Business optimism, now, is evidence of a keening desire by American industry to return to old economic and technological patterns of the 1940s, 1950s, and 1g60s .
 The economic changes of the period since 1970 have amounted to a vast, if unintended and perhaps unwanted, transformation of the American economy toward the provision of social security . Social security has been a major part of the U.S. economy since 1970 .
 There has even, within this metamorphosis, been some conversion of scientific and technical efforts toward secular society; some social innovation . Some social innovation, such as the creation of the Internet, has been seen in the past .
 Every instinct of the U.S. political economy seems to be crying retreat, to be war . Now, every instinct of American political economy is crying retreat and war .
 It seems possible that military industries have functioned as a ‘leading sector’ during the long expansion of the 1940s to the 1970s . Joseph Schumpeter’s sense of a dominant industry is that of the military . In the 1930s, the U.S
 Modern economic growth is characterized by long periods of expansion, more or less associated with a given ‘locus’ of innovation . One does not have to believe in specific explanations of economic cycles to see this .
 Such periods include 1848 to 1873 and 1895 to 1920, as well as the post-World War II boom that ended in the early 1970s . The world economy has seen a boom since World War II .
 There has been no undisputed leader during the U.S. expansion of the postwar years . The U.N. has been in the midst of its post-war expansion .
 Some theorists of economic cycles point to an assortment of leading industries, including electronics, consumer electrical goods, and air travel . Some theorists point to electronics and consumer electronics .
 What seems possible is that the military industries themselves have constituted such a focus on the military industry .
 They do not function as a single or multiple industrial sector, as did railroads and the automobile and electricity businesses in earlier booms . Instead, they are a cluster of industries joined by a common objective and a common customer . The U.S. economy is not a single industry,
 The defence boom and business confidence it inspires are from this perspective deeply disturbing . Defence boom and confidence in defence industry is deeply disturbing, says the author .
 An economy in the throes of decline cannot afford to lose this portion of its knowledge, of its education system, and of its future to old industries, and to destruction . An economy is in decline can't afford to keep these knowledge, education system .
 There is now, as not often in the world since Nagasaki, the intuitive possibility of nuclear war . "There is now not often as often as in the past," says Peter Bergen .
 There is also the possibility of a remilitarized world economy which will make this prospect more imminent, year after year . Research boom becomes a boom in procurement, in strategic doctrine and in military culture .
 'Very little is more important, as we enter the 1980s, than to act against the one and against the other,' he says . Very little is important, he says, as little as to act .
 Department of Defense Annual Report, Fiscal Year 1981, Harold Brown, Secretary of Defense, Dept. Defense, 29 January 1980 . Harold Brown was secretary of defense of the U.S. Army in 1980 .
 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute , World Armaments and Disarmament. Institute . Stockholm Institute for Peace Research Research Institute . Institute . World Armament . Disarmaments and disarmament .
 Kevin N Lewis, “The Prompt and Delayed Effects of Nuclear War’, Scientific American, July 1979. Kevin N . Lewis, "The Prompt And Delayed effects of nuclear war’," Scientific American .
 Hans Morgenthau in D Carlton and C Schaerf , Arms Control and Technological Innovation , 262. Quoted by Hans Morgenthalau in Arms Control .
 Edward Denison, ‘Service Industries — Trends and Prospects’, Survey of Current Business, January 1945, . Survey of current business .
 Wassily Leontiefand Marvin Hoftenberg, “The Economic Effects of Disarmament’, Scientific American, April 1961; ‘The Input-Output Structure of the United States Economy, 1972’ , Survey of Current Business, February 1979; .
 Foreign military sales accounted for $5:4 billion of the total in 1979 . Procurement for foreign military sales was $5.4 billion .
 See Eric Hobsbawm, “The Development of the World Economy’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, September 1979 . See Eric’s ‘Developing the World economy’ in 1979 .
 Estimated in Richard Dempsey and Douglas Schmude, ‘Occupational Impact of Defense Expenditures’, Monthly Labor Review, December 1971 . Estimated in . Richard Dempsey’s estimate .
 Donald Rumsfeld, President of the U.S. Department of Defense, published the Defense Department Report in Fiscal Year 1979 . The report was published by the Defense Dept. of Defense Department in 1979 and 1980 .
 It was during this period that Margaret Thatcher made the hawkishly vitriolic speeches about foreign policy . Pravda, in a typically miscalculated effort at propaganda, dubbed her the ‘iron lady’
 Conservative ideology revealed the centrality in Conservative ideology of perceptions of the Soviet threat and of a strong foreign and defence policy . It also served as a rallying cry for party unity and as a convenient stick with which to batter the Labour government about its head .
 The same themes were pursued through the 1970s until the Conservatives were elected in 1979, even if they became less prominent as Conservatives found other policies around which to unite .
 Increased military budgets, improved military salaries and shopping lists of expensive new weapons projects were the Conservative answer to the Soviet threat . The Conservative solution to the damage allegedly done to British defence policy by Labour .
 Conservative government has increased military spending and announced plans to go on doing so . True to its promises, the Conservative government plans to increase military spending .
 Labour government agreed to 3 per cent increase in defence budget in 1977 as part of NATO programme . But implementation was delayed until 1979-80, the last defence budget prepared by Labour .
 In other words, the Tories are doing no more than Labour was doing by the end of its period in office . The Tories are not doing more than the Tories were doing before they were in power .
 By the late 1970s, wages and salaries had become matters of major grievance in the armed forces . morale was badly affected not only by this but also by inadequate living conditions, and by limited availability of supplies and spare parts .
 The problem was that Labour’s budgetary trimming exercises left inadequate resources to sustain the military capabilities it was attempting to mount . The problem is that Labour's budget trimming exercise left insufficient resources .
 The result was a major crisis of morale in the services in 1978, characterized by high rates of early departure, low efficiency, and a deluge of leaks to the press about the inadequacies of British military preparations . The result of the crisis was characterized by early departure and low efficiency .
 Conservatives have committed themselves to preventing this from happening again . The Conservatives are determined to prevent it happening again. They are committed to preventing it from happening .
 A good proportion of the 3 per cent annual increases will be eaten up by that commitment alone . The government is committed to raising £1,500,000 a year by 2015 .
 The costs of military equipment, especially weapons systems, are climbing at giddy speeds, far outpacing inflation in the civil economy . On top of that, the costs of major weapons systems are climbing .
 It is likely that annual increases in real military spending of 3 per cent will not be sufficient to maintain the present range of forces .
 Conservatives will seek even larger increases, perhaps up to 6 or7 per cent annually . One would therefore expect the Conservatives to seek more than 6 per cent .
 A study of possible British military spending in the 1980s within the context of the likely condition of the national economy shows that there must be serious doubts about the government’s ability to sustain annual 3 per cent increases .
 By the end of its period in office the 1974~9 Labour government was firmly committed to increasing military expenditure . Economic and Social Constraints by the Labour government were the greatest .
 Conservative administration distinguished for its enthusiasm for high military spending . It has been succeeded by the Conservative administration .
 There has been a stable consensus in Britain’s political leadership in favour of increasing the military budget . Despite acrimonious debates between Labour and Conservative front benches, there is a relatively stable consensus .
 Political and ideological preferences of a government are only one factor in setting national military spending levels . But the political and ideological . preferences of the . government, even if supported by such a . consensus, are only . one factor, albeit an important one, in setting military spending . levels .
 In the short run, however, considerable problems can be posed, and are at present being posed for the expansion of U.S. military programmes . The United States is expanding its military programmes in the short term .
 If there is an expansion in the volume of procurement, or a shift of emphasis towards new military technologies, additional capacity must be created . Moreover, if there is a gradual shift in the . emphasis towards . new military . technologies, it said .
 The effect of these other calls on available resources can be described as the allocative constraint, reflecting socioeconomic choice between various goals . The effects of these constraints on resources are described as 'allocative constraints'
 Since resources available to a national economy are finite at any given time, these various goals are mutually competitive and, possibly, they are ultimately mutually exclusive . Resources available to the nation are finite and resources are finite .
 Allocative choices made express priority given to military expenditure as against other forms of public expenditure, private consumption, investment or net exports . The allocative choices were made by the government .
 A government may have a firmly held preference for a particular pattern of resource allocation, but in practice it is never entirely free to implement it . A government is not always entirely free from implementing it .
 It cannot but respond to economic conditions or other social priorities, it says . It can't respond to other politically expressed social priorities such as economic conditions, it argues .
 Should it fail to respond adequately, there is in the end the possibility that it will be brought down and replaced by a government which at least claims, at the outset, to have a different set of allocative preferences .
 In practice, choices about allocation are difficult and uncertain and have been made in inconsistent ways, even by the same government . Short-term stabilization measures have been required, as a result of short-term measures .
 The adjustment within defence policy has been to drop roles, cancel projects, keep military wages down, run down spares, and so on . The adjustment has been in place to keep costs and wages down .
 If allocation outreaches feasible levels, as a result of over-ambitious projections of economic performance or insufficient attention to other social priorities, later correction is a painful business for the armed forces .
 This process of correction can be thought about in terms of the stabilization constraint . The stabilization constraint is a constraint on the stabilization of the growth of the population .
 To achieve long-term stability, planned targets should accord with long-run socioeconomic priorities and feasible projections of economic output, the government says .
 If an attempt is made, through incompetence or, more important, through deliberate political choice about competing allocative demands, to challenge long-run socio-economic priorities in military planning, is an extremely disruptive encounter with the effects of the stabilization constraint .
 NATO aim of annual increases in military spending of 3 per cent in real terms through to 1986 . The government has declared its support for NATO's aim of increasing military spending .
 We think it is reasonable to assume that the Ministry of Defence’s Long Term Costing, covering a ten-year period, includes a working assumption that this trend will be continued to the end of the decade . We think that the MoD's Longterm Costing includes a
 The 3 per cent figure may be viewed in many circles as the lower limit of what is necessary . In fact, since cuts in forces are a likely prospect even with that level of spending increase, the figure is likely to be seen as lower .
 The relative price effect expresses the difference between the rate of inflation for military goods and services and the rate for all damestically produced goods . It depends on the relation of import prices to domestic prices, relative productivity growth and relative wage growth .
 The relative price effect was low in the late 1970s because of the squeeze on military wages, which the current government is committed to preventing . Our calculations therefore assume a slightly higher effect because of that .
 The assumed rate of growth of output is 1% annually . This is the rate estimated by the government for the period to 1983-4 . At present there is no basis on which to assume it will be higher through the rest of the 1980s .
 Having made these assumptions, the calculation and the conclusion are straighforward . The calculation and conclusion are straight forward .
 On current government plans, the share of GDP in current prices devoted to military expenditure will rise from 4-6% at present to 5-92% in 1985 and 7-21% in 1990 . In 1985 and 1990, military spending will rise to 6% of GDP .
 This will take GDP share back up to the level at which it stood in the mid-1g50s and from which it has since declined . GDP share has since more or less declined .
 There is no sense in which this can be taken to represent a feasible programme of military expenditure given long-run socio-economic priorities . The UK is not likely to be able to provide a feasible military expenditure .
 It will have severe economic repercussions, most notably on civil industrial investment and the balance of payments . It will also have severe repercussions on the civil industrial sector, including on industrial investment, balance of pay .
 It will undermine the foundations on which stable military programmes might be constructed . Ironically, it will thereby undermine the foundation of stable defence programmes .
 The government’s preference is but one factor affecting the level of military spending . But, as we have argued, it is not the only factor affecting military spending in Britain .
 Some guide to the future can be gained by reference to the past, especially reference to long-run and relatively stable patterns in the past .
 We cannot predict how social judgement of competing priorities will be made in the future . But we can assess past patterns and see what would happen in the 1980s if those patterns were to hold .
 The volume of British military expenditure over the period 1951-75 is well explained by the relationship between real income, the relative price effect and United States and Soviet military expenditures, together with a statistical dynamic adjustment process .
 Using the equation which fits the period 1951-75, it is then possible to estimate British military expenditure in the 1980s as a consequence of the relationship of these four variables .
 The volume of military expenditure would decline over the decade by the equivalent of 1-5 per cent annually . Far from there being an annual 3 per cent increase, the volume would decline by 1 to 5 per cent .
 In current price terms, the share of GDP devoted to military spending would decline to 4:5 per cent by 1985 and 4-4% by 1990, continuing its slow move towards the NATO average .
 The difference between spending 4-4 per cent of GDP on the military in 1990 and spending 7-2 per cent expresses the difference between the reality of the British state and society for the past thirty years . The Conservative government wants to construct a new state of British society, he says .
 To fulfil its military spending ambitions, the government will have to push through profound socio-economic and political changes . Yet within the ‘new’ departures the Conservatives seek there are several very familiar, traditional themes .
 The decision to purchase Trident as the successor to the British Polaris nuclear force can be understood by looking, in turn, at the effects on the domestic British scene of its military spending plans .
 The major decision in British military policy currently is the procurement of a new force to replace Britain’s four Polaris submarines .
 The decision would be understandable within the terms of orthodox strategic debate, though it would not be supportable . Were the procurement of Trident or any other major nuclear force likely to result in a clear strategic advantage for Britain?
 Polaris and now Trident are vague, confused and contradictory . But the politico-strategic arguments in favour of Polaris are vague and confused, contradictory .
 Even if annual increases of 3 per cent in real terms are sustained, it will require the orderly phasing out of other major military forces or chaos in military policy and industry around the end of the 1980s .
 Understanding the emphasis placed on the procurement of Trident is not aided by strategic analysis . We must leave that realm, and enter one of a more elusive political symbolism .
 Changes of government nor failures in the late 1950s and early 1g6os have really dented the theme . The most that happened was the reduction of the Polaris force from five to four submarines by the 1964-70 Labour government .
 The Blue Streak-Skybolt-Polaris-Trident theme gives it its durability . It's reasonable to suggest it derives not just from the nuclear weapon dimension, but from the fact they are missile forces .
 It is the kind of thing the USA and the USSR — the superpowers — possess. It is a kind of something the U.S. and the Soviet Union possess.
 It provides the British state with a tinge of great power standing, in times when it has had precious few other such tinges .
 Britain, being Britain, with all that means, with . all that history, ought naturally to be in on this, the most devastating military instrument . Rather, they derive from a basic belief that Britain . should naturally be in . on this weapon, they say .
 For these beliefs to be effective, to result in a series of policy decisions over time which lead to Polaris and beyond, there is no need for them to be shared by other states . For those beliefs, they should not be shared with other states, they say .
 Arguments which demonstrate the weakness of claims that possessing a force like Polaris provides particular status thus miss the point . Arguments that claim the power of Polaris are invalidate the point of the argument .
 What other states believe about Britain is here secondary, almost irrelevent . What other countries believe about the UK is almost irrelevably important to Britain .
 The way Britain procured Polaris would hardly provide much status in the eyes of others . It is equally irrelevant to comment that the way Britain Procured Polaris was procured by the way it did .
 Britain has Polaris, and thus, in its own eyes, it has the requisite tinge of greatness . What matters is that Britain's Polaris is that it has Polaris . It's not a matter of whether Polaris is the best in the world .
 Polaris and Trident are concrete indications of the difficulty the British state has found in modernizing itself in the past thirty years, in accustoming itself to a permanently reduced international position . Polaris is therefore concrete indications that the UK is struggling to modernize itself, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Britain is seeking greater military capabilities than resources can be provided to sustain . This difficulty is seen elsewhere in British defence policy, particularly in the continual process .
 The Invincible class of anti-submarine warfare cruisers are mini-aircrattcarriers . Of course, some adjustments have been made; the military withdrawal from Empire is one such .
 Some adjustments have been made; some have been then qualified . Others have not been made, some have not, made. Some adjustments were made and then qualified; others have not .
 "The difficulty of making the adjustments has been great," says coach . "The inability to scale desired capabilities down to available resources has been a pattern of constant chops and changes," he says .
 The difficulty in modernizing Britain is felt elsewhere in British state policy . Its sources lie in the history and structure of the state and in Britain's economic and social relations .
 In some ways, and in some instances, the British state has been able to modernize, but rarely with any ease . The British state is modernizing but not always with ease .
 Defence policy is so closely related to imperial military traditions that the difficulty has been the greatest . It is perhaps not surprising that it is in the field of defence policy, so closely .
 For all the apparent modernity of British armed forces, for all the Ministry of Defence’s ability to function in sophisticated levels of discourse, major aspects of British defence policy are totally anachronistic .
 The submarines and missiles are there to sustain the self-image of the British state and ruling circles . They are an attempt to maintain the appearance of being a major world power long after the fact has ended .
 The emphasis placed upon the procurement of a replacement for Polaris, despite the damage this will do to the rest of British military preparations, is a good indicator of the hollowness and self-defeating nature of the Conservative government’s international aspirations .
 It is all too reminiscent of the nineteenth-century British view of the world. Indeed, it's all too similar to that of the 19th century British view .
 The archaism of this view of Britain’s role in the world is interestingly paralleled by the Conservatives’ economic policies, says Simon Tisdall .
 We are thinking first and foremost of the ideology of ‘laissez-faire’ and the rhetoric of reducing the role of the state . We are also thinking of the increased emphasis on internationalizing British capital .
 The removal of controls on currency exchange and opposition by both the City and the government to controls on the Eurodollar market are a further part of the pattern .
 The rule of Britannia and ‘laissez-faire’ make up only a part of the picture of nineteenth-century Britain, says historian .
 If past social and political patterns hold, the Conservatives will be unable to sustain annual increases in military spending of 3 per cent in real terms .
 Evidence from analysing past patterns suggests that military spending will actually decline in the 1980s .
 A genuine and profoundly new departure is required if Conservative military plans are to be implemented . Clearly then, despite the traditionalism which lies at the heart of much Conservative thinking on international and economic issues, compared to the past thirty years a genuine departure is needed to be needed .
 The British people would have to pay costs for sustaining the imperial self-image on a scale which we have not been willing to pay for three decades . What this means is that the British people . It means they would pay costs to sustain the imperial .
 We would have to accept the closures of more hospitals, the further run-down of the National Health Service, so that good health becomes a privilege once again, not a right . Good health should become a privilege again, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 We would have to accept the closure of schools and the enlargement of classes, the . continuation of outdated and inadequate educational facilities . The schools would have been closed and enlarged, according to the government .
 We would have to accept the steady elimination of many of the services and amenities in local communities we have taken for granted, along with the further decay of inner-city areas . We would rather accept the continued elimination of services we have been taking for granted .
 "We would have to accept these and other costs, not as a temporary break, but for many, many years," he said . And we would have been forced to accept costs, he said. "And it would be a long-term cost of living," he added .
 For the resources which military expenditure and military industry utilize are also those which could be utilized for civil investment . The resources which are used in the military could be used for civil investments . For the first time, civil investment could be made in the United States .
 In other words, we would also have to agree to put off economic recovery, to throw revenues from North Sea oil down the military drain . The civil economy stagnate yet further while the military economy booms .
 The war psychology which we see being created today, which is necessary to legitimate the replacement of Polaris and the devotion of enormous resources to the military, is one side of the coin . The war . psychology . which we . see being . created today is the war psychology that we see .
 The other side is the increased authoritarianism of the state in dealing with ‘dissident’ groups, the transfer of military techniques learned in Northern Ireland to the British mainland, the growth of Special Branch and the political role of the police .
 The British state had already increased, in the 1970s, under a Labour government, the attention it pays to domestic propaganda and techniques of political repression . The process would have to continue and reach into yet more areas of our social and political life . The state would have already increased under a
 Conservatives’ rhetoric around international questions is in direct conflict with their rhetoric of reducing the role of the state . To sustain their international aspirations and to impose social and political penalties on the British people would require a major expansion of the role the state in particular areas .
 The ideology of economic ‘laissez-faire’ is at odds with the means which would have to be employed to implement Conservative ambitions in the international arena .
 The ideology of ‘laissez-faire’ is already at odds with the reality of economic policies . It seems to be more likely that the ideology would, over time, be jettisoned or downplayed, rather than that propaganda and coercion would be .
 The Conservatives’ Forthcoming Failure has been mapped out in stark terms . This nightmarish prospect has been laid out in deliberately stark terms. It is the Conservatives' failure to win a seat in the Commons .
 It is predicated on the government being successful in increasing military expenditure and reconstructing British politics .
 The government performs in the international as well as the domestic arena, says the government . The government says it is committed to the country's future in the future .
 In the domestic arena it exploits the genuine dangers in the international situation, but by so doing it also contributes to an exacerbation of those dangers . In the international arena, the government is exploiting the dangers, but also exacerbating those dangers.
 Building up a war psychology in Britain contributes to greater tensions and greater dangers of war, says David Cameron . Building up war psychology contributes greater tensions, he says .
 The government is not immune from the effects of its own propaganda . And the government is also not immune to its own own propaganda.
 Conservative government contributes to the possibility of a major war, of a nuclear holocaust . Conservative government is contributing to the potential of a war, says David Cameron .
 We presume that even the government would accept that, were such a war to occur, it would be some evidence that its policies had failed . We presume . Even the government .
 Annual increases in real military spending of 3 per cent through the 1980s will undermine the economic basis on which stable military programmes might be built .
 Accelerating economic decline would hit the mass of the British people hard, but might drive home the impossibility of current military plans and force a change .
 Thirdly, a powerful and conscious popular mobilization seeks a change of course . But this is more likely to happen, and to happen sooner rather than later, if, thirdly, they seek a change .
 This implies a resistance both to propaganda and coercion and the capacity to go beyond resistance into the development of a new and saner course for British policy .
 This means a forceful assertion of allocative choices which are different from those of the current government . To return to the terms we used earlier in this essay, this means . This means an assertion of . allocative choice which is different from that of the . current government, it says .
 The strength of this assertion would then result in a stabilization, in the closure of the Conservatives’ new yet traditional departure, writes David Frum .
 We have argued that Conservative plans for military expenditure in the 1980s conflict with the social, economic and political realities of late-twentieth-century Britain .
 They will be asserted by people and movements struggling against coercion, the removal of social services and the threat of war . People seeking a secure future and a reasonable standard of living, they say .
 This requires a very different allocation of resources from the Conservatives’ preference and a different set of policies . Within the context of a general economic crisis, this requires a different allocation .
 'forces' are made up of people and of many kinds of groups, groups and organizations who must first decide that they will actively oppose the Conservatives’ policies . But the point is that these ‘forces’ are . made up . of people .
 Business Week, 18 February 1980, carries a major article on this theme . Business Week is published by Business Week on February 18, 1980 .
 Work done on the possibility of converting military industry to non-military uses shows the adjustment is possible, but it has also shown that a successful transition depends on a series of political preconditions, to which the Conservatives would be thoroughly opposed .
 For the years 1974-9, the average relative price effect was 1-36 per cent as against 2-23 per cent for 1968-79 . For reasons stated in the text, we have assumed a figure for the 1980s of 2 per cent .
 National Income and Expenditure figures for current expenditure on goods and services for military defence were used . Long runs of data are available in current and constant prices .
 A Reply’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, March 1977 and September 1978. A Reply .
 Smith, “The Demand for Military Expenditure’, Economic Journal, forthcoming . Smith: ‘The demand for military expenditure’ is ‘demand for military spending’ Smith says .
 R Groom, ‘The British Deterrent’ , in J Bayliss , British Defence Policy i in a Changing World (Croom Helm, London, 1977).
 Stopping cruise missiles is not just a matter of convincing the politicians, it's just convincing them . The Armament Process in Reverse is designed to stop missiles from being launched .
 Time again, statesmen of the world have met together in international fora and expressed lofty and commendable ambitions for peace and disarmament . Time and time again, the world has met together to discuss disarmament and peace .
 War and militarism continue to characterize international relations . New and more deadly kinds of weapons continue to be acquired . War continues to be a source of tension .
 It appears as though disarmament, which is viewed as an international act of will, is quite unrelated to armament . Armament is a national process involving people, money and institutions deeply embedded in the fabric of our society .
 Campaign for European nuclear disarmament must be seen as first step in a process which reverses the process of armament . We need to see it as a campaign to change the political will of Europeans .
 The aim would be to undermine the ideas and institutions which foster the arms race, to rechannel the energies which are currently devoted to militarization into other new directions and create, so to speak, a vested interest .
 The act of will that is currently thought of as disarmament would present the final blow to a crumbling military-industrial edifice . It would be the last and perhaps least act in a series of events which totally transforms the current political, social and economic environment of armaments .
 The culture which invented the stirrup was quite different from the one which developed the gun . The culture in which invented stirrup is quite different than the culture which developed gun .
 The capitalist armament process and what is more or less its mirror image in the centrally planned economies has its own unique properties . It is a mirror image of what is happening in the central planned economies .
 This essay is an attempt to sketch out these properties and to see what they imply for disarmament . It's an attempt at sketching these properties of disarmament and how disarmament might be possible .
 The procurement of arms accounts for about half the military budget in the United States, Britain or France . In countries like the U.S. or Britain, arms purchases account for half the budget . The same is probably true of the Soviet Union, writes Peter Bergen .
 The procurement budget is dominated by a few major weapon systems, i.e. warships, aircraft or armoured fighting vehicles, that combine a weapons platform, a weapon and means of command and communication .
 In the US, the Trident submarine, the new nuclear-powered aircraft-carrier, and a handful of guided missile destroyers and frigates account for about two thirds of the naval procurement budget .
 MX missile, F 15 and F 16, are equally important for the Air Force . The new XM 1 battle tank accounts for a major share of the Army budget . The MX missile and the new battle tank are also important .
 In Britain, the Multi-Role Combat Aircraft Tornado accounts for around 40 per cent of the Royal Air Force budget . The three antisubmarine warfare cruisers probably account for a fifth to a quarter of the British naval procurement budget .
 Whereas formerly the weapon was the . instrument of man, now it appears that man is the instrument of the weapon system . The weapon system is now being used as a weapon system, says President Obama .
 A weapon system demands a rigid technical division of labour that admits little variation in the social organization of the men who operate it . The weapons system demands little variation on the social structure of the people who operate them .
 The weapon system guarantees the existence of certain types of industry for its manufacture . Equally, the weapon system, like the machine, guarantees a certain type of industry . The weapons system is like a machine, and the weapons system can be used to make weapons .
 In almost all industrialized countries, armed forces have been pruned and centralized since the war . Armed forces remain functionally organized around the weapon system .
 navies are organized by ship, with groups of ships organized hierarchically into task forces . Navy is organized by ships, rather than by ships .
 At the apex of the American surface Navy is the aircraft carrier, requiring destroyers and a submarine or two for protection, aircraft to fly from its deck, and supply ships of various kinds for replenishment .
 The bomber and the battle tank have a similar role in the Air Force and Army . The battle tank and the bomber are similar to each other in the military .
 The Army is made up of armour, artillery, parachute or infantry units . The armoured units are the core of the combined arms team . They are the most powerful combined arms teams in the world .
 The functional autonomy of individual services or military units is achieved through independent strategies associated with particular weapon systems . Individual services and military units achieve their functional autonomy through their own strategies .
 This would explain why strategic bombing is so central to the United States Air Force or why the British Navy remains committed to an ocean-going role associated with carriers .
 In the Soviet Union, land-based mediumand long-range ballistic missiles constitute the basis for a separate service, the Strategic Rocket Forces . The Soviet Union also had a separate force, known as the Strategic Missile Forces .
 The strategic doctrine of any particular military unit can be expressed in the military specifications for a particular weapon system . That is to say, in a set of specified performance characteristics .
 The weapon system is the link between the enterprise and military unit, the embodiment of a persistent militaryindustrial alliance . Hence, the weapon system .
 In the West, the design, development and production of weapon systems is, by and large, undertaken by a few large companies known as prime contractors . Western countries in the West are known as 'prime contractors'
 Prime contractors are the manufacturers of weapon platforms-aircraft, shipbuilding, automobile or engineering companies . They assemble the complete weapon system, subcontracting subsystems, like the weapons, the engine and the electronics, and components .
 Boeing and Rockwell are bomber enterprises . Dassault in France and British Aerospace make combat aircraft . Westland Aircraft makes helicopters, Westland aircraft makes helicopters . Electric Boat and Vickers Barrow make submarines .
 Firms have amalgamated or nationalized, especially in Europe, but basically there has been very little rationalization . Firms are amalgamating or nationalizing, but there have been very few rationalizations .
 The plants which receive prime contracts for major weapon systems have remained much the same, under different names, for 30 years . The plants have remained the same under different name, under the different names .
 There has been more specialization and an increased amount of subcontract work among the prime contractors and the outside firms, especially in the electronics industry .
 There have been few, if any, actual closures in the postwar period . But among the prime contractors, there have been little actual closures . The Pentagon says it will be open to the public for the first time .
 Equally, there have been no new entries into the major weapons markets . Equally there are no new entry to the major weapon markets .
 The consequence is that a specific mix of skills and physical equipment, and a specific set of relationships with customers and suppliers (the subcontractors) has been preserved . In effect, a specific manufacturing experience corresponds to a specific military experience which corresponds to the military experience .
 Several of the big arms manufacturers in Europe have been nationalized . The prime contractors operate according to the principles of private enterprise .
 They need to maintain their independent viability and this, in practice, means the constant search to find new markets, and to maintain or increase profit margins .
 The fact that this competition takes a technological rather than price form has to do with the peculiarity of the arms market — the government as sole customer . The government is sole customer for the weapons market .
 Firms put more emphasis on ability to offer improvements to the product than on the ability to reduce the cost of production . In the end, the government pays .
 In essence, the Western armament process is characterized by a contradictory combination of stability and competition . The Western armaments process has been characterized by stability, competition, and stability .
 On the supply side, it is monopolistic,e.e. has one customer, and on the demand side it is oligopolistic, i.E. has a few competitive suppliers . The supply side of the market is more important than the supply and demand side .
 Inevitably, these two aspects are reflected in the final product, the weapon system . The weapon system is designed to be the most powerful weapon in the world .
 In a planned system, unless there is some overriding objective like victory in war, a plan tends to reflect the objectives of the institutions that participate in the plan, to express the various interests of the plan’s constituencies . In a plan, the aim of a plan is to express
 Consumer sovereignty in a planned system is rare because people who draw up the plan are strongly influenced by the people who carry it out . In other words, consumer sovereignty is rare in planned systems . Consumers are unlikely to be able to make decisions about their own rights to the system .
 In peace-time, without external stimulus of war, decisions about what is ‘needed’ for defence tend to be taken by ‘experts’, generally those who have gained their formative experience in the armament sector .
 Such decisions tend to be ‘autistic’ — the outcome of the institutional interests of users and producers . Such decisions are often the result of institutional interests, such as user and producer interests, say experts .
 Because the Soviet Union has always lagged behind the United States, the need for any particular weapon system has been assessed against an idea of what the weapon system might possess when it enters operational service . The weapon system will be assessed against what it might be capable of using five or ten years
 This idea owes more to the subjective imagination of the designers than to any hard knowledge about what was happening in the Soviet Union . The idea owes to the designers' subjective imagination, rather than any knowledge of what happened .
 The designers are the products of their military-industrial environment, the designers say . They say they are products of an environment like the military .
 The competition between prime contractors propels technology forward as each corporation attempts to offer something better than its competitor . It's something the military, at least in the US, can justify to Congress .
 And yet this technological dynamism is confined within certain limits, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: The stability of military and industrial institutions is guaranteed by the planning system . He says the stability of the military, industrial institutions are guaranteed by planning .
 The form and function of the weapon system have not changed much since 1945 . The weapon system has not changed since 1945, says the U.S. Navy .
 All weapon systems have more destructive weapons, particularly missiles . All weapons systems have improved capabilities for communication, navigation, detection, identification and weapon guidance .
 Each contractor has designed, developed and produced one weapon system after another . Each system represents an incremental improvement on the last .
 For Boeing, the Minuteman Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile followed the B52 strategic bomber, the B 47 . The B-52 was followed by the B-47 bomber, which followed the Air Force One missile .
 Newport News yards have produced no fewer than nine aircraft-carriers between 1952 and 1979 . Newport News’s yards have also produced nine aircraft carriers, each bigger and better .
 Vickers Barrow has been making submarines since the 1890s . Dassault has produced Mirage fighters, Mirage fighters and Westland helicopters . The submarine which the British propose to construct in order to launch the American Trident missile .
 The idea that each weapon system must have a follow-on has become self-perpetuating . The idea is self-propetuating. The idea of each weapon must have an 'follow-on' has become a self-defeat .
 Each corporation has a planning group whose sole function is to choose suitable successors for weapons currently being produced . The planning group maintains close contact with consorts in the military .
 In actual fact, because of the intimate relationship with the armed services it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy . It becomes a 'self-fulfilled prophecy' for the British government .
 The system has not worked smoothly, and it has taken periodic industrial crises to initiate the full range of new projects . Even so, the system hasn't worked smoothly and it's taken periodic crises to start .
 Such was the crisis which followed the winding down of the Vietnam War in the early 1970s . The crisis was similar to that of the end of the 1970s, when the war was over .
 The pressure on the defence budget which we are now witnessing is partly the result of projects initiated during that period . Defence budget pressure is partly due to the projects initiated in that period, says minister .
 As weapon systems approach the limits of technology, they become increasingly complex and costly . Weapons systems are increasingly complex, costly, as technology limits .
 The basic technology of the weapon platform may not have changed much, such improvements have often entailed the incorporation of very advanced technology, e.g. microprocessors, or nuclear power for submarines . This has greatly increased the complexity of the weapons system as a whole .
 As the weapon system becomes more complex, more labour and materials are required for development and production, greatly increasing the total cost . The weapon system will need to be more complex and more labour is required .
 The weapon systems of the 1970s represent what one might describe as a quantum leap in expense and grotesque elaboration . The weapon system of the 70s represents what one may describe as an "quantum leap"
 It will involve the biggest construction programme in the history of the U.S. The project is the largest in the country's history of construction .
 The obese Trident submarine, which is too big to get out of the channel where it was built, will cost much the same . It will cost the same, with the cost of the submarine costing much of the same as the other .
 The cost problem facing the United States military is growing worse and no relief is in sight . The cost of the U.S. military is in the midst of a national security crisis .
 The 'bow wave' of future procurement costs is growing beyond the point of reasonableness . The so-called ‘bow wave’ of future procurements is growing . The government is facing a huge financial crisis .
 Current procurement programs are estimated to total about $725, billion . Current programs have been estimated to be worth $725 billion .
 If these costs are spread over the next ten years (a conservative projection) the annual average of $72-5 billion will be more than twice the current funding levels . The costs will be spread over ten years, according to the projection .
 Many people are beginning to wonder whether the extra money will buy any real increase in military utility . Yet many people, not just those who question the whole basis of modern strategy, are concerned .
 The development of naval aircraft and submarines has meant speed is no longer important for surface ships . Speed is now no longer an important factor for surface vessels .
 The cost, complexity and size of modern weapon systems may turn out to be a positive liability . The cost of modern weapons systems may be a good liability, experts say .
 Size and vulnerability go hand in hand in the hostile environment of the modern battlefield, where accuracy and lethality of all munitions have greatly increased . In the modern age of the battlefield, size and vulnerability are key factors .
 Complexity greatly increases unreliability, reduces manoeuvrability and flexibility, and creates enormous logistic problems . Complexity of complex structures greatly increases reliability, reduces flexibility and reduces flexibility . Complexities greatly increase unreliability and reduces manoeuvment and flexibility .
 The First Tactical Air Wing failed a test given by the Air Force’s Tactical Command to see if it was ready to mobilize for a war in the Middle East . The wing's motto is 'Readiness is our Profession'
 Only 23 of the 66 F 15 aircraft were ‘mission capable’ because of engine and parts failures, lack of spares, shortages of skilled technicians, etc. — and these problems are not untypical of Western weapon systems .
 Cost is a disadvantage because of the high attrition rates of modern warfare . Budgetary limitations lead to savings on such essentials as ammunition, fuel, spares, military pay, training, etc. Likewise, cost is also a disadvantage due to high attrition rate of warfare .
 The huge support systems and the overburdened centralized command systems associated with the modern weapon system are very vulnerable and could be easily disrupted in a war . The massive support systems are vulnerable to a war, say experts .
 The problems of vulnerability, logistics, communications, etc. etc. have called into question the future of the weapon system . Indeed, the experience of war in Vietnam and the Middle East has called into questions about the weapons system .
 Destructiveness and effectiveness are no longer synonymous — if they ever were . Destructibility and effectiveness no longer are synonymous . The U.S. government is no longer an effective tool of destruction, it says .
 The degeneracy of the weapon system is not without its effects on Western economy and society as a whole . It is not only the effects of the weapons system but also the effects on society .
 The weapon system is the basis of military organization both within individual nations and within the alliance as a whole . As an object of use, the weapon system provides the basis for military organization .
 The dominance of American weapon systems reflects the dominance of U.S. strategic thinking and the American defence industry, says CNN.com .
 The proposals for groundlaunched cruise missiles could be interpreted as an attempt to reassert that dominance . Groundlaunched missiles could also be seen as a bid to assert dominance in the air .
 As the military rationale for such systems becomes more and more remote and rarified, so their usefulness in holding together, as it were, the Western alliance becomes more open to question .
 The weapon system is part of modern industry and its development has to be understood as consequence and cause of broader industrial tendencies . As an object of production, the weapon system must be seen as a result of wider industrial tendencies, says author .
 In a capitalist system, the market mechanism ensures rapid technical change . In the world, it means rapid technical changes in the way of the market .
 As production processes are adapted to meet changing demands, the whole economic structure undergoes radical alterations . Production processes will undergo radical alterations as production processes adapt to meet demands .
 Companies, industries, sectors and regions rise and fall according to the dictates of the market . Companies, industry, sector and region rise to the top five in the world .
 As the product of a semi-planned sector, armaments can interrupt this process . Armaments are often the result of a planned economy, not a planned society .
 In so far as they guarantee the stability of military-industrial institutions, of the major corporations, armaments can help to alleviate crises . Arms arms can help alleviate crises, writes David Frum .
 The stability of industrial structure has the effect of freezing industrial structure and postponing change . That same stability has also frozen industrial structure, postponing changes, experts say .
 In so far as armaments are themselves subject to the capitalist dynamic they can drag the economy along their own technological cul de sac, passing on the degeneracy of trend innovation .
 In effect they can preserve and extend industries that would otherwise have declined, say experts . But they can also fetter the emergence of new dynamic industries, they say .
 Mechanical engineering and shipbuilding in Britain or the automobile and aircraft industries in the United States. This is one reason for the persistence of mechanical engineering and . shipbuilding .
 The absorption of resources by these declining sectors, distorting effects of armament-induced ways of thinking about technology on new as well as older industries, are among the factors which help to explain the backwardness of arms-intensive economies like Britain and the United States .
 Armament sector in the Soviet Union could be described as the inverse of the Western armament sector . The Soviet Union's armaments sector was described as 'in inverse' of that of Western armaments .
 On the supply side, arms are produced by the same kinds of enterprises that characterize the centrally planned economy as a whole . Arms are produced in the same kind of enterprises as well as in the centrally-planned economy .
 Research institutes, design bureaux and production plants are organized as separate entities under the control of nine different defence ministries . Unlike those in the West, research institutes in the U.S. are separate from production plants .
 The stability of these institutions, together with their suppliers, is guaranteed by the system of planning and budgeting, says the head of state broadcaster .
 Unlike in the West, where competition, the pressure for technical advance, the winning or losing of contracts may lead to the amalgamation of design teams and prime contractors and to massive shifts in the composition of subcontractors, the various industrial organizations are assured .
 Armaments in the Soviet Union are privileged products . It is often said that the armament sector is the only sector in the . Soviet system .
 Armament sector receives the best machinery and parts; it can commandeer scarce materials . Defence employees earn higher incomes and obtain better non-monetary benefits . requests and orders from the administration tend to be dealt with more quickly .
 Many commentators have remarked on the unusual degree of which the consumer can ensure that specifications are met and can overcome resistance to demand-induced changes . The consumer can also overcome resistance .
 In general, these programmes were a response to developments in the West, which was always one technological step ahead of the Soviet Union . The West was always ahead of Soviet Union, and was always technological ahead of them .
 Because of the degree of consumer sovereignty, the armament sector can represent a mechanism for change in the Soviet system . The armaments sector represents a means of change in Soviet system, the author says .
 Military competition with Germany could be said to have been the overriding objective of the Soviet planning system . This was certainly the case in the 1930s .
 It can be argued that it was through the armament sector that the economy was mobilized . The armaments sector was the key to mobilising the country's economy .
 The weapon system is the basis of modern military organization . Disarmament is a key component of the weapon system . Weapons are the basis for modern military organizations .
 It holds together the two great military alliances and divides East from West . The alliance was formed in the wake of the Second World War II .
 The sector which produces the weapon system is also the conceptual link between the two societies . And yet, paradoxically, the weapons industry is also a key link between both societies .
 For it introduces an element of planning into the capitalist system, it helps to stave off crisis but, at the same time, slows down change . For it thus helps stave away crisis but also slows down progress, says David Cameron .
 It introduces an element of competition into the Soviet Union, inserting a mechanism for change . The Soviet Union was founded in the early 1930s . It was the first state-run state of Soviet Union .
 In the past, the armament sector may have worked quite well in blunting some of the contradictions of each society . The armaments sector has helped blunted some of those contradictions of society .
 The declining military effectiveness and growing cost of armament are undermining the political weight of the superpowers and sapping their economic strength . The decline of military effectiveness is gradually undermining political weight and economic strength of superpowers .
 The crisis of the armament sector has thrown up new forms of conflict and protest, says David Cameron . Cameron: 'The crisis of armaments sector has throw up new ways of protest'
 The crisis has drawn a response from within the armament sector, as well as elsewhere, from soldiers illprepared for new forms of conflict and from workers in the defence industry .
 It could alternatively initiate a process of disarmament by channelling the new protests into positive directions . But it could also be channelled into positive ways to disarmament .
 Most disarmament efforts are aimed at the role of armaments as objects of use . The aim of disarmament is to reduce the use of weapons in the world . Most disarmaments efforts have been aimed at disarmament .
 To reverse effectively the armament process, we also need to undermine their role as objects of production . We need to also undermine the role of producing weapons, he says . He says .
 But we also need to change the military-industrial culture which created them . We need to also change the culture that created them, says David Cameron . It's time to get rid of the 'military-industrial' culture, he says .
 In a sense, economic development represents a continual process of conversion . The process involves finding new products and phasing out old ones, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The conversion from arms to peaceful production would be merely one aspect of this process . The conversion of arms to peace is one of many aspects of the process, says the author .
 The capitalist economy depends on the market as a method of allocating resources . The market is used to allocate resources in the capitalist economy .
 It involves anarchy, dislocation, structural unemployment and periodic crises, it involves anarchy and structural unemployment, it has been said . "It involves anarchy" and "dislocation"
 The alternative is the central planning mechanism of the socialist countries, which leads to rigidity because biases in government reflect vested bureaucratic interests . The alternative to the socialist system is the state of state planning .
 It avoids crises but, at the same time, is much more resistant to change than is the capitalist system . The capitalist system avoids crises and avoids crises, but is resistant to changes . It thus avoids crises yet is more resistant than any other system .
 The conversion from war to peace needs to be seen not as the technical process of converting swords to ploughshares, but as a social process of finding a new mechanism for the allocation of resources . The conversion is not a technical process, but it must be seen as social process .
 These have become what one might call quasi-weapon systems — similarly elaborate and expensive, expensive, with, in the end, similar economic consequences . The systems have become increasingly elaborate, expensive and expensive .
 These products could never provide perfect substitutes for armaments since they do not command the same urgency . Further, they could never be perfect substitutes since they don't command same urgency as weapons .
 It would be difficult to justify increased expenditure on space or artificial hearts in times of economic recession . Space and artificial hearts would be hard to justify in such a recession .
 Conversion needs to be seen as a way of creating a new economic system which would minimize those problems that create opportunities for conflict and the pressure for armaments . Conversion would be a way to create a new system that would minimize the problems that make conflict more likely .
 Such a system would combine the positive elements of planning and free enterprise, instead of, as in the armament sector, the negative elements of both . The idea is to combine planning with free enterprise with planning, not armament .
 The Western armament system is characterized by planning on the demand side and competition on the supply side . Western armaments system, as we have seen, is characterized as planning and competition .
 The Western form of military technical change, the outcome of this system, is transferred to the Soviet Union through the consumer sovereignty . The consumer sovereignty that is the unique characteristic of the armament sector in the Soviet .
 What is needed is a system of consumer sovereignty in which the consumer is not a military establishment engaged in a competitive arms race but an ordinary person . The consumer should not be engaged in an arms race, but in other words, planning, under democratic control .
 A sturdy democracy originates in popular movement, even though such movements must eventually find an institutional expression . The U.S. has a strong democracy, but it must find institutional expression, the author says .
 Trades unions in the defence industry in Britain, West Germany, the United States, Italy and Sweden have expressed interest in converting defence unions .
 Lucas Aerospace and Vickers workers have earned a world-wide reputation for their proposals and campaigns to achieve socially useful production . This interest has proceeded farthest in Britain, where the workers of Lucas Aerospace have earned the world's reputation .
 Neither the market mechanism nor central planning has proved very efficient at marrying social need to available resources . The market mechanism and central planning have failed to marry social need with available resources, experts say .
 The alternative is to propose products which emanate from direct contacts between producers and consumers . Producers and consumers should be able to make contact with each other .
 In developing their ideas, unions found it necessary to develop links with unions in supplier industries and with consumer organizations .
 Rolls-Royce workers' proposals for gas turbine propulsion for merchant ships turned out to be an oversophisticated, marginally useful suggestion .
 It provides a more effective method of putting political pressure on management and the government . More importantly, it provides an effective way to pressure management and government .
 Many of the ideas clash with priorities currently established by the government, which tend to reflect existing vested interests, say experts .
 Shop stewards proposed energy conservation equipment and alternative forms of energy based on wind or waves . Yet official energy priorities stress North Sea oil, coal, and nuclear energy .
 Transport policy places the emphasis on roads rather than railways or canals . They also proposed new kinds of rail vehicles or ways of revitalizing Britain’s canal system .
 The workers have joined forces with organizations like the anti-nuclear energy movement or Transport 2000 . Transport 2000 lobbies against the unplanned growth of the automobile infrastructure .
 Unions in British Leyland pressed management to purchase a scrap metal baler . The idea was put forward by the Vickers Shop Stewards .
 Informal alliances between producers and consumers could provide the basis for future planning agencies . Future planning agencies would reflect a different set of social priorities .
 There is always the risk that social criteria for resource allocation could turn out to be national, and hence divisive on a global scale . Ideally, these links should be international, for there to be international .
 At both Vickers and Lucas Aerospace, some international links have been forged . Vickers Aerospace is the world's second largest manufacturer .
 They have proposed various kinds of equipment for irrigation and water purification . They have also proposed various types of equipment .
 Lucas Aerospace workers have discussed the possibility of adapting a road/rail vehicle they have invented for use in Tanzania and Zambia with the governments of those countries . The Lucas Aerospace team have invented the vehicle to be adapted into use in the countries .
 Lucas Aerospace workers have actually achieved some success in pressing their management to undertake the manufacture of socially useful products . Lucas Aerospace staff have actually succeeded in pressing management to manufacture socially useful goods .
 Workers are inserting their own criteria, as producers and consumers, into the choice of products . For the first time, workers are inserting themselves into the decision-making process . Workers say they want to be able to make their own choices based on criteria .
 They are, in a sense, developing a new mechanism for conversion, which, if it spreads, could change the composition of power in existing institutions . It could eventually be embodied in a new set of planning institutions which set priorities according to social needs of consumers .
 Any campaign for disarmament must join forces with workers in the defence industry in demanding conversion . Workers in defence industry must also demand conversion to disarmament .
 Conversion could build upon the growing fissures within the armament system . It could direct current frustrations towards disarmament rather than war . Conversion and other disarmament issues could be discussed .
 Conversion would thus be seen as a way of achieving disarmament rather than a thorny problem to be solved after the politicians had finally willed the reduction of armaments . Conversion would be a way to achieve disarmament, rather than an issue of political will .
 Conversion would not just be a matter of turning swords into ploughsares . Conversion would be a step in the right direction of the world's most powerful nations .
 It would be a matter of creating a new mechanism for the wider process of economic conversion . It would match the desperate needs of the modern world with resources that are either misused or not used at all .
 It could undermine the political and economic basis for armaments in advanced industrial countries . It would help overcome structural problems, weaknesses and divisions of different economic systems, he says .
 Report to the Congress of the United States by the Comptroller General, PSA D-80-6, November 1979, Nov 1979, 3 6. 6. Report to Congress . by the comptroller General .
 Economic and social difficulties in advanced industrial countries, crisis, militarism and war in the third world compound the political tensions that fuel a demented arms race .
 In Europe, the main geographical stage for the East-West confrontation, new generations of ever more deadly nuclear weapons are appearing . Europe is Europe's most geographical stage of the confrontation .
 For at least twenty-five years, the forces of both the North Atlantic and the Warsaw alliance have each had sufficient nuclear weapons to annihilate their opponents, and at the same time to endanger the very basis of civilized life .
 Competition in nuclear armaments has multiplied their numbers, increasing the probability of some devastating accident or miscalculation . But with each passing year, competition in nuclear arms has multiplied numbers .
 Each side tries to prove its readiness to use nuclear weapons, in order to prevent their use by the other side . New, more ‘usable’ nuclear weapons are designed and the idea of 'limited' nuclear war is made to sound more and more plausible .
 This paradoxical process can logically only lead to the actual use of nuclear weapons . So much so that this paradoxical . process only leads to nuclear weapons being used in the real world .
 Neither of the major powers is now in any moral position to influence smaller countries to forgo the acquisition of nuclear armament, says CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 The increasing spread of nuclear reactors and the growth of the industry that installs them, reinforce the likelihood of world-wide proliferation of nuclear weapons . The risk of nuclear exchanges is multiplying the risks of nuclear attacks .
 An increasing proportion of world resources is expended on weapons, even though mutual extermination is already amply guaranteed . Mutual extermination of the population is already guaranteed .
 Generations have been born beneath the shadow of nuclear war, and have become habituated to the threat .
 Fear extends through both halves of the European continent . Meanwhile, in a world living always under menace, fear extends through Europe .
 The powers of the military and of internal security forces are enlarged, limitations placed upon free exchanges of ideas and between persons . Civil rights of independentminded individuals are threatened, in the West as well as the East, as well .
 We do not wish to apportion guilt between the political and military leaders of East and West. We wish to avoid apportioning blame between the two sides .
 Both parties have adopted menacing postures and committed aggressive actions in different parts of the world . Both sides have adopted aggressive postures, according to CNN.com .
 We must act together to free the entire territory of Europe, from Poland to Portugal, from nuclear weapons, air and submarine bases, from all institutions engaged in research into or manufacture of nuclear weapons .
 We ask the two superpowers to withdraw all nuclear weapons from European territory . We ask for them to withdraw from Europe, we say .
 In particular, we ask the Soviet Union to halt production of SS 20 medium-range missile . We ask the United States not to implement the decision to develop cruise missiles and Pershing I1 missiles for deployment in Western Europe .
 We also urge the ratification of the SALT II agreement, as a necessary step towards the renewal of effective negotiations on general and complete disarmament .
 We appeal to our friends in Europe, of every faith and persuasion, to consider urgently the ways in which we can work together for these common objectives .
 "We must commence to act as if a united, neutral and pacific Europe already exists," he says . We must also consider a united and neutral Europe, he adds .
 We must learn to be loyal, not to ‘East’ or ‘West’s, but to each other, and we must disregard the prohibitions and limitations imposed by any national state . We must be loyal not to 'East or 'West' or 'East'
 It will be the responsibility of the people of each nation to agitate for the expulsion of nuclear weapons and bases from European soil and territorial waters . The EU must decide upon its own means and strategy concerning its own territory .
 These will differ from one country to another, and we do not suggest that any single strategy should be imposed, says the BBC .
 "This must be part of a trans-continental movement in which every kind of exchange takes place," he says . "But this must be . part of the movement," he adds .
 "We must resist any attempt by the statesmen of East or West to manipulate this movement to their own advantage," says David Cameron . We must resist attempts to manipulate the movement, he says .
 Our objectives must be to free Europe from confrontation, to enforce detente between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, and, ultimately, to dissolve both great power alliances . Our objectives are to free European unity from confrontation and to dissolve great power alliance .
 In appealing to fellow-Europeans, we are not turning our backs on the world. We appeal to fellow Europeans not to turn their backs on us. We're not turning ourselves against the world, they say. We are not looking to turn ourselves away from the rest of the world
 In working for peace of Europe we are working for the peace of the world. In Europe, the peace is peace, he says. In working in peace, we are also working for world peace .
 This appeal will achieve nothing if it is not supported by determined and inventive action, to win more people to support it . The appeal will not achieve nothing unless it is supported by . determined and . inventive action .
 We need to mount an irresistible pressure for a Europe free of nuclear weapons, says David Cameron . The UK needs to mount irresistible pressure to end nuclear weapons in Europe .
 "We do not wish to impose any uniformity on the movement nor to pre-empt the consultations and decisions of those many organizations already exercising their influence for disarmament and peace," the group says .
 We invite your support for this common objective, and we shall welcome both your help and advice . We invite you to join us in the fight for our country .
 Johnson was later apprehended by the FBI, and sentenced to twenty-five years in prison . Johnson had been sentenced to 25 years .
 Spivy, director of J-3 division, had been organizing for the ‘defence’ of his European allies . He had organized for the 'defence' of his allies .
 Documents appear to contain over 2,800 targets — possibly double that number — throughout Europe and parts of the Middle East, it says . The documents, it explained, appear to have been released by the U.S. State Department .
 The weapons designated for this work ranged from 2°5 kilotons to 1-4 megatons . The weapons were designed to carry out the mission .
 So prolific was the armoury by the time of the early sixties, it was thought prudent to assign it to such hitherto unanticipated targets as bridges and motorway junctions .
 Up to the mid-1g60s the United States had enjoyed a preponderating lead over the USSR in the numbers and refinement of its nuclear weapons . The U.S. enjoyed a pre-eminently superior lead over Russia .
 'retaliation' was designed to forestall any regrettable tendency among allies or neutrals to be over-run . What was not public was the information that much of this ‘retaliation’ was designed .
 The proportion of allied populations scheduled for similar elimination was not public knowledge during the years of calculations . But the proportion of the allied populations was not known .
 Europe is in a far worse position at the beginning of the eighties than was even secretly thinkable twenty years ago . But from what is publicly known it is clear that Europe is far worse now than at the start of the 80s .
 It was as early as the mid-1950s that so-called 'tactical' nuclear weapons were brought into widespread deployment in Europe .
 By 1960 the USSR had an answering arsenal, all capable of targeting on European cities . By 1960, the Soviet Union had an arsenal of weapons capable of attacking European cities.
 By 1978, the equipment of the world’s armies was costing substantially over a billion dollars a day . Overall, by 1978, by the end of that year, the world's armies was spending substantially over $1billion a day on equipment .
 The sinister leapfrog between Eastern and Western weapons developments was producing an even more sinister jump in the established theory of mutual deterrence . Western and Eastern weapons developments were producing a sinister jump .
 In Central Europe alone, 7,000 American and probably 3,500 Russian ‘tactical’ warheads with a destructive potential at least fifty times that of all the weapons used in the Second World War, the Korean War and the war in Vietnam combined . In the late sevent
 The conventional notion of deterrence had always been wrapped in swathes of assurances by its proponents that the actual use of nuclear weapons was unthinkable . The idea of deterrence was always wrapped around assurances that nuclear weapons were unthinkable .
 Nuclear forces in the superpowers are at near parity, so 7Jime magazine offers up the pious hope that, next time, both parties might blink at once .
 We must still presume that neither major power really wishes to destroy the world, we may begin to understand why more and more weight has been placed on the notion of ‘theatre’ weapons . Theatre weapons might be actually employed without annihilating the whole of civilization .
 This is the unlooked-for transformation which has come over the logic of deterrence . This is a transformation which is not looked-for, but the logic is deterrence . The U.S. has been in the grip of the world's most powerful state of power .
 It followed the development of highly accurate, adaptable and lethal weapons delivery systems . The weapons delivery system was developed in the 1990s .
 Small nuclear weapons of various designs were produced and deployed for use in what was assumed to be a tactical or theatre war . It was not long before smaller nuclear weapons were produced .
 I don't believe any scenario exists which suggests that nuclear weapons could be used in field warfare between two nuclear states without escalation resulting . I do not believe that any scenario . exists .
 There is no Marquess of Queensberry who would be holding the ring in a nuclear conflict . The Marquess would not be in charge of a nuclear attack .
 I cannot see teams of physicists who would run to the scene of a nuclear explosion and then back to tell their local commanders that the radiation intensity of a strike by the other side was such and such, and that therefore the riposte should be only a weapon of equivalent yield . I
 If the zone of lethal or wounding neutron radiation of a socalled neutron bomb would have, say, a radius of half a kilometre, the reply might well be a ‘dirty’ bomb .
 Once we have seen the trend involved in reasoning about theatre war we cannot fail to fail to draw some very unpleasant conclusions about it . Theatre war is theatre war, but it is not theatre war .
 If Mountbatten and Zuckerman are right, any ‘theatre’ in which such weapons of whatever provenance are used will be eliminated .
 Second, the corollary is that if there is any meaning in the restriction implied in the concept of ‘theatre weapons, it is not that they will be selective within a particular zone, but that they might possibly be unleashed in one comparatively narrow area rather than another wider one
 It implies that there has been a mutation in the concept of deterrence itself, with grisly consequences for us . It rather implies that the concept has been mutated in the way deterrence itself .
 'Deterrence is now so very costly that 'conventional' responses are becoming impossible, to the point where even superpowers find themselves stalemated unless they are willing to discover means of ‘conventionalizing’ and then employing parts of their nuclear arsenals .
 If the powers want a bit of a nuclear war, they will want to have it away from home . The UK is the only country in the world to have nuclear weapons .
 If we do not wish to be their hosts for such a match, we must discover a new initiative which can move us towards disarmament . If we don't wish to host them, we need to discover new initiative to move us to disarmament.
 New technologies will not do this, and nor will introspection and conscience suddenly seize command in both superpowers at once . New technologies won't be able to replace conscience with new technology, they say .
 A multinational mobilization of public opinion must be part of the response to the crisis, says John Defterios . He says .
 In Europe, this will not begin until people appreciate the exceptional vulnerability of their continent . Europe's exceptional vulnerability will not be solved until people are aware of their vulnerability, he says .
 Olof Palme has drawn attention to this extreme exposure . Palme is one of the world's most famous Nordic statesmen . He says Palme was born in Sweden and has been in Sweden for decades .
 General assumption seems to be that any potential military conflict between the superpowers is going to start someplace other than in Europe .
 We would have to count on one or the other party — in an effort to gain supremacy — trying to open a front on our continent, as well . But even if that were to be the case, it would have been a front for both parties .
 War can simply be transported here, even though actual causes for war do not exist . As Alva Myrdal has recently pointed out, a war can be simply transported here . War can be transported to a war simply as well as actual causes .
 Mr Palme recalled attempts to create, in North and Central Europe, nuclear-free zones, from which, by agreement, all warheads were to be excluded .
 There is, in my opinion, every reason to go on working for a nuclear-free zone . Today more than ever there is more reason to work for a free zone than ever .
 The geographical area closest to hand would naturally be Northern and Central Europe . Northern Europe would be the most populated area in the world .
 The goal of the UN Special Session was ‘general and complete disarmament’, as it should have been . Palme’s own proposals were also included in his own proposals . The goal was deliberately coupled with a series of intermediate objectives .
 The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of agreements or arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the zone concerned, and the full compliance with those agreements . Such zones constitute an important disarmament measure, says the UN .
 The process of establishing such zones in different parts of the world should be encouraged . The ultimate objective of achieving a world entirely free of nuclear weapons is to be achieved .
 In the process of establishing such zones, the characteristics of each region should be taken into account, the author says . The characteristics of such zones should also be considered .
 The States participating in such zones should comply fully with all the objectives, purposes and principles of the agreements or arrangements establishing the zones, thus ensuring that they are genuinely free from nuclear weapons . The United States should ensure that such zones are free from weapons .
 States of the region should solemnly declare that they will refrain from producing, acquiring, or in any other way possessing nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices . States should refrain on a reciprocal basis from producing or acquiring nuclear weapons, and from permitting the stationing of nuclear weapons on their territory by
 Article 63 of this final document schedules several areas for consideration as nuclear-free zones . Article 63 sets out areas that could be considered for a nuclear zone . Article is part of the final document of the U.N. Security Council .
 Organization of African Unity has resolved upon ‘denuclearization of the region’, but also the Middle East and South Asia, which are listed alongside South and Central America .
 Treaty of Tlatelolco (a suburb of Mexico City) opened for signature from February 1967 . This is the only populous area to have been covered by an existing agreement .
 There are other zones which are covered by more or less similar agreements .
 Conservationists will be pleased that they include Antarctica, the moon, outer space, and outer space .
 The effectiveness of the agreed arrangements is often questioned . One reason is that they are often questioned is that the effectiveness of them is questioned .
 The other is that if civilization is destroyed, the survivors may not be equipped to establish themselves comfortably in safe havens among penguins or deep-sea plants and fish, leave alone upon the moon .
 If we are agreed that ‘it does not matter where the bombs come from’, there is another question which is more pertinent . The question is whether it matters whether the bombs are coming from the bombs .
 Highpriority targets are all locations from which response might otherwise come . Clearly, highpriority targets must be high-priority targets for the U.S.
 "This would not in one step liquidate the alliances, or end all the tension," he says . This would not liquidate alliances, he adds .
 It would constitute a significant pressure on the superpowers, since each would thenceforward have a priority need to target on the silos of the other, and the present logic of ‘theatre’ thinking would all be reversed .
 None of this would lift the threat of apocalypse, but it would be a first step in that direction . It would be the first step toward lifting the threat from the apocalypse .
 "As things are, we are in the theatre, and they are hoping to be able to watch us on their videos," says the band .
 Europe as a whole has not hitherto raised the issue of its possible denuclearization . There have been a number of efforts to sanitize smaller regions within the continent .
 The idea that groups in particular areas might agree to forgo the manufacture or deployment of nuclear weapons was first seriously mooted in the 1950s .
 The proposal was discussed in the Disarmament Sub-Committee of the United Nations, but it got no further .
 Adam Rapacki wants to outlaw the manufacture and the harbouring of nuclear arsenals in all the territories of Poland, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic and the Federal German Republic .
 Rapacki’s proposals would have come into force by four separate unilateral decisions of each relevant government . The proposal would have had to be made by four different decisions by each government .
 Enforcement would have been supervised by a commission drawn from NATO countries, Warsaw Pact adherents, and nonaligned states .
 Inspection posts, with system of ground and air controls, were to be established to enable the commission to function . Inspection posts would be set up to enable them to operate .
 Neither nuclear weapons, nor installations capable of harbouring or servicing them, nor missile sites, would have been permitted in the entire designated area .
 Nuclear powers were thereupon expected to agree not to use nuclear weapons against denuclearized zone . They were also expected not to deploy their own atomic warheads with any of their conventional forces stationed .
 The plan was rejected by NATO powers, on the grounds that it did nothing to secure German reunification . NATO powers said it failed to cover the deployment of conventional armaments . The plan failed to secure reunification and, second, that it failed .
 In the beginning, nuclear stockpiles would be frozen at their existing levels within the zone . Nuclear stockpiles are already frozen at existing levels in the zone, officials say . The zone would also freeze existing levels of stockpiles .
 The removal of weapon stocks would be accompanied by controlled and mutually agreed reductions in conventional forces . Later, the removal of weapons stocks would lead to controlled reductions of conventional forces, the U.N. says .
 In 1957, Romania proposed a similar project to denuclearize the Balkans . Meantime, in 1957, in Romania, a similar proposal was proposed .
 The Chinese People’s Republic suggested that the Pacific Ocean and all Asia be constituted a nuclear-free zone, and in 1960 various African states elaborated similar proposals for an All-African agreement .
 In 1962 the Polish government offered yet another variation on the Rapacki Plan, which would have maintained its later notion of phasing, but which would now have permitted other European nations to join in if they wished to extend the original designated area .
 In the first stage, existing levels of nuclear weaponry and rocketry would be frozen, prohibiting the creation of new bases . The first stage would be the first of a freeze on nuclear weapons and rocket launches .
 Nuclear and conventional armaments would be progressively reduced according to a negotiated timetable . Then, as in the earlier version, nuclear and conventional arms would be gradually reduced . The new version of the deal would be published in the UK and Russia .
 The rejection of this 1962 version was the end of the Rapacki proposals, but they were followed in 1964 by the so-called ‘Gomulka’ plan, which was designed to affect the same area, but which offered more restricted goals .
 The main NATO powers displayed no real interest in all these efforts, they did . But they did raise some real concern and sympathy in Scandinavia . NATO's efforts did not go unnoticed, but they did have some real interest .
 As early as October 1961, the Swedish government tabled what became known as the Undén Plan at the First Committee of the UN General Assembly .
 This supported the idea of nuclear-free zones and a ‘non-atomic club’ and advocated their general acceptance . It was the first time a nuclear zone had been considered a non-nuclear club .
 Certain of its proposals, concerning non-proliferation and testing, were adopted by the General Assembly . Certain of the proposals were also approved by the UN .
 The Undén Plan was never realized, because the USA and others maintained at the time that nuclear-free zones were an inappropriate approach to disarmament . The USA and other countries argued that such zones were inappropriate .
 In 1963, President Kekkonen of Finland called for the reopening of talks on the Undén Plan . The Undén plan was the first attempt to re-open talks with the Finnish government .
 Finland and Sweden were both neutral already, he said . Denmark and Norway had no nuclear weapons of their own, despite membership of NATO .
 He said the de-facto commitment would be reinforced by a deliberate collective decision to confirm it as an enduring joint policy . But he said it would be notably reinforced by the decision to confirmed it .
 The Norwegian premier responded to this démarche by calling for the inclusion of sections of the USSR .
 As long ago as 1959, Nikita Khrushchev had suggested a Nordic nuclear-free zone . No approach was apparently made to him during 1963 to discover whether the USSR would be willing to underpin such a project with any concession .
 Khrushchev launched yet another similar proposal in 1963, for a nuclear-free Mediterranean . The proposal was rejected by the Soviet Union in 1963 .
 The fall of Khrushchev took much of the steam out of such diplomatic forays, even though new proposals continued to emerge at intervals .
 In May 1974, the Indian government detonated what it described as a ‘peaceful’ nuclear explosion . The Indian government described the explosion as a 'peaceful' explosion .
 This provoked renewed proposals for a nuclear-free zone in the Near East, from both Iran and the United Arab Republic . It also revived African concern with the problem .
 New Zealand offered up a suggestion for a South Pacific free zone later in the same year . The Indian bang was probably heard in New Zealand .
 The Latin American Treaty, which is briefly discussed above, had already been concluded in 1967 . Within a decade it had secured the adherence of twenty-five states .
 African pressures for a similar agreement are notably influenced by the threat of a South African nuclear capacity, which is an obvious menace to neighbouring Mozambique, Zimbabwe, and Angola, and a standing threat to the OAU .
 In the Middle East, fear of an Israeli bomb is widespread throughout the region . Israel plays a similar catalysing role, and fear of a bomb is also widespread .
 Apart from a thin scatter of neutrals, Europe is the seed-bed of alignments, and the interests of the blocs as apparently disembodied entities are commonly prayed as absolute within it .
 In each bloc there is a leading state, not only in terms of military supply, but also in the determination of policy . They displace the constituent patriotisms of the member states with a kind of bloc loyalty, which solidly implies that in each state there is the leading state .
 The West enters the latest round of the arms race in a prolonged and, for some, mortifying slump . Economic competition divides the West, which enters the new round of arms race .
 In the East, divergent interests are not so easily expressed, but they certainly exist, and from time to time become manifest . Divergent interests in the East may not be easily expressed but they exist, says the author .
 For all this, subordinate states on either side find it very difficult to stand off from their protectors . Subpartmental states find it hard to stand back from the protectors of their own .
 Russell ‘Foundation joined forces with a variety of peace organizations in Britain (CND, Pax Christi, the International Confederation for Disarmament and Peace, among others) to launch an appeal to do precisely this . The European Appeal was launched in 1980 .
 A completely new draft was prepared incorporating the ideas of correspondents in many different countries, in Northern, Western, Southern and Eastem Europe . This was then circulated very widely in Europe, as a result of which a new draft of ideas was prepared .
 The appeal then took on its final form after a meeting in London in April 1980 . French, British, West German and Italian supporters were present at the meeting . The appeal was made after meeting with supporters of the French and British .
 The appeal was announced at the end of that month and signatures were still being canvassed in Great Britain and the rest of Europe up to Hiroshima Day, 6 August 1980 .
 The European Nuclear Disarmament movement has already become known as the European nuclear disarmament movement . The initial response to the movement was quite extraordinary, says Dr. David Cameron .
 It quickly became very evident that European hesitations about nuclear armament were in no way less developed than the reservations of Africans, Latin Americans, or Asians . European reluctance to use nuclear weapons was no longer as developed by Europeans, Latin American, or Asian nations .
 Composer Peter Maxwell Davies joined painter Josef Herman with Moss Evans, trade unionist Moss Evans . The composer joined the painter with the painter . Davies joined Herman with Evans in the painting .
 Growing swell of support included hundreds upon hundreds of other names which were not household words, but which reflected a real movement of opinion .
 Dockers, coalminers, students, housewives, busmen and computer programmers sent in the printed appeal forms . Often afhixed to home-made petitions listing dozens of adherents .
 It was not possible and not desirable for British activists to attempt to prescribe what courses of action were most relevant in all the different nations of the continent . It was 'not possible' to try and prescribe what course of action was most relevant .
 Each of the important neutral states was caught in its own patterns of affinities, from Yugoslavia to Spain . Spain, recently emancipated from Franco, was poised before a variety of choices about possible future alliances .
 Mass movements have grown up in Holland, Belgium and Norway . Already, as the British supporters agreed on their first moves, mass movements had grown up .
 The Dutch and Belgians were able, in the swell of protest, to postpone the implementation of the NATO agreement to install cruise missiles in their countries . The Dutch, Belgians and the Dutch were able to delay the implementation .
 "Very soon after the agreement of the text of the appeal, contact between these movements took place," she said .
 Key activists from each of these countries joined with eminent political leaders in supporting the proposed European Convention . The European Convention would be held in the European Union .
 In France, the EN D initiative was announced by Claude Bourdet, the editor of Témoignage Chrétienne, at a national press conference .
 Similar announcements were made in Oslo and Berlin at the same time, and a variety of organizations and individuals gave their support .
 An international meeting was organized by the Spaniards to ventilate the argument in the days before the recalled Helsinki Conference on European Security, scheduled to meet in Madrid .
 An early signatory was Professor Giovanni Favilli, the scientist who had, from the beginning, been actively involved in the Pugwash movement . Professor Favilli was a member of the movement .
 He convened meetings in all of the quartieri of the region to consider appeal . The appeal was widely published in the civic journal and elsewhere .
 A Greek committee began to take shape, with the support of Andreas Papandreou, the opposition leader, amongst others . The committee is expected to be formed by the Greek government .
 Portuguese supporters included Ernesto Melo Antunes, the former Foreign Minister, and Francisco Marcelo Curto, Minister of Labour in the Soares government, among others .
 By mid-July there were supporters in Finland and Turkey, Hungary and Czechoslovakia, Ireland and Sweden . Supporters in Finland, Turkey and Hungary also support the band's cause .
 The roll-call reached from Roy Medvedev in Moscow to Noel Browne, the former Health Minister, in Dublin, and Gunnar Myrdal in Stockholm to ex-premier Hegedus in Budapest .
 Groups in one country made direct appeals to similar groups in another country . This extensive response was reinforced by the encouragement of lateral appeals, in which groups in both countries appealed to each other .
 Several members of the British TUC General Council wrote to their opposite numbers in France, and a British trade union group soon received approaches from Oslo . Norway is a major source of support for the Norwegian government in Norway .
 As the campaign gathers weight, this kind of initiative will gain importance, because it does not depend upon centralized networks of communications . The initiative is a practical, as well as a symbolic, assertion of a growing all-European consciousness, says author .
 Already efforts are being made to ‘twin’ Cambridge and Siena, which share the burden of proximity to planned bases for cruise missiles . Already efforts have been made to 'twin' Cambridge .
 Such arrangements are possible at a multiplicity of different levels, between women’s groups, churches, civic and industrial bodies, students, or a wide variety of sporting associations .
 The problem of East-West contact may be especially susceptible to this kind of treatment . East-East contact may also be particularly susceptible to such treatment .
 The appeal insists that We must resist any attempt by the statesmen of East or West to manipulate this movement to their own advantage . At the same time, the appeal insists we must resist attempts to manipulate it .
 "No one should seek to minimize the difficulties involved in this task, but neither should they be magnified," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The difficulties involved are not minimized, but they are magnified."
 There are big differences in the scope for public campaigning in countries which support the two blocs . It is not possible for governments in either camp to ignore the pressure of informed and active public opinion in the other .
 The movement for European nuclear disarmament is a movement to transform the meaning of these blocs, and to reverse their engines away from war . The movement is to reverse the engines of the European nuclear blocs and not war .
 Ifall previous efforts to denuclearize parts of Europe have foundered, this is in large measure because they have all been partial, and thus incapable of mobilizing counter-pressures to dual bloc dominance on a wide scale .
 The paradox is that if President Ceausescu still wants a nuclear-free Balkan Zone, or if President Kekkonen still aspires to a denuclearized Baltic, then both are more likely to succeed within the framework of an all-European campaign than they would be
 Public opinion must and will develop, albeit unevenly, over the continent as a whole . But it will only come about when vast pressures of public opinion have come into being; and these pressures must be developed .
 Europe is not Antarctica, but Europeans have at least as much right to live as do Penguins . Europeans have to live in Europe as do penguins, but they have a right to life .
 People must begin to organize, in what will become a gigantic transnational campaign . For this reason, people must begin organizing, in the hope of a transnational movement .
 A panEuropean Convention will only be the beginning, but the organizational problems involved in this first step are large enough in all conscience . The European Union is looking forward to a pan-European Convention in 2015 .
 There must be meetings of many kinds, demonstrations, cross-frontier marches, concerts and festivals . There must also be meetings and demonstrations, demonstrations and concerts, it says .
 When they reach out to each other, this daunting labour will shrink to human size, and solving it may then become simplicity itself . Solving the problem may then be simplicity itself, says author .
 In schools and colleges, colleges, village halls and municipal libraries, in cathedrals and in Quaker meeting houses, I have been involved in meetings innumerable and meetings usually encouraging and stimulating . In schools, colleges and . colleges, . municipal libraries and municipal . libraries, . cathed
 This experience is my only qualification for contributing to contributing a small section to this book . This experience was my only qualifications for contributing a part of the book .
 The new move of militarism is so obvious in so many aspects of the life of this country, it is obvious in many ways, says David Cameron .
 The more weapons we have then the safer we must all surely be, we must surely be. Quite probably they are not representative of the country as a whole, whose citizenry still believes .
 It is therefore well that from time to time I also visit semi-hostile groups who manifestly look on an evening with a middleaged peacenik with the honest joy of those on their way to a bull-fight .
 The bull is not meant to know more about the contest than the matadors . The more upsetting for them often enough is because the bull doesn't know more of the contest . The matador says the bull is more upset for them than they are upset .
 The issue of disarmament, low key for so long, has now come well up front in the public mind . The issue has been low key but now it has come up front for public attention .
 They want to know if we are going to have another war and what such a war might mean for them and their families . They say they are worried about what might happen to them if they are to have a war .
 They are ashamed of the waste of the arms race and they are deceived no longer by the dogma, acceptable in pre-1939 days, that more weapons means more security . More weapons means less security, they say .
 That our government has over-reached itself on the civil defence issue is clear enough . The civil defence minister has been accused of overreach in the past .
 There is too much in H MG’s ill-fated Protect and Survive that is simply too ludicrous for it to be credible . H MG's Protect and Surviving is a series of ludicrous ideas .
 The fears that the recent wave of civil defence propaganda, and it has been nothing less, have aroused may be expressing themselves in growing interest in disarmament itself .
 I have been asked many times about these extraordinary civil defence recommendations . It has not been too difficult to make clear that it is just because we are a nuclear weapon state that we are at risk as targets .
 Civil defence in a nuclear weapon state, especially if seriously undertaken, is actually a new twist in the spiral of the arms race . As soon as she realizes that civil defence in nuclear weapon states, then she too starts to think in disarmament terms .
 The recent spate of nuclear weapon computer errors in the USA has certainly also brought many into the disarmament lobbies .
 People are not stupid and they know perfectly well that the more complicated a mechanical and electrical system is, the more likely it is that one day things will go wrong . The more complicated and electrical systems is, it is more likely to go wrong, says the author .
 People have now a far better idea of the cost of the arms race than ever they had before . The arms race is no longer an arms race, but it is now a huge problem .
 At a time of national affluence, real or imagined, it may not seem to matter much what slice of the weekly wage is on its way to the ‘defence’ budget .
 A weekly national average expenditure of almost £3.80 per person on the military is a powerful justification . When all seems to be going downhill, when productivity is more important than people, when hardly an aspect of the social services has not had its cuts, then there has to be very
 It seems to be dawning that the threats of ‘the enemy’ are not as credible as the government would like them to be . It has occurred to many that preparing to blow up a great deal of the civilized world may not in fact be the best way of protecting anyone
 The shrill voice of the cold war has been heard incessantly on our media . The result in some sections of the population has not been acquiescence or a war-fighting mentality, but horror and indignation .
 "I do not know how otherwise to explain not only many meetings, but meetings packed out time and time again. I do know how else to explain," he says .
 In East Anglia, no fewer than thirty groups and committees sprang up in the first six months of 1980 .
 Alongside the new interest there are a number of other general public attitudes and preoccupations . Alongside new interest, there are also new attitudes to the public .
 Those of us working in a realistic way for a more international, less violent, less paranoid world, ought to take note of them . We are directed not to peace of status quo but peace of social justice .
 In any process of change you have to start from where people are rather than from where you would like them to be . One of his basic commonsense rules was that in any . process of . change, he said. "You have to go from where . people are"
 In practical terms, people are ‘at’ a number of basic positions, says Simon Tisdall . He says people are 'at' basic positions in the most basic positions .
 The belief that military violence is ultimately the only way of dealing with international conflict is deeply rooted . The belief is very deeply rooted in the belief that it is necessary to use military violence to deal with international conflicts .
 In 1939, owing to the misguided efforts of pacifists and peacemongers, we in this country were militarily defenceless . One reason is that in 1939, the country was defenceless. One is that it was due to the 'misguided efforts' by pacifists .
 The results of World War II appear to have little enough to do with its original aims seems hardly to have been noticed . That the results of the war seem hardly to be noticed .
 Our treaty obligations to Poland somewhere got lost down the labyrinthine ways of six years of what turned out to be total war . The treaty obligations were lost in the labyrinth ways of the war .
 The idea that military ‘balance’ actually means something in the era of nuclear overkill still goes very deep . The idea of 'balance' in the military still goes deep .
 The government is spending more and more than ever, it says . Not surprisingly, since it is regularly presented as the justification for spending more . The government has spent more than $1 billion in the past year .
 The Russians are not only aggressive and expansionist but also possessors of a much greater military arsenal than our own . Russia has a far greater arsenal than the UK does, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Our 'free' media bear a very heavy responsibility for its uncritical acceptance of NATO propaganda on this issue . No serious international survey would support such a position, he says .
 The SS 20, evil monster of the European war theatre, has been made the centre of a giant numbers fraud . SS 20 was made the . centre of the . European war . theatre .
 Most people do not find it difficult to believe that, should the horrific day of a nuclear war come, it will not much matter to the Soviets where a missile came from if it lands on their territory .
 If all ‘theatre’ systems are counted, submarineand carrier-based as well as land-launched, then there is something like parity in theatre warheads between NATO and the Warsaw Pact .
 It is, of course, perfectly easy to understand that to be able to kill only four times, rather than five times, is not actually much of a disadvantage . It is perfectly easy .
 People know something funny must be going on if the cruise missiles, so desperately necessary for our well-being, are not due to arrive for another three years . Yet still those horrible Russians don’t attack. People know too .
 There are three major popular positions — the sense of helplessness, the acceptance of war as a normal conflict-solving system and the fears of vast Soviet superiority . In short, there are three main popular positions: the fear of the Soviet superiority, the feeling helplessness and the acceptance
 In crude ways, no doubt, and without any suggestion that all the answers are in my hands, at least I have tried to grasp these problems . But at least at least he has tried, no matter what, he says, to grasp them .
 The military solution should be thought of as the normal method of conflict resolution at international level . It is a mystery to me, one, I suspect, that is becoming a mystery . I suspect that many more people are becoming more interested in the military solution .
 At village, town or city level, threatening to kill someone is not only abnormal, however lively the dispute, but actually criminal . At all the interstate organizations from cricket clubs to trade unions, threaten to threaten someone, let alone to actually kill someone, is abnormal .
 At nation-state level and upwards there is a blockage in the pipe . Somehow, at nation state level, and upwards, there is an issue .
 All those concerned with the extension of the rule of law into international society must be about the business of exploring alternative defence systems . The rule of the law should be extended to international society .
 'Part of it also must be the exploration of other kinds of defence, both violent and non-violent,' says the author of the book . "We need to look at other ways of defence - both violent or non-violence"
 If the present system is more of a risk than a protection, it makes sense to get away from it . UN Special Session on Disarmament in 1978 said no less than that .
 In the hour or so of question time at most disarmament sessions there is not much chance to do more than shake a few cherished dogmas . This is not the first time a disarmament session has taken place in the world .
 The largest and best equipped military force in the area did nothing to protect the Shah of Iran . One does not have to serve on a Parliamentary Select Committee to know that .
 It vanished like the morning mist in front of popular indignation and religious feeling . It vanished, it vanished like a morning mist, in the wake of religious sentiment .
 It is not necessary to be an international financier to know that the war in what was Rhodesia was prolonged for years by companies which flouted trading sanctions with British government connivance .
 In 1974 the British Army was roundly defeated in Northern Ireland by nearly a million people who refused to do anything . The refusal frustrated the will of the Westminster parliament to which they all claimed to be loyal .
 The Swiss, the Swedes, the Costa Ricans, the Yugoslavs and the Vietnamese have all in their different ways things to tell us about alternative defence . The Swiss and Swedes are among those who have all told us that alternative defence is possible .
 Dr Gene Sharp and Dr Stephen King-Hall have a long list of authors from Dr Sharp to Sir Stephen King . Dr Sharp is one of the world's most famous authors .
 The East-West campaign for a European nuclear-free zone is part of the process . The East and West have been pushing for a nuclear free zone in Europe .
 It is the problem of the horrible Russians, ruthless, expansionist, over-armed, untrustworthy ... you have heard it all. You have heard all. It is a problem of Russia, ruthless and expansionist . It is also a problem for the West, it is a
 Once heard a most distinguished bishop who looked at a CND crawd one Easter . We judge ourselves by our stated intentions, but they are to be judged by their capabilities, he says .
 The churches have played a very sad part in stimulating the demonic content of the arms race . The arms race has been a source of demonic activity in the world, says Christian leader David Cameron .
 If there is to be any progress, we have to try and understand the fears of the ‘enemy’ and judge his behaviour by standards which we apply equally rigorously to ourselves and to those with whom we ally ourselves .
 "There is a very long list of countries with whom we have economic and military alliances and to whom we supply weapons who also have a dreadful record of violating human rights," he said .
 If Afghanistan is a shocker, then so was the inhuman war in Vietnam, and so was Vietnam, Vietnam, Namibia, Cyprus and the collapse of constitutional government in Chile . So is the present Indonesian invasion of East Timor, the South African military occupation of Namibia and the
 To understand that the Soviets also have fears is a great step forward, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The West has effectively made a military alliance with the Chinese, who regularly talk about war with the Russians . The Russians might well have reason for a certain amount of additional anxiety, writes Andrew Hammond .
 There are, of course, Eastern bloc sources of information equally and often more obviously subject to the same process . There are also sources of Eastern bloc information .
 The argument about balance is often not over fact, but over which facts are to be selected in presenting a general picture . Balance is not always over fact but over how facts should be selected, says the author of the book .
 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute produces an annual digest that is quite within the capacity of anyone who can work out how to fll in a passport application or an income tax declaration . It is provided with nice little graphs as well .
 Perhaps the first response should be that the signs of history being made are all around us . The signs of progress are being made all around the world, writes David Frum .
 Social change happens, and its direction depends often enough on the energy, sacrifice and determination of quite small groups of people . Social change often happens often enough in small groups, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The iniquities of nineteenth-century industrialism did not come to an end (in so far, they have in this country) by chance . The Iniquities were not an end by chance, but they were not by chance.
 That women have a great deal more in the way of equal opportunity now than they had at the turn of the century is no accident . That women are more likely to have equal opportunity than they were at turn of century .
 The overseas aid movement was a fragile post-World War II creation, partly radical, partly remedial, had to be built . It is now a vital part of the world's post-WWII post-war reconstruction effort .
 Amnesty created awareness that torture and imprisonment without trial are as much features of the nonaligned countries and the West as of the East . The awareness created by Amnesty is a very recent initiative indeed .
 They range from the United Nations Association to the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament . They range far and wide, from Pax Christi to the Fellowship of Reconciliation .
 Some affiliates of political parties are affiliated with political parties . Others are outside any party framework . Some are outside of any political party framework.
 "All are actively engaged in the business of public education about the risks and the costs of the arms race," says Pentagon .
 It does not require some special or unusual skills to collect petition signatures against the arms race and British participation in it .
 It is not so hard to arrange a fund-raising jumble sale or some other cash-producing event . It's not so easy to arrange fund-raiser jumble sales .
 The War Game is still banned from T V showing by the BBC which commissioned it . It is not difficult to hire a film like this film like the War Game for T V .
 The War Game is still the most powerful piece of motivation in the business . Out of date now in some technical respects, it is still powerful .
 It would be quite impossible to list the actions and endeavours open to ordinary people from different walks of life aimed at increasing knowledge of the facts and the perils of the arms race .
 Few of us are without involvement in organized groups of one sort or another . Few of those who have been involved with organized groups will be surprised by their involvement .
 Few people have no connection of any sort with the educational system, either as parents, teachers, pupils or administrators . Few people are connected to the education system as parents or teachers .
 They can pass on myth and prejudice, violence and national militarism, or they can more constructively transmit a message of internationalism, alternative defence and the heroism of the pioneers of constructive social change .
 No secondary school should be without a specific course on international institutions and the history and consequences of the arms race . The arms race should be taught in schools across the world .
 Hundreds of thousands of generous people are today involved one way and another in the work of the development agencies . Oxfam, Christian Aid, War on Want and so many others are involved .
 All responsible development agencies know that the education of the public here about the causes of third world poverty is an essential part of their work . The education is essential to the development agencies' work .
 Arms race running at about $550,000,000 a year is the greatest single cause of world poverty . Arms race has yet to become a serious part of development agency programmes .
 I could fill a book with groups where the antiarms race message should be heard and acted upon . I could, of course, fill out a book of groups where I could point out the antiarmarm race message .
 Trade unions, political parties, medical associations, legal groups, ecology and energy lobbies — the list is as long as one cares to make it . The list is long and includes political parties and legal groups .
 From a personal point of view I think with a heavy heart especially of the churches. From a . personal point, I think . from a personal view of . the churches, especially the churches . The churches. are responsible for the deaths of many of the world's most famous people .
 The Society of Friends apart, how little they have so far done and how tied they are tied to national prejudices, how wedded to a moral theology of war that makes counting angels on the tips of needles sound by comparison .
 So often, at so many meetings, the frustrated laity of the mainstream churches are there but their clergy not . So often it's at so often that the frustration of the laity is there but the clergy not, says the author .
 The splendid, careful British Council of Churches resolution of November 1979 opposing the renewal of Polaris is a model of its kind .
 This, however, is only a ragbag of ideas, not an exhaustive manual of ‘what I can do’ prepared for every situation . This is not a 'manifesto of 'what you can do' prepared to every situation, it is a 'ragbag of
 Once that threshold is passed, there is no doubt whatever that your road will open ahead of you . Once you've passed that threshold, there are no doubt that your life will open up .
 It may mean that you will be thought odd, indeed a little cracked, perhaps, perhaps . It may also mean you are thought odd and perhaps cracked .
 It is more than possible that you are actually a symbol of sanity in an international society of manipulated sleepwalkers and that the future of the world is in your hands . It is possible, however, that it is possible to believe you are a symbol in the world of manipulation .
 There is a large and varied body of literature concerning armament and disarmament . Further Reading: Armament literature concerning disarmament and armament .
 The following list of journals, books and official publications is not a comprehensive bibliography, but simply a guide to some of the more interesting and useful material available . It is not an exhaustive bibliography, but a list of useful material .
 A new journal intended to ‘probe and understand the nature of arms control’ will be published three times a year .
 Frank Cass & Co. at Gainsborough House, Gainingborough Road, London E11. For individuals, Frank Cass and Co. are available at £18 for individuals .
 Nonviolent Alternatives, Kerkstraat 150, B-2000 Antwerp, Belgium, is published quarterly by NonViolence Alternatives .
 Proceedings of the Medical Association for the Prevention of War.p; free to members.
 Reports, analysis and news of the movement . From 29 Great James Street, London WC1. £1-50a.
 State Research is an independent group of investigators collecting and publishing information from public sources on developments in state policy . £4a. for individuals from g Poland Street, London WCr.
 Messelson, M. M. Robinson, and Julian Perry Robinson, ‘Chemical warfare and chemical disarmament’, Scientific American, April 1980 .
 Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, Sveavagen 166, is located in Stockholm, Sweden . The Stockholm Peace Institute is based in Sweden . It was founded by Sweden's International Peace Institute .
 SI PRI publishes annually the S/ PRI Yearbook of World Armaments and Disarmament . SIPRI publishes a number of books on many aspects of armaments and disarmament .
 W MSE is an annual digest listing and comparing national military and social expenditures . It is based on a list of countries' defense spending and social spending .
 The author thanks Silviu Brucan, Judith Reppy and William Sweet for comments on an earlier draft .
 Bruce Kent is the General Secretary of CND and a former chairman of War on Want . CND is a former chair of War On Want and a member of the CND .
 She was the first winner of the Einstein Peace Prize in 1980 . She is the author of The Game of Disarmament and the first recipient of the Peace Prize .
 Ron Smith is Reader in Applied Economics, Birkbeck College . He is author of ‘Military Expenditure and Capitalism’, Cambridge Journal of Economics . He has written several articles on the economics of military spending .
 He wishes to thank Norman Minaur, Dan Smith and Dorothy Thompson for help with an earlier draft . The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation published the first version of Protest and Survive as a pamphlet .
 In one forum after another, expert contradicts expert, and the man in the street looks on in nervous uncertainty . In the world, experts are contradicting each other in a bid to solve the problem .
 To those who feel that nuclear matters should not be left to the battling experts, NUCLEAR POWER offers essential support .
 In lively everyday language it describes nuclear technology and how it works — and sometimes fails to work . In lively language, nuclear technology is described as "nuclear technology"
 The author surveys the development of nuclear power worldwide . He delineates the issues, not only technical but also economic, social, social and political, which now preoccupy policymakers . The author also outlines the issues that now concern policymakers .
 An annotated bibliography provides guideposts to further investigation by the concerned reader . An extensive annotated bibliographical bibliography provides guides for further investigation .
 The ENERGY QUESTION surveys the world’s energy resources and their potential for development . Gerald Foley with Charlotte Nassim . A Pelican Original .
 Living standards and social development possible for any society depend on the input of energy . Even the world’s food supplies depend on modern farming to turn fossil fuels into food .
 It is now clear that if some of our plans for the future are fulfilled then others must be abandoned . It is clear that some of the plans for our future are now being abandoned . The government is considering abandoning some of its most ambitious plans .
 It is neither optimistic nor pessimistic — but it enables the reader to form his own judgements . The book is neither pessimistic nor optimistic — but open to the reader's opinions .
 NEW Statesman A Pelican Original DISASTERS The anatomy of environmental hazards John Whittow .
 A volcanic eruption, a massive earthquake or a landslide in barren terrain is not a disaster . A massive earthquake, a landslide or a volcanic eruption is not an emergency, it is not always a disaster, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Bangladesh cyclone, the Huascaran avalanche in Peru, the Nicaraguan earthquake and the Turkish earthquake have been reported from all over the world . Yet rarely a month has gone by without a major disaster being reported from somewhere else .
 The disastrous year of 1976 appeared to be the final cataclysm, when earthquake shocks, volcanic eruptions, tidal waves, hurricanes, floods, blizzards and drought combined to give the impression that thé earth was in turmoil .
 John Whittow summarizes the disasters which have caused such widespread death and destruction . He explains, as far as possible, why they occur and whether man is partly to blame for them . He also discusses the causes of the disasters in which they occur .
 Inflation, accompanied by economic disarray and popular despair, continues to offer a major challenge to the credibility of economic science . Trevithick: Inflation offers a challenge to economic science's credibility .
 Dr Trevithick gives in this Pelican Original — an introductory guide to the problems, the jargon and the panaceas . As the flow of explanations bids fair to match the growth in the money supply .
 The characters in his drama include Milton Friedman, Keynes, Hayek and the ‘New School’ at Cambridge . The plot encompasses the Phillips Curve, trade union power, helicopter money, rational expectations, floating currencies, incomes policy, import controls and indexation .
 Irish squaddies are shot in a squalid encounter in the Middle East . Newspapers are pious for a week until the next bit of international ‘news’ displaces them .
 ONUC, UNFICYP and UNIFIL conceal a real and urgent, terrifying and crucial, a randomly violent half-war . Unlovely acronyms are trotted out for a bemused and bored public, but they conceal a serious and urgent problem .
 These are the visible bits of an astonishing and largely hidden military crusade . The US government has spent millions of dollars on the Middle East .
 U.N. peacekeeping forces are waging a struggle for peace, sometimes uncertain but unceasingly, by the United Nations Peacekeeping Forces . It is the struggle to peace waged by the UN forces in the region .
 The funny armies are made up of amazing mixtures of people speaking lots of different languages under, for most, an alien command, keep warring factions apart .
 This book describes the ways these unsung heroes work, shot at by all but unable, for the most part, to shoot back . This book is called "Unsung Heroes" and "Shooting at the Unsung Hero"
 He shows how strategies work or are improvised and, above all, how vital is their role in international politics, he says .
 Cruise missiles deployed in the UK are seen by the British government as preserving our ancient independence in the face of the 'monstrous' Russian threat .
 Use of ownercontrolled missiles by the U.S. in a ‘limited war will mean the complete destruction of the 'theatre' of Western Europe and of Great Britain .
 Cruise missiles which enable attack deep within the Soviet Union will at least allow the United States to fight on our soil rather than on theirs . Cruise missiles will allow the U.S. to attack deep in Soviet Union rather than attack on their soil .
 The possibility of mass destruction is now a frightening possibility . That's combined with the belligerent beliefs of many Western governments and the paranoia of Russia, it's a frightening probability .
 This book examines the politics of what is being done and, in the face of the British government's extraorainary pamphlet PROTECT AND SURVIVE, urges immediate and determined opposition .