 The collapse of communism did not, contrary to what many hoped, lead to detente . East–West detente did not lead to East–East detente, many hoped .
 The East–West crisis over Ukraine in 2014 has been the worst since the end of the Cold War . The East-West crisis is the worst in the history of Russia and the West .
 The question this raises as to how far the period of Soviet rule was a Marxist or a Russian phenomenon is by no means academic . It raises questions as to whether it was Marxist or Russian phenomenon .
 Change when it happens in Russia can happen very rapidly, as after Stalin’s death and again in the mid-1980s . Change in Russia has been a problem since Stalin's death, as well as in the 1980s .
 The end of the Cold War resembled a gigantic tug of war in which one side unexpectedly let go, leaving the other side not merely unprepared but caught off balance . The Cold War ended in a tug-war that left the U.S. and the world unprepared .
 The outside world would lose nothing by preparing a constructive response to the crisis in Syria, says President Assad Assad .
 There are very few monographs dealing specifically with attitudes to Russia which are, needless to say, very diverse .
 A small number of ‘cultural Russophiles’ learn the language and develop an admiration for the country’s literature .
 The arms industry may have an interest in maintaining tension with Russia . Arms industry may be interested in maintaining tensions with Russia, experts say .
 Political scientists and foreign policy advisers wield significant influence in foreign policy . Political scientists are key to foreign policy decisions in Washington .
 The public at large depends for its information on the image presented by the media, says CNN.com . The public needs to know more about the image of the media .
 More recently the prevalence of lawlessness in Russia has become the despair of everyone . More recently, lawlessness has led to the collapse of Russia's security forces .
 As a result, there was never a significant pro-Soviet lobby in the West—at least after the 1950s . The pro-Russian lobby was never significant in the U.S. as a result .
 International Affairs © 2014 The Royal Institute of International Affairs. International Affairs . International Affairs is based at the London School for International Studies .
 There is room for a seamless transition from ‘Sovietophobia’ to Russophobia . Nevertheless, there is room to be 'Russophobia' to ‘Russophobia”
 Communism has vanished but the images of the Kremlin and the Russian Bear remain . The images of Russia's Bear and the Kremlin have never been seen in Russia .
 There has been disagreement between doves and hawks as to how best to meet the Russian challenge . However, there has at practically all times been a disagreement . Whether by dialogue or by confrontation, confrontation is possible .
 The existence of Russophobia, that is a disdainful attitude to the country’s people or an unwillingness to treat the country on equal terms, may be hard to document . At a private meeting on 22 March 1956, he said that Khrushchev's denunciation of Stalin �
 There have been times in the 1990s and during the presidency of George W Bush, when the U.S. seemed unwilling to treat Russia or anyone else on terms of equality .
 Churchill intended, he said, ‘to force her off her current beat onto the back streets’ Churchill, by contrast, was never a Russophobe. He intended to force her to the back .
 Fulton speech has been repeatedly shown on western television screens . Fulton's Fulton speech was shown repeatedly on western TV screens . The Fulton speech is often shown in the UK .
 The praise for Stalin has never been included in the book, a warning against selective history . But the praise for the Soviet leader is never included in a selection of the book .
 Churchill spoke of ‘negotiation from strength’ he was serious about the negotiation . Churchill was serious when he spoke of 'negotiating from strength' He said: ‘Negotiations from strength are not just negotiation from strength .
 Eisenhower warned against the growing power of America’s military–industrial complex in 1961 . Eisenhower, in his farewell address on giving up the American presidency in 1961, said the military industrial complex was growing .
 Churchill was undoubtedly correct in saying that Stalin desired not war but the fruits of war . Churchill was right to say that Stalin wanted war, not war, but fruits of it . Stalin was right in saying: "I want war. I want war"
 There is credible evidence that Brezhnev was a dove; and it comes from a strongly pro-western insider . The evidence is credible and it is a strong pro-Western insider .
 On re-examining western attitudes to Russia of the Soviet Union’s four times. ‘Four times.’ four times’ (and rightly blamed for presiding over the political and economic stagnation of Soviet society. The Soviet Union .
 Unlike some of his colleagues, he did not believe in the promotion of a world revolution . He did not want to promote a revolution, he said .
 He was entirely genuine in seeking a ‘reconciliation’ with imperialism . He was seeking a new basis for Soviet–American relations. He was genuine in . seeking a 'reconcealiliation'
 At the same time he continued to preach ‘ideological struggle’ in order to maintain the façade of party unity . At the . same time, he continued . to preach 'ideological . struggle' in order . to maintain party unity, he said .
 Chernyayev believes that had he been in better health he would have vetoed the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . He believes that if he was in a better health, he would veto the Soviet invasion .
 He failed to foresee the U.S. alarm at Soviet expansion in Africa in the 1970s, which he apparently did see as anti-American .
 Soviet and Russian human rights violations were bound to be a source of friction with the West . The West is concerned about human rights in Russia and Ukraine .
 Both Europe and Russia are parties to the European Convention on Human Rights which was ratified by the Russian Federation in May 1998 . Russia ratified the Convention in 1998 and is now a member of the European Union .
 Support for human rights is, any case, not the same thing as advocating democracy, as President Woodrow Wilson did . President Wilson did, as well as supporting democracy, in the 1930s .
 President Kennedy amended this principle to that of ‘making the world safe for diversity’ – since, unlike the Soviet leaders, he wished to avoid the impression of wanting to impose his values on others .
 There is a danger of getting the right answers to the wrong questions, says CNN.com . But even here, there is a risk of not asking the right questions, it says .
 The Arab Spring in Egypt and Syria has been a major setback for the Arab Spring movement . The record is discouraging, as recently shown by the fate of the Arab spring in both countries .
 The hope of a ‘soft landing’ is not as unrealistic as it might seem . Nevertheless, the hope for a 'soft landing' is not unrealistic .
 Greece in 1974 had been governed, since 1967, by an oppressive and unmeritorious military dictatorship . But the ruling junta eventually became destabilized by its own incompetence .
 It sponsored an attack on the Turkish enclave in Cyprus, thereby provoking an invasion from the Turkish mainland which made the partition of the country virtually irreversible . The Turkish-Cyprus conflict was the result of a Turkish attack on Cyprus .
 As a result the junta was forced to recall Greece’s professional politicians . The junta recalled Greece's professional politicians as a result . Greece's pro-democracy politicians were recalled by junta .
 The second example is that of Chile in the 1980s, where President Pinochet, faced with economic crisis and massive discontent, eventually, in 1988, held—and lost—a referendum on whether he should remain as president .
 In neither case, however, did the existing leaders step down from power . In both cases, the current leaders did .
 In Greece, President Gizikhis, the junta leader, stayed on as the transitional president . Pinochet remained as commander-in-chief of the armed forces in Chile .
 Both were eventually removed, but their departures were a matter of compromise . Both were removed from the White House in 2010 .
 Getting half a loaf can be a first step to getting the whole loaf . What it actually means is that getting half of a loaf is a good way to get the whole thing .
 There is everything to be said for democracy—when it works, when it works . David Wedgwood Benn: Democracy is a matter of principle when it's working .
 Polarizing politics does not always work, particularly when the electorate is polarized . But it does always work when it comes to polarizing politics .
 The root cause of the problem lies in the absence of trust between the competing parties, says the BBC . ‘The root cause is the lack of trust in each other,’ says BBC chief executive Richard Quest .
 Stable democracy is most likely to come not from a grassroots uprising but from change at the top . Stable democracies are most likely not to come from grassroots but from the top, say experts .
 It has, however, often been claimed that in a communist-type state such change is impossible . Leaders who have been through the party indoctrination system cannot possibly be agents of change, it has been claimed .
 It has to be emphasized that the achievement of a ‘soft landing’ does not depend solely on the leadership, however enlightened . It has been emphasized, however, that it is not the leadership of the country .
 It also requires an intelligent and constructive opposition and may additionally require favourable conditions in the outside world. It also needs an intelligent, constructive opposition .
 In both countries the communist leadership, having lost Moscow’s support, had become unsustainable . But the opposition provided it with a viable exit strategy . The communist leadership in both countries had lost Moscow's support .
 Solidarity movement in Poland provided a regime in crisis with a negotiating partner . Solidarity provided the government with a bargaining partner in crisis .
 Vaclav Havel served as a negotiating partner with the regime in Czechoslovakia . It reached a compromise involving, not regime change, but partially free elections in which the opposition subsequently won all the contested seats .
 Former South African president F W. de Klerk addressed the issue in a speech marking the 20th anniversary of the decision to introduce universal suffrage .
 White South Africans had for some time become increasingly aware that the apartheid system of minority rule was unsustainable . The apartheid system was unsustainable for white South Africans in South Africa .
 To dismantle it carries serious risks, including the possibility of a communist takeover . But to dismantle it carried serious risks—in particular, the risk of a takeover .
 This difficulty vanished of course with the disappearance of the Soviet Union . The difficulty of dealing with this difficulty vanished with the collapse of Soviet Union, he says .
 The withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola and the signing of a peace agreement over Namibia also lessened the whites’ sense of danger . The withdrawal from Cuban forces and signing of peace agreement in Namibia lessened whites' sense of fear .
 Afrikaners were becoming increasingly middle class, better educated and therefore alienated from the status quo . Meanwhile, a new generation of Afrikans was becoming more middle class . Afrikers were alienated from status quo.
 Mandela provided the government with a viable negotiating partner, Mandela says . Mandela was Mandela's partner in negotiations with the South African government . Mandela has been a key figure in South Africa's economic development .
 Russia's greatest threat to democracy came not from political reforms as such, but from the danger of economic collapse, says Vladimir Putin . Putin: The greatest threat was not political reforms, but economic collapse .
 This system, although it delivered certain minimum living standards, had caused increasing public dissatisfaction and led to artificial shortages . The system, which delivers minimum standards, has led to increased public dissatisfaction .
 Radical reform was clearly called for and was increasingly advocated in the Soviet press during the perestroika period . Radical reforms were called for by the Soviet media during the Soviet period .
 The subsequent course of events is summarized in a book edited by two Nobel Prize winners in economics, Lawrence Klein and Marshall Pomer . The book has a preface by Nobel Prize winner Joseph Stiglitz .
 In 1990, responsibility for economic aid to the USSR was assigned to the International Monetary Fund . Western financial institutions offered help on condition of a ‘big bang’ transition to the market through shock therapy .
 Post-communist Russian leadership envisaged that this would lead to a fall in output and rise of inflation but predicted improvement ‘within two years’ But its consequences were harsh indeed .
 As many as half of Russia’s children were reported to be suffering mental or physical disabilities due to malnourishment . Per capita consumption of meat and dairy products, eggs and sugar declined by 25 per cent during the 1990s .
 The inflation and mass impoverishment culminating in the financial default of August 1998 are common knowledge . On top of all that, the inflation and . mass . impoverishment culminated in . August 1998 is common knowledge, but it's common knowledge now .
 Klein and Pomer suggest a number of remedial steps which could have been taken . Klein: 'We need to find out what we need to do to get back on track'
 Their central argument is that the state, even though it should not try to control everything, does nevertheless play a vital economic role . The state, not necessarily controlling everything, should nevertheless play an economic role, they say .
 State subsidies to enterprises with growth potential could have had a beneficial effect . For example, state subsidies to firms with potential to grow could be beneficial . State subsidies could have been beneficial to the economy, say experts .
 Russian businessmen who had gone abroad could have been encouraged to provide work for their compatriots at home . Russian businessmen could have gone abroad to help their compatriot at home.
 David Wedgwood Benn by the head of the sociology department of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Mikhail Gorshkov, underlines the importance of sociology .
 Only 14 per cent of Russians supported the idea of a ‘minimum state’ while an overwhelming majority thought that the state should play a key role in both economic and social affairs .
 By 1991, when the USSR finally collapsed, almost all western and Russian political commentators were entirely the opposite . The consensus among commentators was that the USSR had to end in 1991 .
 It was strongly urged that nothing must be done to impede the breakup of the Soviet Union; and that economic aid would merely prop up a bankrupt system . Economic aid would just prop up the bankrupt system, it was urged .
 The prevalent idea seems to have been that of ‘creative destruction’ - although it may be doubted whether destruction in itself ever is creative . It may be doubtful whether destruction itself ever was creative .
 When asked what, if anything, the West can do, the first point is that there are no panacea solutions . When it comes to asking what can be done by the West, the answer is that it is not possible . The West is not alone, however, but the West
 There are a number of avoidable mistakes, for example if Britain were to withdraw from the European Court of Human Rights—supplying Moscow with a justification for doing the same . There are, however, many of the avoidable errors, such as withdrawing from the court of human rights .
 The annexation of the Crimea was a flagrant breach of the UN Charter, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin is very unfriendly to the West, says Putin's spokesman .
 Among the more contentious decisions, there are two particular which deserve to be singled out . Two of the most contentious decisions in the history of the U.S. have been made .
 The first concerns NATO’s eastward expansion in the 1990s into the former Soviet Union . The other concerns are the expansion of NATO's eastward NATO operations .
 It might have made sense in the face of a Russian threat, but at that time there was no Russian threat . The decision was made in response to a threat posed by the Russian government .
 It was overwhelmingly opposed by Russian specialists in the U.S. including former hawks . Former hawks and former Russian hawks oppose the move .
 In reality, it was prompted both in the US and in Europe by domestic considerations . "Domestic considerations" prompted the decision to make the decision .
 President Clinton for example needed the support of anti-Russian eastern European émigré voters for the purpose of getting re-elected . President Clinton also needed to get re-election with anti-Russia voters .
 A further aim was to ensure the survival of NATO in the postcommunist era . The aim was also to ensure NATO's survival in post-communist Europe .
 Britain and other European countries saw it as a way to make sure that the U.S. would remain in Europe . The move was meant to reassure eastern European countries recently liberated from Soviet control .
 One effect of the expansion was to demoralize the strongly pro-western elite in Russia at that time . The expansion of Russia's pro-Western elite in the 1990s demoralized the pro-Russian elite . One effect the expansion of the Russian empire was to demobilize the pro
 The second contentious decision—which leads back to the core of the present crisis—concerns Ukraine .
 In the late 1990s it formed the subject of a deal under which Ukraine renounced its nuclear weapons in exchange for a US-brokered deal guaranteeing Ukrainian sovereignty . The deal was part of a U.S.-brokered agreement guaranteeing Ukraine sovereignty .
 This is confirmed by Strobe Talbott, the architect of the Clinton administration’s policy towards post-Soviet Russia . Talbott: ‘This is not the first time I have seen Russia in the past. It is the second time I’ve seen the Russians in
 Ethnic tension has been absent and (like the relations between England and Scotland) ties have been cemented by centuries of intermarriage .
 Nearly half of the Russian public believes the West seeks to weaken their country, according to a 2011 survey of 2011 . A quarter of Russians believe the West is indifferent to its fate, the survey says .
 Putin’s domestic approval ratings have soared to unprecedented levels since Ukraine crisis began . Since the beginning of the crisis over Ukraine, Putin's domestic approval rating has soared .
 Ukraine's fate of Ukraine has been complicated, but it's complicated . For historical reasons, however, the fate of the country's future is complicated . Ukraine is one of the most important countries in the world .
 Ukraine fell victim to a whole series of invasions from the east by the Tatars in the thirteenth century, and subsequently by the Polish–Lithuanian empire which at one time stretched to the Black Sea and captured Moscow .
 Only in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries did Russia regain its lost territory . Russia regained its territory only in the 17th and 18th century .
 Russia’s lack of natural frontiers, in turn, provided grounds for the most cynical realpolitik . This lack of frontiers provided grounds on Russia's part for its most cynical realism . Russia's lack of real frontiers is a problem for Russia, says Vladimir Putin .
 They were never in modern times a threat to Russia, although in both world wars they provided a thoroughfare for German invasions . In modern times, they were never a threat but provided a route to Russia .
 Western Russophobia predated the Soviet era by quite some time . Orlando Figes’s recent book on the Crimean War is underlined in his recent book . The West has a long history of Russophobia in Russia .
 Western abhorrence of Russia’s human rights record and fear of Russian expansionism were key factors . In this case, western abhorrence . of human rights . record was key factor .
 All this predictably fuelled western antagonism, which nevertheless had deeper roots . Western antagonism still has deep roots .
 Palmerston, among many others, saw this as part of a Russian plan to conquer India and concluded that the only possible response was to dismember the Russian empire . The British government supplied arms to the Chechen rebels .
 Fear was only the culmination of a distrust which had been building up in Britain over many years . But this fear was only a culmination of the distrust built up in the UK . It is only the result of a growing distrust in the country .
 Fears of a Russian conquest of India had been voiced as early as the late 1820s . Fears were voiced in the late 1800s and early 1900s .
 The ‘Testament of Peter the Great’ appeared in 1812 in a French translation . It claimed that Russia aimed not only to conquer Europe but to dominate the world . The 'Testament' was published in the French translation of the document .
 A further important factor in the growth of Russophobia was the role of the British press . The British press played a key role in the rise in Russophobia in Russia .
 Anti-Russian stories boosted sales of anti-Russia stories . Its distribution had greatly expanded owing to the development of railways . Anti-Russia sales boosted sales .
 Crimean War vividly illustrates how perceptions can be skewed by halftruths, fantasy and false information . The Crimean War was the Crimean War between Russia and Ukraine .
 A Russian invasion of India was unlikely, to say the least, if only because the invaders would have come to grief in Afghanistan . The invasion would have been unlikely, as it was unlikely to happen in the country .
 The Russian people were the victims of barbarism rather than its perpetrators, says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "The Russian people are the victims, rather than the perpetrators"
 In the end neither Britain nor Russia achieved their ostensible war aims . In the war, neither Russia nor Britain achieved its ostensible aims .
 Palmerston failed to dismember the Russian empire—and the Chechen rebellion collapsed following the withdrawal of British support .
 Tsar Alexander II, who succeeded his father in 1855, was obliged to sue for peace . This involved renouncing his claim to a protectorate over the Ottoman Christians and agreeing to the demilitarization of the Black Sea .
 Following the Franco-Prussian war of 1870, Russia was able to annul these latter provisions . However, following the war of the 1870s, these were annulled by Russia .
 Even if it proves possible to avert the crisis in the short run, this still leaves the background problem unresolved . But to return to the present crisis, the background is still unresolved, he says .
 The Kremlin’s response was to revive the sense of threat, a flawed response to an understandable sense of grievance . The Kremlin's response to the situation was a flawed reaction to a genuine grievance, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Having forced Khrushchev to back down, he chose the path of magnanimity . The former Soviet Union leader chose to take a softer approach .
 The White House has set up a hot line between the White House and the Kremlin as a safeguard against mutual misperceptions . Another by-product of the speech was the setting up of a hot-line between the two sides .
 Confrontation with Moscow may be unavoidable, and indeed justified in the short run . But it would involve Europe in a serious loss of trade if it were forced to confront Moscow .
 It is imperative to follow the example of President Kennedy and look further, says President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The clarification of western attitudes can play an important role in Syria's conflict with the West .
 Some people in the West may simply want to weaken Russia, but others do not . Some manipulate the human rights issue for Cold War purposes, says Amnesty International . Others, such as Amnesty International, are very genuinely concerned .
 The book’s central concern is the problem of reconciling political morality with political feasibility . The authors draw heavily on the ideas of George Kennan, Reinhold Niebuhr, the theologian and Hans Morgenthau .
 All three are associated with the realist school which emphasizes the role of power and national self-interest in international relations . All three have been associated with realist schools .
 Morgenthau insisted that to equate political realism with immorality was itself untenable . Morgenthalau, for example, insisted to equate realism with immorality .
 By December of that year, when Russia was in turmoil, they voted by a 90 per cent majority to become independent . With the strong encouragement of Boris Yeltsin, they became independent . The vote was supported by the strong support of the then-president of Russia .
 Yanukovich government has proven record of corruption in Ukraine . Ukrainians want to get rid of Yanukovich's government with proven record corruption .
 The mass opposition to the Yanukovich regime may have been at least in part a protest against social injustice and kleptocratic capitalism . In the opinion of a Ukrainian sociologist,20 the mass opposition may be a protest of social injustice .
 Most Ukrainians have no wish to live in a mere buffer state as the victims of a power struggle between other states . Most Ukrainians do not want to live as the . victims of power struggles between other countries .
 One should never give up the search for a solution acceptable both to Ukraine and its eastern and western neighbours . Ukraine is one of several countries in the region that has been involved in the Ukraine crisis .
 David Wedgwood Benn likely to be slow and uneven, as in the case of the Arab–Israel dispute . He says the Arab-Israeli dispute is likely to continue for years .
 Western attitudes do not become one of the obstacles to the project . But one hopes at least that western attitudes will not become a problem .
 Many of those who claim to champion democracy are in fact more interested in capitalism, which is not the same thing . Many of the people who champion democracy 'championed democracy are more than just capitalism', says David Cameron .
 Others are in no way opposed to selling arms to dictators, for purely commercial gain . Others are not interested in arms sales to dictators for commercial reasons .