 At the time, he was a member of the U.S. Air Force, based in Okinawa, Japan . He was in the Air Force at the time .
 If commanded to do so, O'Hanneson would have had to fire nuclear missiles at the Soviet Union . If commanded, he would have to fire at least one nuclear missile at Russia .
 For 13 terrifying days in October 1962, it looked as if O'Hanneson might get that order . For 13 terrified days, it seemed as if the order was going to end .
 The United States had just learned that the Soviet Union was placing nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. had learned of the move .
 The missiles lay about 90 miles off the coast of Florida, posing a direct threat to many U.S. cities . The missiles are located about 90 . miles off Florida . They could pose a direct . threat to the United States .
 President John F Kennedy threatened to bomb and invade Cuba unless the missiles were removed . President Kennedy also threatened to invade Cuba if the missiles weren't removed .
 The Soviets' actions in Cuba--and Kennedy's response--brought the two sides to the brink of nuclear war . The two sides were at risk of war, but Kennedy responded .
 In 1959, revolutionaries led by Fidel Castro toppled a corrupt dictatorship in Cuba . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution . Castro was Castro's successor to President Kennedy .
 Castro alarmed the U.S. by seizing American-owned businesses . He alarmed the United States by seizing businesses from the Castro government .
 He allied Cuba with the Soviet Union, then the world's most powerful Communist country . Declaring himself a Communist, he allied Cuba to the Soviet Soviet Union . He declared Cuba a Communist .
 In April 1961, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency directed a secret invasion of Cuba . The invasion was directed by the CIA in Cuba .
 The invasion was carried out by anti-Castro Cuban exiles at a place called the Bay of Pigs . The invasion took place at the place where the former Cuban government was based .
 Both Castro and Khrushchev feared another U.S. invasion of Cuba . Castro and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushche feared another invasion .
 The United States had placed nuclear missiles in Turkey, near the Soviet border . The U.S. had placed the missiles near the border with Russia .
 Khrushchev felt that positioning Soviet missiles in Cuba was a way to even the balance . The Soviet Union felt it was necessary to balance the balance of the Soviet Union and Cuba .
 Such missiles could destroy Atlanta, Dallas, or Washington, D.C., in a matter of minutes . Such missiles are capable of destroying cities such as Atlanta or Dallas .
 Some of Kennedy's top advisers favored a surprise air attack, followed by a ground invasion . Some of his top advisers wanted a surprise attack, then a ground attack .
 U.S. military leaders could not be sure that such an attack would knock out all the missiles . But United States military leaders say such a strike would be unlikely to knock out missiles .
 They might even launch nuclear missiles and bombers from the Soviet Union . The U.S. might even use nuclear missiles from the USSR .
 He ordered the Navy to set up a quarantine around Cuba, to halt the shipment of military equipment . The Navy has been ordered to quarantine Cuba .
 Americans learned about the crisis for the first time, as the President described his decision to quarantine Cuba . The President described the decision as his decision .
 Supermarket shelves emptied as families prepare for nuclear war . Supermarkets emptied shelves of food, water, and other supplies, as families prepared for war .
 Then, one by one, nearly every Soviet ship either slowed or reversed course . Then, the Soviet ships began to slow or reverse course . The ship was the last Soviet ship to leave the port .
 Kennedy planned to invade Cuba if the Soviet missiles were not removed from Cuba . Kennedy planned an invasion if the Soviets did not remove the missiles . Kennedy also planned to remove Soviet missiles from the country .
 The day started with a U.S. spy plane straying into the Soviet Union's air space, raising alarm on both sides . The day began with a United States spy plane flying into Soviet air space .
 A Soviet officer disobeyed orders and shot down a U.S. spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot . Later, a Soviet officer killed the pilot of a United States spy plane in Cuba .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev both wanted to avoid conflict without looking weak . Despite the pressure to go to war, they both sought to avoid war without looking weakened .
 The two leaders exchanged letters and sent secret messages through aides through aides .
 The United States would privately pledge not to invade Cuba . In exchange, the U.S. would pledge to not invade Cuba, officials say .
 Khrushchev announced that the missiles in Cuba would be dismantled and sent home in October . The missiles would be sent home .
 Cold War lasted another 28 years, but the two sides never again came so close to catastrophe . The Cold War was over for 28 years .
 General Maxwell Taylor: "There can be no long-term living with Castro" The Bay of Pigs incident occurred in 1961 .
 From then on, the White House redoubled its efforts to depose the Cuba n leader . The White House continued to try to oust him .
 Kennedy approved a secret CIA program of sabotage and political propaganda in Cuba . The program was designed to weaken support for Castro . Kennedy approved the program in order to weaken the Castro government .
 For Castro and his ally, Nikita Khrushchev, this amounted to a provocation that couldn't be ignored . Castro and Khrushchekchev, who were allies of the Soviet Union, were at the center of the Cold War . Castro was the prime minister of Soviet Union's
 Students write imaginative diary entries around events of October 1962 . Have students write an imaginative diary entry around events in 1962 .
 CNN.com: "Remembering the crisis in the U.S. is a challenge to the world's resolve," says CNN's John Defterios . The State Dept. of the State Department is investigating the situation .
 Write the letter of the correct answer on the line before each question . --11.11.01.01: Write the letters of correct answers on the lines of each question. --11:01:02:02.02:03:02 .
 A. continued the Cold War B. built the Berlin Wall D ended Communism . A. became allies B. continued to be allies C continued to build the Berlin wall B. ended Communism C. ended communism .
 No portion of this article can be reproduced without the express written permission of the copyright holder. The copyright holder of the article is not allowed to reproduce any of the content .