 Only the good judgment of John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev avoided the disaster that they had helped create . Only the 'good judgment' of Kennedy and his good judgment saved the disaster .
 Many in both government circles promoted the use of nuclear force as the best alternative to define the conflict . Many in government circles believed nuclear force would be the best way to define conflict .
 A third actor, the Cuban leader Fidel Castro, also pushed the Soviets to carry out a nuclear attack against the U.S. Fidel Castro pushed the Soviet Union to attack the United States, according to the report .
 It is disappointing to say that after 50 years, the nuclear threat is still with us . Both statesmen were wise but also, they were very lucky… It was disappointing to see that after . 50 years ago, it was still with .
 The expectations of a post Cold War distension in nuclear terms gave way, perhaps too soon, to a hardening of positions, and to more nuclear armed states, from 4 to 9 . The expectations were too soon to be met with more nuclear weapons .
 Nuclear terrorism, immune to any deterrence and ready to impose its own rules is, appeared in the forefront as perhaps the more dangerous and likely XXI Century threat . Moreover, nuclear terrorism is, according to the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 There is no doubt that the world is today more complex and uncertain than during the Cold War . The world is now more complex than ever, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There are still 20,000 nuclear weapons, many on high alert, deployed in 14 countries . Many of the world's most powerful nuclear weapons are still deployed in the Middle East .
 Many of nuclear disarmament commitments are still pending of accomplishment . Successful cooperation systems, such as Cooperative Threat Reduction Agreement between USA and Russia, run the risk of being deactivated .
 There are still nuclear materials suitable to make a bomb - weapons grade HEU and plutonium spread all over the world . There are not enough protected from the hands of traffickers and terrorists . Not enough is needed to keep nuclear materials safe from traffickers .
 There are still fanatic and irresponsible governments that believe that the solution to national problems is to reach nuclear weapons or nuclear weapons capabilities, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Reconnaissance aircraft that discovered the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba found out in Cuba .
 CIA photo shows medium-range Soviet missile SS-4 in Red Square, Moscow . SS4 missile was a Soviet-era version of the Soviet SS-8 missile .
 Meeting of the Advisory Committee that advised President Kennedy during the crisis . JFK Library . Meeting of Advisory Committee .
 List by Robert F Kennedy with the positions in the first ExComm meeting regarding how to respond to the deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 The first IRBM site under construction in Guanajay, Cuba, October 17 1962 . President Kennedy and his Secretary of Defense at an ExComm meeting .
 President Kennedy met with Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs Andrei Gromyko and the Soviet Ambassador in the United States Anatoly Dobrynin in October 1962 .
 Kennedy did not disclose his knowledge of the deployment of missiles in Cuba . Kennedy was president of the United States in 1961 . He was the first president to be elected to Cuba .
 President made responsible the USSR of any possible possible incident, 22 October 1962 . United States History II.
 U.S. Navy photo of the MRBM Site 1 in San Cristobal taken by the Commander William Ecker, 23 October 1962 . Commander Ecker was on a mission in the Philippines on October 23 .
 The Cuban leader pressured the Soviet Premier to carry on a nuclear weapons attack to the United States . U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson shows photographic evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 U.S. Ambassador Stevenson and Soviet Ambassador Zorin clashed in 1962 UN Security Council confrontation . Newspaper article describing the confrontation described the confrontation in the UN Security . Council meeting .
 The U.S. Ambassador was one of the more relevant protagonists during the crisis .
 USSR Permanent Representative of the USSR to the U.N. to the United Nations, confronted by Stevenson . Stevenson was the Soviet Permanent Representative .
 The Soviet freighter Grozny crosses the quarantine line but stops after the warning shooting of the United States fleet in the so-called Black Saturday, 27 October 1962 . The U.S. fleet fired a warning shot at the freighter in response .
 John F Kennedy and his brother and confidant, General Attorney and member of the ExComm, Robert F Kennedy, who played an important role in the conflict resolution . John F. Kennedy and Robert F . Kennedy's brother played a key role in resolving the conflict .
 Feklisov, trusted man of Khrushchev and Soviet KGB spy in the U.S. under the pseudonym of Alexander Fomin, served as an informal intermediary between the two leaders' environments during the crisis .
 Kennedy meeting with the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The Truth News. The Truth .
 JFK Library shows the removal of Soviet missile erectors in Cuba, 29 October 1962 .
 The withdrawal of these missiles settled in Turkey was part of the negotiation to remove of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The resolution of the Cuban missile crisis must be understood as a win-win process, made possible by common sense .
 Historically it refers to the brink of nuclear war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union because of the deployment of Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba, in October 1962 . In October 1962, Soviet missiles were deployed to Cuba from the United States .
 The conflict began October 16, 1962 when photographic evidence of Soviet nuclear missiles within 50 miles of Havana was communicated to the President John F Kennedy . Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, announced the decision to remove such missiles from Cuba .
 The conflict began earlier and lasted well beyond October 28, within a context of declining tensions . Nevertheless, it should be noted that the conflict began early and lasted long beyond October .
 During this iconic period of 13 days, stressful moments and hard negotiations took place, both external and internal, formal and informal between governments involved, to reach the so-called Black-Saturday -October 27 where the situation was about to get out of control .
 The Missiles Crisis has its closest antecedent in the success in Cuba of Socialism, later Marxism-Leninism, after Fidel Castro's take over, in January 1959 .
 At that time, Castro was seen by Moscow and its allies as the leader who would guide the expansion of pro-Soviet revolutionary movements throughout Latin America . The Castro government was seen as a model for pro-Russian revolutionary movements .
 In the United States, both successive administrations as well as public opinion, showed unalterably opposition to accepting Cuban situation and the close relations with the Soviet Union . In the U.S. public opinion was unalterable against accepting the situation .
 During those years, there had been many failed attempts to stop the Castro regime . The Castro regime was the subject of numerous attempts to topple it .
 The failed invasion of Cuba in April 1961 counted on plentiful help of the United States, although no direct participation in the field of American troops . From a military standpoint, the most important and provocative one was the failed invasion to Cuba .
 Such failure, that took place only three months after the beginning of Kennedy’s mandate, was perceived as a big false step, which put on big trouble the image and credibility of the brand-new administration . Such failure puts on big problems the image of the new administration .
 The United States-Cuba relationship had experienced a significant record of economic sanctions mixed with plots to kill Fidel Castro . Prior to that, the U.S.-Cuba relations had seen a significant history of sanctions and plots .
 In 1962 a new plan, the operation Mongoose, to invade the island and overthrow the Castro regime was being developed by the Pentagon in the greatest secrecy . Operation Mongoose was being led by the U.S. in the most secrecy .
 Other points of tension were the deployment of U.S. Jupiter MRBMs with nuclear warheads in Italy and Turkey, with capability of reaching Moscow . The situation in Berlin was also a point of tension in 1961 .
 Khrushchev conceived and proposed a plan to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba in May 1062 . The issue of a potential invasion of Cuba deeply concerned both Cubans and Soviets .
 At that time, the movement was noticed by the U.S. intelligence, but related signs were dismissed as erroneous or misleading . At the time of the movement, the United States intelligence was aware of it .
 On October 14 an U2 reconnaissance aircraft from the United States got the first unquestionable photographic evidence of the existence of active work to construct missile sites for SS-4s, MRBMs with nuclear warheads, also known as Sandal .
 After analysis, the evidence was communicated to President Kennedy on October 16 . The evidence was sent to the White House .
 National Security Advisor informed President Kennedy the photographic detection by an U2 reconnaissance aircraft of the MRBM SS-4 Sandal missile sites, at 50 miles from Havana .
 First meeting of the ExComm, secret “think tank’s”1 made up of senior members of the National Security Council and other key advisers . ExComm is a secret "think tank" comprised of key advisers to the White House .
 It assessed a shift in the Soviet doctrine from defensive to offensive . It was assessed as a shift from defensive doctrine to offensive doctrine .
 Retaliation anywhere in Europe and escalation of conflict were considered as potential scenarios if the plan was implemented . The plan was considered as a potential scenario .
 The Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara proposed the “blockade’s around Cuba, and the various alternatives were re-analyzed . The Secretary-of-Defense proposed the "blockade" around Cuba .
 Soviet Foreign Secretary Andrei Gromyko confirms that the aid to Cuba was purely defensive, as had been previously reported . Meeting of President Kennedy with Andrei . Gromykos confirms the aid was purely . defensive .
 The military wanted an air strike, along with a ground invasion, but no one had convincing answers on how to proceed to control a potential escalation . The U.S. military wanted air strikes and ground invasion .
 Adlai Stevenson proposed the removal of Jupiter missiles in Turkey and the hand-over of the United States Guantanamo base in Cuba as items to be negotiated . Stevenson also proposed the hand over the U.S. Guantanamo base .
 Intermediate range missiles, IRBMs, are able to reach almost any city in the United States, was showed . New evidence of the presence of intermediate range missiles was also shown . The missiles are capable of reaching almost any U.S. city .
 The President accepted the idea of bombing and invading Cuba, if the crisis was not resolved before the end of the month .
 The President announced to the National Security Council that a quarantine would be put in place . The quarantine will be in place, the President announced .
 JFK met Congress leaders, who expressed their position in favor of initiating the attacks . JFK met members of Congress who expressed support for the attack . JFK was assassinated in September 1945 .
 To prevent overflow, routes of informal control of troops on alert were opened . Troops on alert have been put on standby .
 The President spoke to the nation on TV, he argued that the Soviet Union had to remove the missiles from Cuba or to face a total nuclear retaliation . The President told the nation that the Soviets must remove them from Cuba .
 JFK also announced a ""defensive quarantine"" to be imposed over ships en route to Cuba . JFK also imposed a 'defence quarantine' over ships bound for the island nation .
 Khrushchev protested against the U.S. interference, while the deployed missiles were reaching operational state . Khrushchen protested against United States´ interference . The deployment of Soviet-made missiles was reaching an operational state, the government said .
 Statement by the OAS, Organization of American States, to support quarantine . OAS: Quarantine is necessary in order to prevent spread of the virus .
 A nuclear test was performed by the U.S. in the Pacific without presidential knowledge . The test took place without the knowledge of the president .
 Most Soviet vessels going to Cuba stopped or returned . Some of them, which were not carrying weapons, continued to go .
 DEFCON 2 was set by the U.S. Air Force without presidential authorization . The Air Force set the alarm without presidential approval . Air Force also set the alert without authorization .
 Meeting of the United Nations Security Council with tough exchange of arguments between U.S. and Soviet Union ambassadors, Adlai Stevenson and Valerian Zorin .
 Photographic evidence of the missiles' deployment was presented to the world . The missiles were deployed in a range of countries around the world, including Russia and China .
 Media operation to check potential face-saving deal involving the dismantlement of Jupiter missiles in Turkey . Jupiter missiles are believed to have been destroyed in the region .
 JFK exposed the need of a peaceful solution, aided by international support . JFK exposed to the ExComm the need for a peaceful resolution . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 ABC journalist John Scali with the KGB chief in America, Aleksandr Fomin . Fomin was Khrushchev's informal messenger and person of his confidence . The two men met in a secret meeting in the 1950s .
 Soviet tactical nuclear weapons on high level of alert, already prepared to contain a potential invasion . Russian nuclear weapons already on high alert, ready to contain an invasion .
 Inner pressures within the U.S. government to begin punitive attacks. Inner pressures in the United States government to start punitive attacks . The U.N. government is under pressure to act against the Obama administration .
 Khrushchev intended to negotiate removal of the missiles in Cuba for removal of Jupiter missiles in Turkey . A second letter was more inflexible, and was meant to negotiate the removal of missiles . The letter was intended to remove the missiles from Cuba .
 An unwritten secret agreement, involving the removal of Jupiter missiles in Turkey, in six months, was put on the negotiation table . The agreement was put together in order to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 As planned, Khrushchev's second letter was ignored and Kennedy accepted the first proposal . Kennedy's second proposal was also ignored and the first was accepted .
 A third Khrushchev's letter announced that the missiles would be dismantled and removed . The letter was signed by the then-Krushchev government in 1956 . A third letter was issued in 1958, the missile was removed from the USSR .
 The following day the dismantling began and it was completed in November 9, 1962 . The dismantling began the following day . The Aftermath
 There was an exchange of letters between Khrushchev and Castro where the Soviet leader informed the decision to remove the missiles . The letters were exchanged between the two countries .
 The political implications involved the introduction of a highly destabilizing factor in the delicate Soviet-American bilateral relations . Broadly speaking, the political implications of the incident were political implications .
 The core issue to negotiate was, then, the action of a full removal of those missiles . Within such context, the core issue is the removal of missiles .
 Incentives were offered to the opponent in order to get such action fulfilled . The winner of the match was awarded a straight red card in the first half .
 Cuba had a secondary role during the conflict as the field where the strategic dialogue between both superpowers took place . Cuba was a key player in the conflict between the two superpowers .
 Soviet Union: It tried to uphold and defend the Castro regime to pursue its own interests . States Soviet Union tried to defend and defend Castro regime . Soviet Union was not a supporter of Castro's regime. It was a defender of the Cuban regime .
 In this sense, it acted to deter the United States from a second invasion of Cuba . The U.S. did not want to invade Cuba again, the president said in a statement .
 It tried to improve its positioning within the balance of power in the world, as well as to establish a psychological balance .
 The USSR also aimed to give clear signs of power to China, and to expand communism in Latin America and other regions . The USSR was also aimed at expanding communism in the Americas .
 The Soviet state sought to protect its interests in Berlin and Eastern Europe . It also sought to force the removal of U.S. missiles deployed in Turkey and Italy .
 The U.S. tried to maintain a favorable balance of power in the Cold-War World . It tried to keep the balance in order to maintain the Cold War .
 Cuba: It tried to set up a more solid defense against brand-new potential offensive actions by the U.S. Cuba: "It tried to . set up more . solid defense"
 They looked for the United States financial support, direct investment, and protection against Communism . The U.S. looked for financial support and direct investment in Communism .
 They looked for economic support, direct investment, and USSR´s protection in order to expand the Soviet-kind Communism . The Soviet-style Communist Party looked for support and direct investment .
 In this regard, the mediating role of the Secretary General of the United Nations, U. Thant, was key and rather unknown .
 They looked for consolidating its internal power and acceptance, both in the Congress and in the U.S. public opinion, they say . They looked to consolidate their internal power .
 They sought to give an image of firmness and determination, as well as to regain prestige after the early and spectacular failure in Bay of Pigs . They sought . to give a image of . firmness . and determination .
 They also wanted to adequately position for the following legislative elections, and to fight communism by consolidating the values of democracy, they said .
 They were mostly hawks and had a general adverse position toward the JFK Administration . The JFK Administration was largely hawks, but the hawks were critical of the administration .
 They wanted to impose the U.S. supremacy, if necessary through the use of force, they said . They said they wanted the United States supremacy if necessary .
 As elite they had got got a tough mindset, for which negotiation was considered as a synonym of weakness . Negotiating is considered as an 'opportunity of weakness'
 The U.S. supported the invasion and other punitive measures against Cuba . The Cuban government was largely unfavorable to Kennedy's administration .
 It generally followed the guidelines of President Kennedy in communication and negotiation . The government generally followed President Kennedy guidelines .
 Hawks, they showed some significant flaws in data interpretation and prevention . Hawks, Hawks, showed some serious flaws with data interpretation, prevention. Hawks: "Hawks, Hawks"
 They have doubts about the installation of missiles in Cuba but they supported due to the strong Khrushchev´s leadership . They also have doubts that the installation was installed by the Soviet Union .
 Because of the vertical structure they offered no further opposition to the project . Some of them were enthusiastic about the deployment of the missiles, other realistic, but other realistic .
 Kennedy chose the group on the basis of criteria of ability or prestige . It was an information, analysis, and direct consultation group .
 There were diversity positions and the President played a style of leadership open to receive ideas and proposals, but reserving for him the final decision, within the environment .
 Their interests were those of the Kennedy administration, the core of it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Their interests, he says, are those of Kennedy administration .
 They perceived the crisis as a litmus test for their management style, they said . Besides of the potential humanitarian consequences of a nuclear war, they perceived the potential consequences of the nuclear war .
 "This small group was based on big trust and openness derived from long-standing close relationships," says the BBC's chief executive .
 "They acted under the influence of their leader, constantly supporting his thinking," he said . They acted under his influence, constantly supported his thinking, he added .
 In this sense, they held at that time an absolute power in Cuba, supported by their revolutionary militias . The Cuban government was supported by its revolutionary militias, the author says .
 The definitions of crisis are varied through literature but all share a number of common attributes . The definition of crisis varies through literature, but all have a common characteristic .
 Crisis is characterized by the emergence of a severe threat to significant values, and a limited time to neutralize that threat . Crisis crises are characterized by two key elements: The emergence of an emerging threat and the time it is neutralizing it . Crisis is defined as a crisis that has a
 A fourth element, generally present, has to do with an environment of uncertainty and limited information . The fourth element is generally present .
 Crisis crises have rapid development, they are contingent, and involve high risks of escalation and high probability of losses . Consequently, crises have a rapid development and they involve high risk of escalation . Crisis is contingent and involves high risks and high likelihood of escalation, says David Cameron . Crisis crises are
 Crises are accompanied by extreme stress and they are very likely to evolve into disastrous lose-lose situations . Crises will be accompanied by extremely stress and will evolve into disasterous situations, experts say .
 Uncertainty was present all the time within an environment of limited information about the opponent . Uncertainties were present all of the time in the environment .
 The limited information, more acute in such time than now reached significant issues such as if Khrushchev was still in charge, and if communications were true or false, etc. etc.
 The risk of escalation to the extreme situation of a total nuclear war and the consequent Mutual Assured Destruction, where all players end losing, was always there . The risk was always always there.
 This was the first time in the nuclear history when world leaders became fully aware of the magnitude of such risk . In fact, this was the . first time . world leaders . become fully aware . of the . magnitude of the risk .
 Once started a crisis, parties are obliged to do whatever is necessary to protect their own interests . Yet it is clear that the options used should avoid an unwanted and uncontrollable escalation . This is the basic political dilemma of crisis management .
 Crisis management with threat of war has specific political and operational requirements to achieve a positive outcome, such as avoiding war . Crisis management must be political, operational and political, in order to achieve the positive outcome of avoiding war.
 The political ones are related to the limitation of goals and of means employed . This point has an underlying concept of proportionality, valid while opponents keep themselves from the brink .
 Operational requirements are diverse and they have to do with the need to integrate military and diplomatic measures taken during the crisis . Operational needs have to be integrated, even though the military and . diplomatic logic are markedly different, he says .
 There are multiple strategies designed to address these types of crises . There are several strategies to address this type of crises, CNN's John Sutter says .
 "The offensive ones attempt to change the status quo at the expense of the adversary," says Drexler . The offensive ones are the ones who try to change status quo, he says .
 The defensive ones seek to defend the status quo against an opponent who tries to change it in their favor . "Defensive ones" seek to protect status quo in order to avoid change .
 Soviet strategy of ""faits accomplis"" was a clearly offensive one, of the type called "faits affidavit of faits . Soviet strategy was a clear offensive one . Soviet interests underlying the conflict were revealed in the conflict .
 This strategy seeks to produce a change in status quo through unilateral and surprising actions . It is based on the belief that the opponents are either not committed to defending the previous status quo, or they are too weak to do so .
 The missiles were installed in Cuba in absolute secrecy -the fait accompli . They were put into operation throughout the entire crisis, in parallel with different events and moments of negotiation .
 Khrushchev initially overestimated the likeliness of keeping the project in secrecy . He ignored warnings from his advisers about the degree of tension that the move would generate .
 He let him be carried away by the belief in Kennedy´s rationality to avoid escalation towards a nuclear war . He said: "He let him believe in JFK´s rational thinking to avoid nuclear war"
 One of the worst mistakes of the leaders is to assume the rationality of their opponents, writes CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 United States' choice of ""coercive diplomacy"" In order to avoid war, Kennedy employed a defensive strategy, the coercive diplomacy . United States chose to use coercive diplomacy to avoid conflict .
 This strategy seeks to persuade the perpetrator to undo what has done, to stop provocation . This strategy is known as 'Stop Provocation'
 A driver to success is to offer the perpetrator positive incentives for compliance, says the police chief . The perpetrator should be offered positive incentives to comply, he says .
 It implies that an ongoing negotiation process should be developed in parallel . The process should take place in parallel to the ongoing negotiations .
 Kennedy proposed an initial stage in which he avoided presenting Khrushchev a deadline to remove the missiles, but a blockade or quarantine of Cuba was actually implemented, in deliberate steps . Kennedy proposed a first stage in Cuba in order to avoid a deadline .
 In that way, he drew with international support, a dividing line, a physical one, but mostly of events, that intended to bring light to the opponent’s actions . "In that way," he drew international support," he said .
 He resisted internal pressures of the toughest wings of his administration and of public opinion, the hawks, he says . But at the same time he started tuning up the military factor as he foresaw a possible beginning of hostilities .
 With such strategy he prevented escalation, as he proposed limited goals, nothing further than the removal of Cuban missiles and limited coercion means were used, the author says .
 At a second stage, when the crisis began to overheat, he turned to a tougher position, by issuing a sort of ultimatum, with an imminent start of hostilities two days later . Two days later, he issued a kind of ultimatum by issuing an ult
 This calmed the spirits and pressures on the home front, while painted a picture of determination from outside . This calmed . It painted a . picture of . determination from . outside, while painting a picture . of determination .
 President offered incentives to the USSR in order to close an honorable deal . However, at the same time, he offered, through various channels of negotiation and symbolic communication, to the Soviet Union, he said .
 An absolute leadership of operations was kept, showing the opponent concrete signs of strength, but also a preference for a peaceful resolution . Based on the expressed, the basic operating principles of the crisis management were followed .
 The process was slowed down in the most critical moments, to give more time to decision making .
 On the Soviet side, these basic principles were also taken into account . On the Russian side, the Soviet Union also took into account.
 Permanent communication and negotiation at different levels turned out to be a key to solving problems .
 In fact, communication between the parties was profuse through multiple pathways . The parties were able to reach out to each other through multiple channels .
 "Communication to the public was relatively restricted. On the contrary, communication to be relatively restricted," he said. "On the contrary ... the public is relatively restricted" he said .
 The negotiation with the opponent was developed at a private informal level, although there were also confirmatory actions of public and official type . The negotiation was developed primarily at the private . level .
 There was also direct diplomatic negotiation of the parties, within the United Nations, the OAS and with third countries to seek support .
 Soviet negotiations with the Castro regime were intense before, during, and after the crisis . The Castro regime was the subject of intense negotiations .
 There was also a tireless negotiation and implementation of methods of influence, focused on the inner front . There were also tireless negotiations and implementation, focused upon the inner fronts .
 With military chiefs or within the ExComm, to achieve consensus with congressional representatives, with the media, with pilots in order to minimize attacks on reconnaissance flights, etc. etc. with military chiefs, or . The ExComm .
 A similar process but with less intensity took place on the Soviet side because of the characteristics of the regime . It is assumed that a similar process . took place .
 From the external negotiation point of view, opponents tried energetically to avoid a lose-lose outcome .
 All parties won when they avoided the possibility of a nuclear holocaust . It led them to reach a win-win outcome, as all parties won . All parties avoided a nuclear war .
 This negotiation represented a positive turning point in the development of the Cold War . With a bigger detail, this negotiation was a positive turn point in Cold War history .
 It showed willingness to arrive at a peaceful solution but also firmness, taking only the opponent's more favorable aspects to reach a solution . In the bargain, it showed willingness, but not willingness to reach an agreement .
 At a first stage the diplomatic channel was primarily used, it gave way to secret informal negotiations, that eventually led to close the final deal . At first, it was mainly used, but the secret channel was used to secure the deal .
 The heads of State communicated through letters in order to formalize the steps . Heads of State wrote to each other in a formal letter .
 The willingness to conceal Soviet intentions related missiles in Cuba was put in evidence . The meeting between Kennedy and Gromyko was dated October 18, where the willingness to hide Soviet intentions .
 JFK televised message to the people of the U.S. and to the world dated October 22 . JFK's televised message was broadcast on October 22.
 The turning point is the confrontation at the U.N. Security Council when photographic evidence of missile sites is showed to the world . Photographs of the missile sites are shown to the United Nations Security Council .
 The meetings between journalist Scali and Aleksandr Fomin were a key to reaching a direct and informal communication with Khrushchev . The meetings opened the door to an informal higher-level negotiation, says Fomin .
 The meetings between Bob Kennedy and Dobrynin, that gave shape to such informal high level negotiating track, which ultimately turned out to be the most important path towards a solution, were those meetings .
 The internal negotiation was also hard, due to the positions between hawks and doves in the various groups and bureaucracies involved . The internal negotiations was also very hard, according to the president .
 b. Gathering useful information from intelligence, diplomatic corps, media, armed forces, and all other available sources . b. Collecting useful information .
 Analysis of such information followed by identification of alternatives together with their pros and cons, a search of consensus, and a recommendation . c. Analysis of the alternatives followed by . identification of alternative alternatives together . Their pros, cons, and their pros & cons are considered to be the best alternatives
 Implementation of the decision by different actors with different roles . Implementation by different actor with different parts .
 Among them are diplomacy, armed forces, negotiators, and other formal and informal actors . i. e. i. m. diplomats . iReport: Diplomats and armed forces have been involved in the conflict in Afghanistan .
 Monitoring of decision and feedback, including data collection and decision maker's own perceptions, is a key part of the process . Monitoring of decisions and feedback is key to success .
 The decision chain related to coercive diplomacy applied by the United States was heavily dependent on the context, and on the information gathered in previous steps . In this sense, the U.S. decision chain is heavily dependent upon the context of the previous steps taken by the government .
 It was, therefore, more complex than the Soviet's of faits accomplis , which simply went ahead until it stopped . It was therefore more complex . The Soviet Union's faits-affidavit was more complex, and it was not the same .
 There was a fairly long period of data collection and analysis, till October 20, which was coincident with the ExComm´s consolidation as a think-tank and direct advisory group to the President .
 Secret negotiations with the Soviet ambassador were very relevant . Among the first, the secret negotiations with Soviet ambassador was very relevant.
 U.S. nuclear test in the Pacific was a major factor in the decision to test nuclear weapons without authorization . The decision depended on a decentralized atomic energy entity, the U.N. says .
 The decision to deploy Soviet missiles in Cuba under the most absolute secret was kept secret . On the Soviet side it is assumed that the decision-making process was actually more concentrated on the hands of Nikita Khrushchev .
 His circle of confidence acted with the syndrome of ""group think"" by which the group is unable to offer the leader a different vision of a problem, so that the entire decision making process is greatly downgraded .
 "The complexity of a crisis is the most demanding situation for a leader and their group of decision," says President Obama . The complexity of crises is the "most demanding situation of a leader," says Obama .
 The leader’s profile is a key to achieve a healthy process of decision . The leader's profile is key to achieving a healthy decision process, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 The leader should choose a dynamic and diverse advisory group, able to dissent and to bring different views and perspectives of the issue under analysis . In this sense, the leader must choose a diverse and dynamic advisory group .
 The leader should be able to receive and positively process such views, as well as to take full responsibility for the final decision . The leader must also take responsibility for making the decision, he says .
 It is necessary to constantly review decisions made and correct the path, if required, keeping clear of the ultimate goals . It is also necessary to correct decisions made, if necessary, in order to keep clear of ultimate goals.
 Taking for granted the strict rationality of the opponent, and a mistaken appreciation of the different actors’ potential behavior, can both lead to wrongly ponder decisions and their consequences, can lead to incorrect conclusions .
 flaws on the decision process may lead to a succession of events which could push governments to take the option of war, without a clear assessment of consequences . Concerning international crises with risk of war: flaws on decision process could lead to more crises .
 In such crises, it is highly opportune to keep the conflict restricted by setting limited goals and limited means to achieve them . The conflict should be limited to limited means and limited goals, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Such practice is useful to avoid escalation from conventional to nuclear level, the author says . Such practice would avoid escalation to the level where the concept of proportionality is no longer valid, he says .
 An important point is the control by all means of troops on a high state of alert, as they entail a high risk of s triggering incidents which may lead to spark the armed conflict .
 It means prevention, by pondering governmental decisions, in order to resolve disputes during their early stages . It means preventing, by adequately pondering government decisions, by .
 Appropriate incentives play a key role in the achievement of such deals . The deal is expected to be worth around $1.5 billion .
 Both leaders behave provocative on the previous stages, such as Bay of Pigs incident, Mongoose Operation or the missiles secret deployment, without clearly measuring potential consequences . On the contrary, little or nothing was done by both parts on prevention of the crisis .
 An interesting approach is to understand the relevant impact of those days on the United States’ further foreign policy decisions and their global implications . The U.S. should be careful to consider the impact of that days on its foreign policy .
 Some argue that if messages from this crisis would have been properly understood, decisions on Vietnam and Iraq had been pondered in a different way . Some argue if messages would have led to better understanding of the crisis, they could have been avoided .
 It is time to find key elements in this experience which could serve leaders as inspiration for future decision making in the sense of a more secure world . Now it is time for leaders to find out how to use this experience .
 U.S.-Russia relations are key to increasing global security, says U.K. President Barack Obama . The relationship between the two countries should be preserved, says Obama . Russia and the United States have a bilateral relationship, he says .
 Trust and cooperative relation between both powers is a must for international balance . Trust and cooperation between the two countries must be seen to be a key security issue for the world's future .
 The quality of the U.S.-Russia relationship matters the entire global community . In other words, the quality of this relationship is important to the entire world .
 It is therefore worrisome that the mentioned Nunn-Lugar framework agreement, for example, could be cancelled after its expiration in June 2013 . It is also worrisome that it could also be cancelled if it is not extended .
 If concreted, it would be a serious step backward on the path for a more secure world . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 To renew the agreement, Russia and the U.S. should not be any obstacle for Russians to recover all their potentiality as a state . To renew it should be a way to further enhance cooperation between Russia and United States .
 Both countries together own the 95% of nuclear weapons in the world, so that, it is clear that they have still much joint work ahead on nuclear weapons dismantlement .
 Common interests should be identified in order to go on with the cooperative work. Common interests must be identified, he says . Common interests need to be identified before the work can be done together .
 Need to achieve a deeper consensus among the UN Security Council, the P5, on key ways to prevent further proliferation and to accomplish their nuclear disarmament responsibilities .
 In the past, behind every case of proliferation there has been a P5 acting as “protector’s” P5 thinking more of strategic balances among peers than of final effects of proliferation .
 The game of opposing interests and lack of a common view among them, together with a failure in fulfilling their own commitments, ended weakening the whole disarmament and nonproliferation regime .
 Lessons from the Cuban Missile crisis can be applied here to mutually encourage negotiation processes where global priorities and common points of consensus in favor of an increasing global security could be identified .
 Messages from the October crisis could inspire political will in the line of traversal cooperative work to neutralize the regional endemic crisis in the Middle East .
 The leader of Israel assumes that before the ""red line"", Iran will turn back on the continuity of its program . Israel's prime minister says before the 'red line' Iran's nuclear program will be turned back .
 The meaning of the ""red line" in the case of Iran's conflict has not been fully explained . However, the meaning of this line has not yet been explained . The meaning has not fully been explained by the Iranians .
 If we stick to an accurate reading of the messages derived from the October crisis, the ""red line" implied a warning of potential use of force, but not the use of that kind of force itself . The 'red line' was a warning, not a threat, but a warning
 Kennedy searched parallel negotiation tracks when possible, but there is a clear difference in profiles between those key actors and those related to Mideast conflict . Kennedy: "There are a clear differences in profiles of key actors" in the Middle East conflict .
 To set an analogy, to negotiate with Iran today and try to reach win-win terms could become as difficult as having performed the negotiation with Fidel Castro, rather than with Khrushchev during the crisis .
 Castro and Khrushchev represented concurrent national interests, but the clear difference was the ability to anticipate the final consequences of their actions or maybe, if anticipated, how much potential negative outcomes could matter to them .
 Sanctions by the UNSC and other relevant international actors have traced previous ""red lines" in front of Iran, with unsuccessful results . Sanctions have been traced to previous 'red lines' with unsuccessful success .
 This poses a concern about how to draw a new red line in this conflict avoiding the use of force, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The final document of the 2010 Review Conference of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, NPT, called to carry out a Conference on the Middle East during 2012 with the participation of all states in the region, so as to move forward with the 1995 proposal to shape a WMD Free
 The government of Finland is acting as facilitator for the Conference, although Israel said from the beginning that it will not participate . Israel has not participated .
 Israel has never declared itself a nuclear weapons state and never participated in any of control regimes related to Weapons of Mass Destruction . Israel's position provides easy arguments to other regional proliferators, like Iran, to go ahead with their plans, writes Peter Bergen .
 A new political will and new strategies of negotiation and cooperative work, including shifts to more flexible positions and confidence building, should be considered by the most reliable states in the region .
 It necessarily implies to break the old logic and beliefs through an increase of transparency, and transversal negotiations including Israel including Israel . It would necessarily imply to break old logic .
 It is necessary to assess in what extent these messages are applicable to negotiations with actors different from states, whose logic and behavioral models are completely different . Further analysis is needed to assess whether these messages can be applied to negotiations .
 A realistic assessment of win-win and win-lose scenarios, a clear acceptance of other parties’ interests, as well as an appropriate incentives management can bring states, even with diverse interests, to work together for a common goal .
 In fact, it is necessary to understand that prevention of crisis is even most important than the best crisis management . "Preventing crisis is more important than ever being able to manage crisis," says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Should these lessons be understood and help open new paths to cooperatively reduce global nuclear dangers? Should these . open new . paths to cooperate . reduce global . dangers? We ask .
 Lyndon B Johnson, Vice-President, Bob Kennedy, Attorney General, Theodore Sorensen, Special Advisor to the President, Dean Rusk, Secretary of State, McGeorge Bundy, National Security Advisor, Robert McNamara, Defense, John McCone, CIA Director; Gen.
 Maxwell Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Ken O'Donnell, special Assistant to the President, Adlai Stevenson, United States ambassador to the UN and others attended the event . Maxwell Taylor was the chairman of Joint Chiefs .
 Curtis LeMay of the Air Force and Acehson Dean, former Secretary of State and foreign policy adviser, will speak at 9 p.m. ET on CNN.com Live .
 Morris E. Morris E.,The Fog of War, 11 Lessons from the Life of Robert S McNamara . Morris E.'s book, The Fog Of War, is published by Robert S. McNamara, a historian and author .
 Dobbs, M., One Minute to Midnight, Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War, Knopf, NY, 2008 . Dobbs: "One Minute To Midnight" is Kennedy's "one minute to Midnight"
 Netanyahu spoke at the United Nations General Assemby, NY, September 27, 2012 . Netanyahu, B. Netanyahu was the prime minister of Israel .