 The immediate effects were that missiles were withdrawn from Cuba, and the United States secretly agreed to withdraw its missiles from Turkey . The U.S. secretly withdrew missiles from Cuba and Turkey .
 By June 1963 the first telephone “hotline’s” was installed for the leaders of the superpowers to directly communicate . The first telephone hotline was installed in June 1963 .
 It led to better communication between the leaders of the two countries . The two countries have been at odds for years .
 The United States and the USSR also decided to reduce their nuclear programs . The U.S. and the former Soviet Union also reduced their nuclear program .
 With tactical nuclear weapons on the island, America would have lost nearly all of the 180,000 troops in the invasion as well as all the Marines still on Guantanamo Bay . The U.S. would have actually lost all the troops in that invasion .
 The United States entered the Vietnamwar because it was worried about communists gaining power in the conflict between the North Vietnam and the South Vietnam . The U.S. entered into the Vietnam War in 1968 because of the conflict .
 The U.S. failed to achieve its objectives and a peace agreement was signed . Ultimately, the United States failed and the peace deal was never reached .
 Khrushchev, on October 26, sent a letter to Kennedy in which he stated that he would remove missiles from Cuba if the U.S. would no attack Cuba . Kennedy said in the letter that he had no intention of attacking Cuba .
 The crisis demonstrated that the U.S. needed to have the best delivery systems for its nuclear weapons . The crisis proved that the United States needed to be able to use these weapons in order to deter Soviet aggression .
 Tension increased when a U2 plane was shot down by a Russian missile and the pilot killed . Tensions increased when the pilot was killed in the attack .
 If there was no “Cold War” Europe would have fallen to the Soviet Union and World War 3 would have started . The Cold War would have ended if there were no Cold War, World War III would have begun .
 Any “Cold War” is better than a “Hot War’s” look at Iraq and Afghanistan . Iraq and Afghan wars have lasted over 15 years and still going. Any "Cold War" is better .
 Since then, Cuba has not been known to possess a nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons program . Cuba is not known to have a nuclear or biological weapon program .
 The resolution of the crisis boosted Kennedy’s status because Kennedy had forced the Soviets to yield to U.S. pressure . Kennedy's status boosted because he had forced Soviet pressure to yield .
 After years of warfare, an estimated 2 million Vietnamese were killed, while 3 million were wounded and another 12 million became refugees . Around 12 million Vietnamese became refugees in Vietnam .
 The war killed an estimated 2 million Vietnamese civilians, 1. million North Vietnamese troops and 200,000 South Vietnamese troops . The war was fought between North and South Vietnam and North Vietnam .
 North and South Vietnam were united under the Communist North in 1975 despite the best efforts of American servicemen who left the area following the Treaty of Paris in 1973 . The final outcome of the Vietnam War was that South Vietnam was united under a Communist North .
 The correct answer among all the other choice is D United States naval blockade of Cuba . U.S. naval blockade is the correct answer .
 Khrushchev accepted Kennedy’s demand to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba . Kennedy accepted the demand that the missiles be removed .
 The Soviet Union used checkered shirts to sneak thousands of troops to Cuba . Why did the Soviets put missiles in Cuba to prevent a Nuclear War?