 It took no time at all — at a moment when no other nation had such potentially Earth-destroying weaponry — for an America triumphant to begin to imagine itself in ruins . As the late Paul Boyer so vividly described in his classic book By the Bomb’s Early Light,
 In November 1945, in the “36-Hour War,” Life would feature a mushroom cloud rising over Washington in a surprise attack slaughtering 10 million Americans . The mushroom cloud would kill 10 million people .
 Radio quickly followed with its own nightmarish nuclear scenarios of all-American disaster as, within years, would TV, while post-nuclear landscapes of horror were a dime a dozen in the world of pulp fiction .
 In the movies, mutant and irradiated creatures of every sort — from previously somnolent giant reptiles to monstrous ants — ran wild on screen . In the past, mutant creatures of all sorts were featured in films .
 This was the “duck and cover” world I grew up in (“you and I don’t have shells to crawl into, like Bert the Turtle, so we have to cover up in our own way…” This was one in which, though
 It was a world in which, for the first time, not God but human beings could create their own end times . It was the world where God but not God created their own ending times. It was also a world where people could make their own ends times .
 50 years ago, there was a moment when it looked like all the futuristic fiction might indeed turn into reality . We still haven’t taken it all in, but 50 years later, it seemed as if events were drawing a concentric circle around you .
 At 18, with most of my life still theoretically ahead of me, I believed him . "I believed him," he said. "At 18, he believed him"
 Noam Chomsky reminds us of how close we truly got to a self-induced apocalypse and why it came to that . In his new TomDispatch post, Chomsky explains how close the U.S. got to an apocalypse . Chomsky: "We are not going to be able to live
 It’s a chilling tale about the imperial urge to control the world, one that still couldn’t be more relevant . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in the UK .
 But that question does not arise in a disciplined intellectual and moral culture . The U.S. effectively owns the world by right, and is by definition a force for good despite occasional errors and misunderstandings .
 Henry Kissinger called a high-level nuclear alert to warn the Russians to keep their hands off during the 1973 Israel-Arab war . Kissinger was secretly authorizing Israel to violate the cease-fire imposed by the U.S. and Russia . Kissinger called the alert during the Arab-Israeli war
 A TomDispatch regular, he is the author of numerous best-selling political works, most recently, Hopes and Prospects, Making the Future .
 TomDispatch.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Visit CNN.com/Travel next Thursday for a new look at the U.S. Treasury Department .
 Tom Engelhardt is the author of The End of Victory Culture, a history of American triumphalism in the Cold War era . Engelhardt: Mission Unaccomplished, TomDispatch interviews American Iconoclasts and Dissenters .