 Friday marks the 50th anniversary of President Kennedy&#39;s assassination . Once again, we will mourn the dead, march for peace and call for the closing of this terrorist training camp .
 Project Unspeakable is staged by activist groups around the country as a tool for political education and discussion .
 The goal is to use live political theater to break the silence and propaganda around the assassinations of the Kennedys, Malcolm X and Martin Luther King Jr. and to show how and why U.S. government and military forces systemically killed our best leaders .
 As we mark this anniversary, I certainly urge people to read Douglass&#39; book. "As well as people in the U.S. to read it, I'm sure people will read it," he says .
 Douglas uses the writings of his friend Trappist monk Thomas Merton as a sounding board of faith and reason throughout the story . Merton wrote in 1965, &quot;is the evidence that is stricken indeed by the presence of the Unspeakable .
 The Unspeakable is the void that contradicts everything that is spoken even before the words are said, Merton wrote . This is what too few are willing to see .
 The Unspeakable refers to the systemic evil and its darkness and shadow that surrounds us today, says Merton . It is the void out of which Eichmann drew the punctilious exactitude of his obedience, he says .
 It&#39;s the structures, institutions and spirit of violence, war and evil that run rampant across the globe . The structures and institutions of violence and evil run rampant in the world, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Unspeakable Evil pursued its warpath in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala, Panama and Colombia and then the war on terrorism and the United States .
 Douglass argues JFK had always been determined to give his life for peace to prevent another world war . Douglass: JFK began to take small steps to reverse our nuclear buildup and pull our troops out of Vietnam .
 Douglass paid for his pursuit of peace with his very life . The Unspeakable is not far away, Douglass writes in a quote we will cite in Friday's performance .
 The emptiness of the void, the vacuum of responsibility and compassion, is in ourselves . The vacuum of compassion and compassion is in the emptiness of ourselves, the author says .
 As a growing precedent to JFK&#39;s assassination by his own national security state, we U.S. citizens supported our government when it destroyed whole cities . Citizens supported the Cold War state when it protected our Cold War security by world-destructive weapons, and when it
 By bearing witness of martyrdom, he taught, we will come to know what humanity really is in its glory, on earth as it is in heaven . By bearing that witness, he . taught, he said, we . come to known what humanity . really is on earth on earth
 This weekend, thousands will converge on Columbus, Ga., for the annual protest at the School of the Americas . The school is a U.S. military training institution for Latin American militaries and death squads . John Dear: "Project Unspeakable"
 "Once again, we will mourn the dead, march for peace and call for the closing of this terrorist training camp," says President Obama . "We will mourn ... and march again," says Obama .
 Friday, Nov. 30 marks the 50th anniversary of President John F Kennedy's assassination . President Kennedy was assassinated 50 years ago .
 ""The Laramie Project,"" the ""Project Unspeakable"" script can be read by a dozen people and the production staged by activist groups around the country as a tool for political discussion .
 The goal is to use live political theater to break the silence and propaganda around the assassinations of the Kennedys, Malcolm X and Martin Luther King Jr. and to show how and why U.S. government and military forces systemically killed our best leaders .
 On Friday, Douglass, Randy Kehler, Kathy Kelly and I will be among the readers of this week's column .
 It's the best book on the assassination, perhaps the best on a U.S. president . It's one of the best books that explains these last 50 years of war and corruption .
 Douglass uses the writings of his friend Trappist monk Thomas Merton as a sounding board of faith and reason throughout the story . Merton's writings are used to guide Douglass to the end of his life .
 The Unspeakable, Merton wrote, "is the void that contradicts everything that is spoken even before the words are said" Merton: "The void that gets into the language of public and official declarations at the very moment when they are pronounced"
 Merton's term ""the Unspeakable"" refers to the systemic evil and its darkness and shadow that surrounds us today . Put another way, it refers to a systemic evil that surrounds the world today .
 If we open our eyes, we see it everywhere - the Snowden revelations that our government is spying and tracking possibly every human being on the planet, our secret wars and extrajudicial assassinations, the drone bombings, the loss of civil liberties, the total sellout to corporations and weapons manufacturers
 In the 1950s and 1960s, the Unspeakable meant the war on communism, the active pursuit of global nuclear war, and war with Cuba, the Soviet Union and Vietnam . In the 1960s and '60s, "Unspeakable" was the focus of the Un
 By punishing, silencing, and killing off the voices of truth, this Unspeakable evil pursued its warpath in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala, Panama and Colombia . Then the war on terrorism and the U.S. killings in Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Yemen, Libya
 Douglass argues JFK began to understand our commitment to war and nuclear weapons and decided to confront it . Douglass: JFK's decision to confront nuclear weapons was made by JFK to confront the problem .
 He began to reverse our nuclear buildup and pull our troops out of Vietnam, he says . Then he began to take small steps to reverse the nuclear buildup, he adds .
 Douglass argues that because of JFK’s ongoing bad health, near-death experience on PT 109, and convictions about the flawed founding of the League of Nations, JFK was determined to give his life for peace .
 "The Unspeakable is not far away,"" Douglass writes in a quote we will cite in Friday's performance . He paid for his pursuit of peace with his very life .
 Kennedy's assassination is rooted in our denial of our nation's crimes in World War II that began the Cold War and the nuclear arms race . The nation's denial of its crimes in the war began to start a Cold War . Kennedy's murder was rooted in the denial of the nation's
 By avoiding our responsibility for the escalating crimes of state done for our security, we who failed to confront the Unspeakable opened the door to JFK's assassination and its cover-up . By avoiding the . responsibility, we . fail to confront our responsibility opened the . door to the Un
 If we pursue the truth, he insists we will find hope even in the darkness . He insists if we pursue truth, we can find hope in the dark .
 What Jesus was all about, what we as human beings are all about in our deepest nature, is giving our lives for one another . What we're all about is that we give our lives to one another, says CNN's John Sutter .
 If we enter the story of the nonviolent Jesus and see with the eyes of truth as Merton and Douglass do, we can find the good fruit that comes from their lives and new courage to "seek out the way of peace" today .
 "Project Unspeakable" attempts to look deep into the darkness of 50 years ago, a darkness that still grips our land . In a spirit of truth and compassion, find the wisdom and strength to renew our journey to peace .
 I hope this 50th anniversary will inspire us to pursue the truth and deepen the struggle to close the SOA as well as the struggles to end drone warfare, government surveillance, systemic injustice, U.S. war-making, and environmental destruction .
 We can send you an email alert every time a new column in ""On the Road to Peace"" is posted .
 CNN.com will feature iReporters from across the U.S. and around the world in a new book . The book will be published by Simon Cowell, a Pulitzer Prize-winning author, in 2015 .
 Pope OK'd spending 1M euros to free kidnapped nun May 5, 2022 Vatican releases pope's message for World Day of Prayer for Vocations . Georgetown renames chapel for Sr. Sr. in El Salvador .
 Thea Bowman to honor a 'brave, holy woman' May 5, 2022 . Vatican removes Ohio priest from ministry after abuse allegations May 2, 2022.
 Cardinal Marx backs loosening of priestly celibacy . Pope's music library contains nearly 2,000 CDs, includes Elvis Elvis .