 In the first two parts of this series, we considered th~ ;ole,ofAmerican Sl(]INT during the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba during the ~ummer and early fall of 1962;\ Although the conventional buildup was easily (jiscovered, thltransfer and installation of intermediate
 The/Kennedy administration responded by declaring a maritime quarantine around Cuba nn/22 October . The quarantine was declared by the Kennedy administration in response to the Cuban crisis .
 The Soviets, although on.alert, never forward deployed their military . The Soviets never deployed any of their military forces .
 From this intercept, NSA determined that the communists were monitoring United States (and NATO) readiness levels and force deployments, much like their U.S. counterparts were watching the communist forces . The intercepts were made by the NSA .
 The material reveals that the communist cryptologists, especially the Soviets, had a fairly good analytic insight into U.S. communications . The material also reveals the Soviets had a good insight into United States communications .
 Moscow provided substantial information to Moscow regarding U.S. forces posture . U.N. traffic analytic and cryptanalytic efforts provided substantial intelligence to Moscow .
 Cuban COMINT elements and the GRU made their first big discovery during the initial buildup . The GRU and Cuban intelligence elements made the discovery in the early stages .
 It is not clear if these were the CIA-run networks or the rather haphazard operations of anti-Castro groups .
 The agents were reporting the construction of military barracks and sites for missile launchers . The agents reported the movements of Soviet military personnel throughout Cuba . They were reporting movements of military personnel .
 Some of the messages incorrectly reported the locations of the missile bases . Others reported the presence of missiles before any of the SS-4s had been shipped . The very fact that such reports might reach Washington could compromise the Anadyr' operation .
 GRU had observed a large increase in military aircraft stationed in Puerto Rico . Among other things, the GRU has observed an increase in aircraft presence in the island .
 It also noted an alarming rise in the number of SAC aircraft put on alert . The report also noted a rise in aircraft being placed on alert in recent years .
 GRU mission in Washington overheard orders for senior military officers to be on call if needed at the Pentagon . GRU was probably operating a listening post from of the embassy in Washington .
 U.S. military posture in Russia has increased in recent years, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Russia has seen a sharp increase in the number of Russian military assets in the region . Moscow says it is concerned that the U.K. has increased its military presence in recent months .
 Merchant ship status reports issued by NSA and field sites never singled out the Alexandrovsk for any special interest or significance .
 GRU intercepted enough radio and phone traffic to determine that some forces, probably SAC, had gone to DEFCON 2, the next level of alert before hostilities are declared . SAC forces are thought to be on the brink of war .
 This meant that all of that command's missiles and bombers were ready to go . The bombers, in fact, were already airborne and stayed aloft by refueling . This is the first time the U.S. has ever seen such a large force of force in the world .
 Information probably did not reach Moscow until 26 October . However, this information probably did reach Moscow in October .
 On the morning of 26 October, Khrushchev received more ominous news from Washington and Havana . The Soviet Union broke out of the war with Cuba .
 The plan for a massive air strike, known as Operation Scabbards, was in place and ready to go within twelve hours of the president's order . The plan was known as 'Operation Scabbard' and 'Scabbards' and was ready for the air strike within twelve
 GRU obtained information that U.S. military hospitals had received orders to expect a number of casualties to arrive . GRU reported that it had obtained information from the GRU . The GRU said it had received information that United States military hospitals were ordered to expect casualties .
 Moscow gave Pliyev permission to fire on U.S. aircraft if he believed an attack was under way . Moscow was certain that an air strike against Cuba was imminent . Moscow gave him permission fire on American aircraft .
 The U-2 was shot down by the U.S. Air Force in a shoot-down that afternoon . It was the first time the team had been shot down in the air .
 GRU appears to have performed fairly well in keeping Moscow attuned to U.S. military preparations .
 The U-2 flights of 14, 15, and 17 October probably detected the missile sites being constructed . Khrushchev failed to alert the Soviets that the sites were being built . The entire Soviet intelligence structure failed .
 The secrecy of the Anadyr' plan the Soviet ambassador to Washington was kept in the dark and the refusal to develop a plan if the Americans discovered the ruse left Moscow at a severe disadvantage .