 Khrushchev promised to respect Turkish sovereignty and borders and thus not to invade or threaten Turkey in exchange for similar pledges from the United States regarding Cuba . The United States also pledged to respect Turkey's sovereignty .
 This represented one last try by the Soviet Union to obtain some measure of negotiating success from this crisis . The Soviet Union was trying to negotiate a deal with the U.S. government .
 In this letter, he made scant reference to the 27 October broadcast as he required that work must cease on the weapons sites in Cuba .
 His actions suggest he was hoping for a static situation in which he could leverage the crisis for a key concession – a pledge of non-hostility from the United States . His actions and demands suggest that he was trying to leverage the situation .
 The events that occurred beyond Castro’s purview precluded his ability to successfully leverage the situation . The events were beyond his purview, and he was not able to leverage them .
 Castro's elevation of his air defense response capability led to the only direct casualty of the crisis and a potential catastrophe . Castro’s elevation of air defense capabilities led to an air defense crisis .
 Major Rudolf Anderson was shot down in his U2 while conducting a photoreconnaissance mission in Cuba . Anderson was shooting down in Cuba during a photo-bombing mission .
 Anderson's death prompted the military to call for retaliatory measures . Anderson’s death represented the most tenuous time of the entire crisis . The military has not responded to the death .
 MIG fighters were scrambled to intercept and American escort fighters with nuclear tipped missiles rushed to the U2’s aid to escort it back to Alaska . U2 was escorted to Alaska by the U.S. Air Force escort .
 Robert Kennedy relayed the sustentative parts of the letter being transmitted to Khrushchev . Kennedy reiterated that Turkey was not a part of this deal . Kennedy: "Turkey was not part of the deal"
 Robert Kennedy stressed that “we needed an answer immediately from the Soviet Union.” Robert Kennedy said . Robert Kennedy: “We needed a answer immediately’s Soviet Union”
 The United States’ final offer was on the table and there was no more room for stalling . The U.S. had been stalling for more than a week . The United Nations is expected to make a decision on the deal .
 General Pliyev was aware that Castro ordered his air defense units to fire on U.S. aircraft . He believed he believed an invasion was set for the next twenty-four hours . The Russian general was aware of the threat .
 By 11:00m. in Moscow, Malinovsky responded by saying “I propose to confirm” as he informed the Kremlin . Malinovsky: ‘I propose . confirm’ as he informs the Kremlin.
 Khrushchev approved the order at noon . Presidium considered their military options and moved to relax the potential for mishap .
 Since 22 October, Pliyev had the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons to defend his forces . Pliyeva has been in charge of Russia since October 22 October .
 John Scali met again with Feklisov to inquire of him why there were confusing messages from the Soviet Union . Also that afternoon, he met again to inquire about the messages . Scali: "I don't know what happened to me. I don't believe it"