 The Soviet Union secretly deployed medium range ballistic missiles and intermediate range missiles to Cuba with Cuban leader Fidel Castro 's consent . Khrushchev had secretly deployed the missiles .
 The missiles posed a direct threat to U.S. cities, military installations and the general population . The missiles were intended to counter a strategic imbalance between the U.R. and U.N.R .
 The Soviet Union had been motivated to put missiles in Cuba due to a set of problems it was facing at home such as Sino-Sino-Soviet dispute, a strategic imbalance with the U.S., high demand in defense and space programs .
 The Soviets accepted President Kennedy's proposal to ban nuclear testing . However, after withdrawing the missiles from Cuba and an agreement with the U.S. President Kennedy 's proposed a ban on nuclear testing in Cuba .
 Following the ban, tension began reducing, marking the beginning of the end of the cold war . The ban was imposed on Russia and the West .
 Had the crisis not erupted, then chances were that U.S. could have attacked Cuba . Had chances were not averted, chances were slim of attacking Cuba .
 President Kennedy 's government had been responsible for the failed 'Bay of Pigs' in which U.S. trained and funded a section of Cubans living in the US to invade Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro’s government .
 Kennedy and Castro had never been in good terms, with Castro 's governing leaning towards communism . Castro's governing lean towards communism, with Kennedy 's government leaning towards communist .
 By the end of the 1960s, the Soviet Union was at par with the U.S. with regard to military capability, arms control and nuclear might . No other attempt was made by Kennedy 's or subsequent governments to topple Castro 's .
 This advanced strategic military advantage was partly due to the Soviet Union 's space program . The Soviet Union had an advanced strategic advantage in its space program.
 President Kennedy informed the world that the Soviet Union was building secret missile bases in Cuba, a mere 90 miles off the shores of Florida . Kennedy made the announcement in October 1962 .
 Kennedy decided against an armed invasion of Cuba and air strikes against missiles . After weighing such options, Kennedy decided on a less dangerous response .
 It was a showdown between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, each side fearing what the other was capable of doing . Each side feared what each other could do .
 For thirteen long days, everyone in America was extremely tense and nervous about what would happen . For 13 days, the American public was extremely nervous about the outcome of the election .
 If even just one missile was launched at the U.S. by the Soviet Union, World War III would have started . "World War III" would have begun if even one missile had been launched by the Soviets at all .
 Both the United States and the USSR the most powerful coutnries in the world with very differing governmental beliefs that caused both nations to construe the other as inevitably hostile and, indeed, evil .
 The USA maintained good relations with the pro-American dictator Batista . Batista was the dictator of Cuba .
 The conflict proved manageable, to all participating sides, as no nuclear war actually occurred . However, the conflict proved to be manageable to all participants .
 To evade escalation of the conflict, involved nations were obliged to come to an agreement, and overcome their differences . To avoid escalation, they agreed to a resolution .
 The world was divided between ideologies, with U.S. controlling the West and USSR spreading socialism with the Warsaw Pact in the East . The Warsaw Pact also spread socialism in the West .
 Scientists were racing against each other in the field of science at the beginning of the 20th century .