 Book is about extraordinary women throughout human history whose lives were shaped less by having been born women, as Simone de Beauvoir put it in her revolutionary book The Second Sex, than by having to be made into women by their cultures .
 Each of the women featured in A to Z of Women in World History is considered within the particular cultural and historical milieu of which she was a part . Each of these women was considered within a particular cultural milieu .
 The intertwining of three contemporary subfields of history forms the intellectual web underlying the research and writing of this book . World history, women’s history, and gender history is a key part of the book .
 Each chapter represents a category of human achievement from business to art to science . Taking cultural interaction as the key force in shaping world history, each chapter o{ A to Z of Women in World History . Each chapter takes a look at the achievements of women in world history .
 Nineteenth-century Chinese revolutionary Qiu Jin, for example, modeled her life on the 15th-century French Christian martyr Joan of Arc .
 Many entries include cross-references to help readers understand such cultural borrowing within and across chapters . Many entries in the book include references to cultural borrowing .
 There is also an alphabetical list of entries in the book’s front matter for easy reference .
 As men have traditionally dominated each of the categories of human achievement, nearly all these women faced formidable obstacles . Women faced obstacles in the form of gender, religious, class, and/or racial discrimination .
 Gender inequality tends to increase across cultures as economic, political, and social institutions become more complex . As world historian Peter N Stears noted in Gender and World History, gender inequality tended to increase in cultures .
 Men, he wrote, attempted to reduce women’s roles in society to a dependent domesticity . Men also tried to reduce the role of women to dependent domesticdomdomdom, he said .
 The women whose lives have been written about in this book amply illustrate that those rigid gender roles were much more permeable than they—or we—had been led to believe . The lives of these women illustrate that gender roles are much less rigid than they were led to .
 Women warriors crossed the boundary of proper womanhood with the most vehemence . Women warriors are among those who crossed the boundaries of proper womenhood . Women warrior warriors were among those .
 Tamara Bunke was born to German parents in Argentina . Her multicultural heritage led to her involvement in Che Guevara’s failed revolution in Bolivia in the 1960s .
 Bunke ultimately hoisted an M-1 rifle to her shoulder to force her dreamed-of revolution . Bunke worked first as a German/Spanish interpreter and then as an undercover agent .
 She and her comrades were betrayed by the Bolivian peasants they hoped to help . They were ambushed and butchered by Bolivians soldiers in 1967 .
 Eunice’s story illustrates that women heeded the call to revolution as ardently as their male counterparts . It also illustrates the futility of one society forcing social change upon another . The story is a reminder that women are not as much as men .
 Dolley Madison found subtler, more traditionally feminine ways to affect the politics of war and peace . First Lady of the U.S. First Lady was a strong advocate for peace and peace in the 1930s and '60s .
 Madison hosted White House parties where U.S. congressmen, presidents, and bureaucrats could informally but persuasively chat about affairs of the day and thereby swing the political pendulum . Madison was a Washington, D.C., socialite who hosted parties for politicians and bureaucrats .
 Madison sidled over to the hawkish U.S. congressman Henry Clay and offered him a pinch of her snuff during one of her famous soirees in the spring of 1812 . Washington’s political powerhouses knew that Madison's husband .
 Washington, D.C., burned during the War of 1812 . Madison defended her beloved White House from encroaching British troops by packing up precious artifacts .
 Other women warriors were forced to disguise their gender in order to join the ranks of the official military . Some women warriors had to hide their gender to join official military ranks .
 In a variety of human endeavors, women have had to play at being a man if they wanted recognition of their talents . Women have played at being men if they want recognition of talents .
 Sophie Germain, a French mathematician, could not enroll at Ecole Polytechnique in Paris because she was a woman . Germain was not allowed to enroll at the university because of her gender . She was a mathematician at the time of her studies .
 She put a masculine name at the top of a math problem she completed and asked a male friend to hand in the assignment for her . The assignment forced the professor to examine her mathematical proofs, she says .
 Germain Germain passed the professor’s scrutiny; she went on to help found the study of mathematical physics . Germain was a pioneer in mathematical physics; she helped found the subject .
 Harriet Jacobs broke political, social, and literary boundaries through her autobiography . Harriet Jacobs' autobiography was published in 2007 . Jacobs' book, "Harriet Jacobs" is published in New York City, New York .
 Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, in which she revealed the double-edged sword of being a female slave in the pre-Civil War United States. Incidents In The Life of A Slave Girl .
 She suffered a constant onslaught of sexual hounding by her licentious master . Not only was she condemned to a life of servitude by virtue of her birth to an enslaved mother, but because she was female, she suffered sexual hounds .
 Jacobs equated women’s happiness not with marriage but with independence . Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, the foremost slave narrative written by a woman, overturned the so-called sentimental novels .
 Italian artist Artemisia Gentileschi painted Self-Portrait as the Allegory of Painting . Gentilesch painted Self Portrait as an example of feminine independence .
 Gentileschi later gained a reputation as a respectable artist of biblical allegory . She was raped in her early career by an art teacher who raped her . Gentilesch was a respected artist .
 Male Renaissance painters frequently painted themselves being guided by an ethereal, feminine Allegory of Painting hovering over their canvasses . Male Renaissance artists often painted themselves painting themselves with the ethereal Allegory .
 Gentileschi could paint herself as the embodiment of the Allegory of Painting, guiding her own craft . Gentilesch painted herself as a woman, guiding herself to her craft .
 Gentileschi did not receive the kudos she deserved in her own time . Today many art historians consider her the artistic genius of the 17th century . Gentilesch is considered to be one of the most influential artists in the world .
 Ato Z of Women in World History is an attempt to reveal not only the distinction of the women it covers but also the ingenious ways in which women skirted the numerous barriers society placed in their paths . The AtoZ of Women In World History will be presented by CNN.com
 Each entry presents the essential facts of each woman’s life within her unique historical context . Each entry is presented within the context of each of these women's lives .
 Taken collectively, AtoZ of Women in World History paints a broad image of women as movers and shapers of world history . Without whom the historical glass would be much more than half empty, the glass would have been half empty .
 Dutch track andfield athlete Fanny Blankers-Koen talks about anger . Anger can be a forceful motivating factor in Fanny's motivational speech .
 When she told friends that she was training for the 1948 Olympics in London, they told her that at the age of 30, she was too old . The Olympic Games was held in London in 1948 .
 Dutch newspaper opined that her age would be too great a handicap to overcome . Even a Dutch newspaper reporter said that she would not be able to overcome her age .
 Others, less tactful, blurted out that she should be at home taking care of her young children . Others said she should have been at home .
 Blankers-Koen trained all the harder after the comments that her ambitions evoked became so aggravating that she trained harder . The comments that she had evoked evoked were so aggraviating that she began to train harder .
 Blankers-Koen was born Francina EIsje Koen in Amsterdam, Netherlands, on April 26, 1918 . Blankers Koen was born in Amsterdam in 1918 .
 When she turned six, Francina joined the local sports club, where she improved her innate swimming and running abilities . Francina is one of the world's most talented swimmers .
 She defeated the Dutch national champion in the 800m race the following month . Not ready to give up, however, she defeated her national champion the next month .
 Jan Blankets, track coach for the Dutch team at the 1936 Berlin Olympics, watched Francina Koen carefully and saw a potential jumper and sprinter . Koen won the gold medal at the Berlin Olympics in 1936 . Koen was one of the most successful sprinters in history .
 World War II interrupted BlankersKoen’s Olympic dreams; the games were cancelled in 1940 and 1944 . Blankerskoen won the gold medal .
 The feisty competitor continued to train even during Nazi occupation of Holland . She took time off only to give birth to her two children .
 Blankers-Koen still competed even though she had given birth to her daughter seven months earlier . She was not in mint condition when she competed in Oslo in 1946 .
 Blankers-Koen knew that age 30 was considered too old to compete effectively . Blankers Koen knew age 30 would be too old for him to compete at the Olympics .
 She knew that if she made the Olympic team, she would be away from her young children . And, in truth, she knew that she would miss them, and that she knew she would .
 Her husband coaxed her out of her tearful misgivings at leaving her children behind . But with the help of her husband, she blazed to victory .
 The following day, she left her competitors behind to win the 80-meter hurdles in a world recordbreaking 11. seconds . The next day she won the 80m hurdles in 11.02 seconds .
 Ghosen again to be the anchor in the women’s relay race team, she charged past the competition to grab the gold for Holland . Ghosen was the anchor for Holland's women's relay team .
 Dutch fans welcomed her home in style, filling her house with flowers and cakes . Her Dutch fans filled her home with cakes and flowers .
 Later that year, the Associated Press named her Eemale Athlete of the Year . She was named the E.M. athlete of the year in 2010 .
 Blankers-Koen continued to compete after her triumphs in London, winning several European competitions . Nicknamed the Elying Dutch Housewife, BlankersKoen won several competitions in Europe .
 She was manager of Holland’s national team at the 1968 Mexico Giry 2 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES Olympics . She retired from competitive running in 1955 .
 Blankers-Koen was inducted into the International Women’s Sports Hall of Fame in 1980 . Blankers was also inducted in 1980s into the IWS Hall of Famer .
 Traveler, adventurer, and writer Anne Blunt relied heavily upon her wits during her odyssey to faraway and often dangerous places .
 She and her husband Wilfrid Scawen Blunt were exploring the central Arabian desert . They were resting some distance away from their caravan when they were resting .
 Anne, hampered by a wrenched ankle, could not scamper so easily on the soft sand . Wilfrid scrambled onto his horse, but Anne was hampered by an ankle injury . An unfriendly horseman rode up; WilFrid scrambled on his horse .
 The horseman knocked her over with his spear and, grabbing Anne’s unloaded gun, thrashed Wilfrid over the head . Anne's unloaded gun was also thrashed by the horseman, who killed her .
 The horseman was shocked at the sight of a woman in the desert . The three returned to the caravan and all was peaceful again under the hushed desert sky .
 They forsook the tables and chairs, the white linens and silverware, and rubber bathtubs common among other 19thcentury British travelers . They also forsook tables, chairs, and the white linen, and . silverware .
 They were equally unhampered by prejudice against desert dwellers that kept their compatriots from living among the Bedouins .
 Like other Europeans, the Blunts traveled for the sake of experience, to be sure . But they also traveled to share a meager desert existence with the Bedouins .
 She grew up surrounded by the wealth and comfort she would one day shirk . She was surrounded by wealth, comfort and comfort .
 Her marriage to Wilfrid Blunt produced one son, who died four days after birth, and one daughter . She also had a daughter, who was born four days later .
 Wilfrid inherited his brother’s estate in Crabbet Park, Sussex, in 1872 . He inherited the estate from his brother, who died in 1865 .
 The couple began preparing for their journey by practicing their Arabic and studying maps of the Middle East . Blunt resigned his diplomatic post and the couple will travel to the region .
 Anne Blunt recalled that the Royal Geographic Society’s most recent map was dated 1836 . They were alarmed that the most recent of their maps had been dated to the age of 1836, she said .
 With little information but a lot of courage, they departed for the cradle of civilization . Thus, with little information, they left for the birthplace of civilization.
 Over land and sea, they arrived in Alexandretta, Turkey, and from there, they traveled to Aleppo, Syria . They arrived in Turkey, then traveled to Syria, where they were taken to Aleppo .
 The Shammar Bedouins controlled the left bank of the Euphrates River, while the Anezeh nomads owned the right bank, he said . The Shammars controlled the right and left banks of the river, he added .
 Skene hints that he is on good terms with the Anezeh and could send a letter of introduction to their sheik, or leader . Skene hinted that he could send an introduction to the leader of the sheik .
 The Blunts had planned on joining the Anezeh for their migration to Nejd, or the central Arabian desert . They had hoped to join them in the desert, but received a letter instead .
 Their small caravan consisted of about 15 people, including servants and guides . The caravan was made up of 15 people .
 Couple loaded camels with a sandwich made of oilskin tarp, carpet, an eiderdown quilt, another carpet, and another carpet . Couple would make bed in between layers of layers of tarp .
 The Bedouins were given food including roasted grasshoppers and wild hyena meat . Anne Blunt says they refused any food they were given by the Bedoulins .
 Camel saddles were brought in from without, and the Blunts were invited to a Bedouin feast . The Blunts are invited to the feast by the Bedouins at the end of the year .
 Wilfrid and Jedaan arranged for the Blunts to accompany the Anezeh the following April to the Nejd . The Blunts were the first to travel with the Aenezeh in April .
 The trip covered more than a thousand miles, beginning near Damascus, Syria . The trip was a four-day journey .
 Wilfrid had planned to make a report to the British government on the feasibility of a transnational railroad through the Indian subcontinent . The Blunts had planned on returning to England after their journey in the Arabian desert .
 Wilfrid Blunt's experiences in India led him to disapprove of his nation’s treatment and attitudes toward other races, and of British imperialism . Blunt was a member of the Blunt family .
 After the Indian trip, the couple purchased a 40-acre homestead, called Sheik Odeyd, near Cairo, Egypt, where they spent their winters, gardening and collaborating on translations of Arabic literature .
 She broke the record for the fastest completion time in 1985 . She became a symbol of feminine strength and endurance when she broke the world record .
 Gauging sudden weather changes can save not only the musher's life but those of her sled dogs as well . The musher’s life can be saved by checking the weather in advance .
 Butcher has encountered and endured every imaginable threat in Alaska’s wilderness . Butcher has seen and survived every imaginable threats in the wilderness .
 Butcher does believe that women have greater potential for endurance than men do and stronger tolerance for pain and discomfort . Butcher believes women have a greater tolerance for discomfort than men .
 Susan Butcher was born on December 26, 1954, in Cambridge, Massachusetts . She was the daughter of Agnes Butcher, a psychiatric social worker, and Charlie Butcher, chief executive officer of family's chemical company .
 Susan and her sister enjoyed spending summers in Maine helping their father restore old sailboats . Susan spent the summers with their father restoring sailboats in Maine .
 In 1972, she moved to Boulder, Colorado, where she took a job as a veterinary’s assistant . She later moved to Denver, Colorado .
 4 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES: Boulder, Colorado, is Boulder . Her stay in Boulder only lasted three years, however .
 Colorado introduced her to the sport of sled dog racing, which she could combine her athletic prowess with her affection for dogs . On the one hand, she was able to combine athletic prowess and her love of dogs .
 A car hit one of her dogs, and the other pet was stolen, she says . On the other hand, her life in Boulder became disappointing when a car hit her dogs .
 In 1975, she moved to Fairbanks, Alaska, where the sled dog trails were in closer proximity . She moved to Alaska in 1975, where she found the best sled dog trail trails .
 Mushers race for 1,157 miles, beginning in Alaska and ending in Nome . Mushers go from Anchorage to Nome, Alaska, to Alaska, Alaska .
 Competitors must cross the frozen Bering Sea, iced-over rivers, and two mountain ranges . Competitors have to cross iced over rivers, mountain ranges, and ice-over mountains .
 In 1978, Butcher finished the race in 19th place, assuring her a portion of the prize money doled out to all racers who were among the top 20 finishers .
 In 1986, 1987, 1988, and 1990, Butcher took first place, becoming the only woman to win four times . Butcher won the race four times in the 1980s and 1990s .
 In 1990, she broke the record for the fastest time by completing the course in 11 days, one hour, 53 minutes, and 23 seconds . She completed the course for the first time in 1990 .
 She made giant strides toward exploding the myth of feminine weakness, while encouraging a nurturing, caring attitude toward the animals that helped her win her prestigious titles .
 Susan Butcher operates Trail Dog Kennels with her husband David Monson . Today, Susan Butcher runs the Kennels in Texas .
 She has been named Womens Sports Foundation’s Professional Sportswoman of the year in 1987 and 1988 . She has won two gold medals in her career .
 The International Academy of Sports named her Outstanding Female Athlete of the World in 1989 . She won the title in 1988 .
 Tibet is a nearly inaccessible country situated between China and India . David-Neel became fascinated with Tibet in 1911 when she travelled to the Far East .
 She became the first western woman to enter the Tibetan city of Lhasa and interview the Dalai Lama . The Dalai Lama is highest Tibetan Buddhist teacher .
 Alexandras mother, Alexandrine Borghmans, had hoped for a boy who would become a Catholic bishop . During her pregnancy, Alexandras' mother hoped for the boy to become a bishop . Alexandras was born in August 2013 .
 Her schoolmaster father, Louis David, harbored republican sentiments, or the desire for a representative form of government, instead of a monarchy, or government headed by a single monarch .
 He began publishing a republican journal but was forced to stop when Napoleon Bonaparte declared himself emperor . He published republican journal until Napoleon declared himself Emperor Napoleon in 1867 .
 Louis David was exiled to Belgium 5 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES where he met and married Alexandrine Borghmans . Louis David died in 1953 at the age of 92 .
 David was penniless when his daughter inherited his money . The Belgian woman would inherit her father’s money upon his death .
 Alexandra David described her parents’ marriage as unhappy from the start . She said disagreements between the couple increased with the birth of their daughter . Alexandra David describes her parents' marriage as 'unhappy'
 Louis David had his daughter secretly baptized in the Protestant faith . Alexandra David chose her own religious path not long afterward .
 Alexandra David’s life took a series of twists and turns during her teens and 20s . Alexandra David's life took her discomfort with a settled life . The film is based on the book, "Alexandra David"
 Louis and Alexandrine tried various means of caging their daughter, with little luck . Louis tried various ways to caging his daughter with little success . Alexandrine's parents say she is still alive .
 Alexandra David left for London at age 15 to study Buddhism and occultism . At age 15, she studied Buddhism, occultism, to her parents' dismay . Her parents say she left to study occultism and Buddhism .
 Her mother put her to work in a shop selling fabric for women’s clothing, but she soon quit . Upon her return to Paris, she was put to work at a fabric shop selling women's clothing .
 She attended the Sorbonne, an elite institute of education, for a time but soon quit that, too . She went on to study in France's most prestigious university .
 Her father encouraged her musical talents, and she attended the Royal Conservatory in Brussels, Belgium, refining her piano and vocal talents .
 Her first real job was with the Hanoi Opera Company in Vietnam . From there, she took her first real work with the Opera Company . The opera company is based in Vietnam and based in Hong Kong .
 Alexandra David combined her new singing career with her intellectual interest in Asian culture, especially in Buddhism, and departed for points east . Alexandra David was born in New York City, New York, New Jersey .
 Alexandra David showed much interest in men, but little desire to marry . To her mother’s consternation, Alexandra David was not interested in marriage . Alexandra David's mother was worried about her daughter's future .
 While on tour in Tunis, she met a wealthy French railroad engineer, Philippe Neel, who was also her distant cousin . Neel was a wealthy railroad engineer and her cousin . She was married to Neel's wife .
 Alexandra David-Neel made compromises when she chose marriage . She made many compromises when choosing between marriage and marriage .
 She accepted the use of Neel’s money to finance a trip to India for one year . In return, she accepted use of the money to pay for a year in India .
 Philippe Neel got the short end of the marriage bargain . There is little doubt that he got the shorter end of his marriage bargain with Philippe .
 Alexandra DavidNeel returned not in one year, but in 14 years, after touring Ceylon, Sikkim, India, Nepal, Burma, French Indochina, Japan, Korea, China, and finally, Lhasa .
 Believers devote their lives to living without many material goods, practicing intense meditation and withdrawal from human desires . Believers practice intense meditation, withdrawing from human desire .
 Unique to Tibetan Buddhism is the notion that the Dalai Lama, or Grand Master, is reincarnated after death in the body of another human . The Dalai Lama is the Grand Master of Tibetan Buddhism .
 Alexandra David-Neel visited the 13th Dalai Lama . The present Dalai Lama is the 14th of the world's highest ranking Tibetan Buddhist leader .
 First she became a disciple of a lama, living and studying in a Himalayan hermitage, or isolated community, in the Himalayan .
 In the early 20th century, the British tried to penetrate the mountainous nation ofTibet to further trade and influence . The British colonized India in the mid-19th century .
 To enter the capital of Tibet, the forbidden city of Lhasa, is hidden away high atop the Himalayas . The forbidden city is located in Tibet's Himalayan capital, the Tibetan capital of the Tibet region .
 She had studied the Tibetan language for years, and she spoke it flawlessly . She spoke flawlessly.
 She disguised herself as a beggar and entered the remote mountain village in 1924, traveling from the Gobi Desert of Mongolia to the China/Tibet border . Accompanied by a Sikkim boy, Anphur Yongden, whom she later adopted, she disguised
 From 1937 to 1945, she lived in China and traveled in the Soviet Union . She also traveled in China, Russia and the USSR .
 In 1946, 6 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES when Philippe Neel died, she returned to France to settle his estate . In 1946 she returned home to settle her estate .
 She celebrated her 100th birthday at her home in Digne, France, in 1968 . She died on September 8, 1969 .
 American tennis player Chris Evert won a total of six U.S. tennis opens, seven French opens, three Wimbledon titles, and two Australian opens during her career .
 Her professionalism attracted media attention, large audiences, and significant prize money to women’s tennis during the 1970s and 1980s . Her professional tennis career was a major success in tennis .
 Evert (sometimes called ‘little miss icicle’) was elected president of the Women’s Tennis Association a record nine times . Evert was elected eight consecutive terms from 1983 to 1991 .
 Her dedication to a sport that made her a success elevated her stature even more . Her dedication was her dedication to the sport that led her to a success .
 Chris Evert was born on December 21, 1954, in Fort Lauderdale, Florida . He is the second of Colette and James Evert’s five children .
 The Everts all played tennis; James Evert was the teaching professional at Fort Lauderdale’s Holiday Park Tennis Center . James and Jill Evert were the co-founder of the tennis club .
 At the age of six, Chris Evert began spending two to three hours a day and eight additional hours on weekends practicing her strokes . Evert: "I love to be around the world, and I love to keep it around me"
 Evert began competing at the age of 10; by her 15 th birthday, sports reporters and fans began giving her their attention .
 In 1970, she defeated another top-ranked player in the Clay Court Tournament . She then went on to upset Margaret Court, who had just won Wimbledon, U.S., Erench, and Australian Championships in the same year .
 In August 1971, she became the youngest woman ever to play for the United States Wightman Cup Team . The annual team competition between players from the U.S. and Great Britain is an annual competition .
 She defeated Winnie Shaw 6-0, 6-4, and Virginia Wade 6-1 . She won both her matches in straight sets . She defeated both Shaw and Wade in sets .
 Chris Evert’s popularity grew, tennis world began making adjustments to spotlight her performances . Tennis world began adjusting to spotlight Evert's performances after her success . Evert is now a top-ranked tennis player .
 More than 9,000 spectators watched her victory over Germany’s Edda Buding . More than nine,000 people watched her win over Buding at Wimbledon in London .
 Evert faced the top American player, Billie Jean King, in the semifinals . Evert won the match against King in a straight set .
 More than 13,000 fans were courtside to watch King defeat Evert in straight sets . King defeated Evert 6-3, 6-2 at the Wimbledon Championships in London .
 In 1972, Evert had reached the number one ranking and embarked on her domination of women's tennis . Evert was at St. Thomas Aquinas High School in 1972, when she was at the top of the world rankings .
 From 1973 to 1979, 7 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES she reached the semifinals or better in 17 of 19 U.S. Open competitions . She reached the semifinal or better of 17 of her 19 matches in the United States Open .
 She won the All-England Championships at Wimbledon in 1974, 1976, and 1981 . She also won Wimbledon titles in 1974 and 1976 .
 Everts comments about her composure on court have inspired others facing difficult challenges, whether in sports or in other endeavors .
 Chris Evert married British Davis Cup player John Lloyd in 1978; they divorced in 1987 . Evert and Lloyd married in 1978 .
 Bush appointed Evert to the President’s Council on Physical Fitness and Sports . Evert is a member of the Council on Fitness and Sport .
 She serves as a special adviser to the U.S. Tennis Association and is on the board of the International Tennis Hall of Fame and the Women’s Sports Foundation .
 In addition, she participates in the Virginia Slims Legends Tour to benefit the National AIDS Fund . In addition to the tour, she also takes part in the tour to raise money for AIDS victims .
 English outlaw Mary Frith, or Moll Cutpurse, was known to London’s criminal elements . She was known for her standards and standards .
 No, she had risen far above that petty crime; she was a Fagin, or a trainer of pickpockets . She was not only a pickpocket, but she was an Fagin of pickpocket .
 Frith's memoirs were published three years after her death . Frith was a literate woman during a time when few women, let alone criminals, could read and write .
 Frith’s adventures and exploits became grist for the English drama mill . Two playwrights turned her life into a play .
 Mary Frith was well educated, but refused to submit to the discipline of school . The daughter of a shoemaker, she was well-educated, but she refused to comply with school discipline .
 As a young girl, her parents set her up in an upper-class home as a domestic servant . But she loathed housework and looking after children . She loathed looking after them and housework .
 Frith began wearing men’s clothing and devoting herself to a life of crime . Frith wore men's clothing and began wearing them in men's clothes .
 She also tried her hand at fortune-telling, but that, she lamented, was not very profitable . She said she also tried to sell her fortune .
 The surname “Cutpurse’s” was meant literally; she was known for cutting the straps of purses and stealing them . She was known to cut the straps and steal them .
 The variety of crimes she committed, and her ability to escape the clutches of the law, made Frith famous . Frith's crimes made her famous for her escape from prison .
 London’s bobbies nabbed her during a heist in which she attempted to rob General Thomas Fairfax . General Fairfax was a well-known English officer . She was captured on Hounslow Heath .
 She was released from London’s Newgate prison when she was able to post bail, set at 2,000 pounds . Surprisingly, she was released after posting bail at £2,000 per night .
 Mary Frith is famous mostly as a folk hero, as is true for other English criminals such as Robin Hood . She is famous for her role in Robin Hood, the English outlaw who was hanged in 17th century .
 English stories, plays, and poems allude to her strange cross-dressing behavior . Her choice of a life of crime was unusual for a woman in her day . She was a cross-dresser, a woman who lived an unusual lifestyle .
 The most thorough treatment of Frith in literature appeared in 1611, in a play written by English dramatists Thomas 8 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES Middleton and Thomas Dekker .
 The Life and Death of Mrs Mary Frith, Commonly Called Mai Cutpurse, was published three years after her death . Most of the information that historians have about her life comes from her own publication .
 Criminal biographies sold well in the 17th century and were one way that English people entertained themselves . She was well known (publishing books in the 16th century was not a commonplace occurrence)
 Frith’s memoirs differ from what she writes about her own life . Readers who examine Frith's memoirs realize quickly that the editor's introduction differs from what Frith writes about .
 The introduction deals mostly with Frith’s childhood, paying particular attention to her habit of dressing like a man . Frith was born in New York City .
 The editor goes on to suggest that astrology, or placement of the planets, best explains why Frith behaved .
 Mary Frith had worn a man’s doublet, or a sort of suit coat, until she took to bed before her death on July 26, 1659 . Frith died in 1659 in her home .
 Frith’s own writing, which begins after the editor's introduction, differs from that of the editor . Frith's own writing differs from the editor of this article .
 She discusses how she became involved in the criminal world, and what she had to do to survive there . She spends very little time on her childhood, and instead she discusses her childhood .
 Frith thought that the women’s extravagant fashions of the day were a waste of their husbands’ money . Frith said that women's extravagant fashion was waste of husbands' money .
 "If [the preacher] be squeamish and will not preach, let the sexton mumble two or three dusty, clayey words and put me in, and there's an end," he wrote .
 Imagine a spinning top slowly losing momentum until it drops to one side, wagging side to side, then dropping still . Norwegian skater HENIE,SONJA, is one of the world's most famous skaters .
 Imagine spinning and gliding on a sheet of ice, cutting figures and leaping into the air . Then, imagine the same top spinning and cutting figures on the ice . Imagine the top spinning on ice, gliding in the air and cutting in figures .
 Son] a Henie took the basic athletic turns and jumps of figure skating and applied the graceful movements of a ballet dancer . Son] Henie Henie is a member of the Henie family . Henie: "I'm not afraid to say yes. I'm glad to say
 Norwegian-born world champion skater was born in Oslo, Norway, in 2003 . He is the son of former Olympic champion and Olympic gold medalist .
 Henie's father, Hans Wilhelm Henie, had been a world champion cyclist . Henie was born in Switzerland, Switzerland and Germany . Her father was a world cycling champion .
 He actively encouraged the development and enjoyment of sports in his children . The father-of-two actively encouraged his children to be involved in sports .
 Sonja Henie’s mother, Selma Lochman-Nielsen Henie, supervised her daughter's skating career as well as her own . Henie also supervised her daughters’ skating career .
 Schools and churches, churches, train stations and businesses, particularly in less populated areas, all have racks upon which people hang their skis .
 Motion on ice and snow for Scandinavians is akin to moving in water for people living in warmwater climates . Motion on snow and ice is similar to moving water in warm water for warm water .
 Sonja Henie put a pair of skates on her feet as a way to move around on winter days . Henie says she thought of them as providing another fun way of moving around .
 She practiced for hours, receiving informal instructions from a member of a skating club, and then entered and won a competition at age nine . She won a contest at age 9 .
 Two years of rigorous training, exercise, and dancing earned Sonja, and her family, the national championship of Norway . Sonja's family won the title .
 Three years later she won second place in the world figure-skating championships . Three years after she won, she won world figure skating championships .
 Henie won the first of 10 consecutive world figure skating championships in 1927 . The following year, 1927, the world competition was held in Oslo, Norway, where Henie first won the title . Henie has won 10 straight world championships .
 In the 1920s, women all over the world began changing their appearances quite drastically . Women all around the world were changing their appearance quite drastically.
 Skirt lengths rose to the knee, elaborate hairstyles were unpinned, and hair was clipped to chin length . Skirt length rose to knee, hair was unpinced, and hairstyles unpinched .
 Sonja Henie introduced this new fashion to the world of figure skating by wearing a white velvet short dress . Henie wore the dress in a marked change from the traditional long, black skating skirt .
 Henie infused figure skating with ballet with ballet and other dance moves . Henie also infused her figure skating moves with ballet moves .
 She studied a contemporary dancer, Anna PAVLOVA, and incorporated many of the moves she watched .
 She made a deliberate attempt to design and skate to a choreographed program of ballet solos . She made an attempt to choreograph a ballet solo .
 Henie Henie sought grace on the ice . Henie wanted to show grace in figure skating . He sought grace in his skating style .
 Henie embarked on a decade of shows, exhibitions, parties, competitions, and more 10 competitions . Henie won the world championship in 2007 .
 Sonja Sonja was just 16 years old at the time . She found time to explore other sports, as well as skating .
 Sonja Henie won the world champion figure skating competition 10 times . She won two more Olympic gold medals in 1932 and again in 1936 . Henie decided to end her amateur skating career in 1936, and she immediately started another .
 The Henies rented the Polar Palace in Hollywood for two ice shows, which were immensely successful . Henies were the first to perform in Hollywood, with a successful ice show .
 Sonja Henie is a 24-year-old British actress who has appeared in films and TV shows . Henie's film career began at the age of 24 in 2011 .
 Sonja Henie was made a Knight of the First Class of the Order of St. St. Louis in 1937 . She was also made a member of the Norwegian Royal Family .
 Sonja Henie became an American citizen in 1941 . She was married to sportsman Daniel Reid Topping . Henie was born in 1941 to Daniel Topping, but she became a US citizen .
 In the same year, she married her compatriot, wealthy shipping magnate Niels Onstad . She was married to Onstad's compatriot Niels onstad .
 Sonja Henie-Niels Onstad Art Center opened in Oslo, Norway . The couple purchased paintings and opened the art center together .
 Naomi James piloted her sloop, the Express Crusader, across the finish line of her home harbor of Dartmouth, England . Naomi James was a New Zealand skipper and racer . She was the first female skipper of her own sloop in 1978 .
 She had spent months on the sea, sunburnt, windburnt . She had no one else on board to keep her company . She was left alone for months .
 Polish rival Krystyna Chojnowska-Liskiewicz, had made a similar trip, threatening to achieve fame before James . Several months earlier, a Polish rival, Krystyn Chojska-liskiewiew, had travelled to Poland .
 The competitor had sailed through the Panama Canal, linking South and Central America, instead of making the treacherous passage around Cape Horn, at the southern tip of South America .
 The Polish woman's trip was strictly an ocean sail . That was the route that James took, making her trip to Poland strictly a sailing trip .
 Naomi Power James is the daughter of farmers Charles Robert Power and Joan Doherty Power . She was born in Gisborne, near Hawkes Bay, on the shores of New Zealand’s north island, New Zealand .
 She dropped out of school at age 16 to work as a hairstylist from 1965 to 1971 . She did not like school and dropped out to work in hairstylists .
 James had always wanted to travel, and in 1970, she and her sister Juliet traveled by ship to London, England . She and Juliet traveled to London by ship in 1970 .
 Naomi met Robert James, the skipper of a yacht called the British Steel, on a bicycle tour in France . James asked Naomi to work on the boat as a deckhand and cook . She met James on a bike tour and was asked to work for him .
 Naomi read a magazine story about a woman who planned to sail around the world in 1975 . Naomi returned to New Zealand in 1975 after reading the story in a magazine magazine . Naomi read the story and decided to sail the world .
 The adventurer returned to London and married Robert James the following year .
 The union brought her into contact with other sailors, yacht owners, and much-needed sponsors for the challenge that lay ahead of her .
 James’s accomplishment is all the more gratifying, considering her relative lack of experience at the helm of a sailboat . James is the only person in the world to lead a boat in a sail boat .
 She had never skippered a yacht before setting off alone on her record-breaking trip . She was the first woman to set off solo on a solo trip to the world's largest yacht .
 On Christmas 1976, she did have her first heavy-weather sailing experiences in the Bay of Biscay, off the coasts of Spain and France .
 She wrote in Alone Around the World that she had never witnessed such appalling weather . She wrote that she was shocked by the appalling weather.
 Her husband helped her identify when to wait, and when it was safe to set sail again .
 Rob James allowed Naomi to navigate the boat back to England . Rob James and Naomi were on the boat at the time .
 “I didn’t altogether trust my ability to find land again,” she wrote. “But she did, but she did.” She wrote .
 A few evenings later, back in England, the Jameses and other sailors had dinner with yacht owner Chay Blyth . The Jameses were invited to dinner with the yacht owner .
 Someone brought up the topic of sponsorship for James’s around-the-world voyage, and when the room fell silent, James's heart sank . ‘I don’t want to go around the world,’ he says .
 One sailor exclaimed that he thought she could manage the trip with a boat and 10,000 English pounds . But then, one sailor said he thought he could manage it with a small boat and £10,000 .
 One man offered the money, and Blyth offered her the boat, and then next thing she knew, James knew, the gauntlet had been thrown . The gauntlet was thrown, and she accepted the boat .
 She gained the confidence and sponsorship of the newspaper that would become her publicist, the London paper Daily Express .
 James began her journey on her 53-foot yacht, the Express Crusader, on September 9, 1977, from Portsmouth, England . With only her kitten Boris as company, she began her voyage with only her cat Boris .
 On October 16, she crossed the equator, the imaginary line dividing the Northern and Southern Hemispheres of the earth . The equator crossed the line on October 16 .
 Her first difficulty on the trip occurred when her radio broke down, cutting off all communication . Her radio also cut off communication with her .
 James continued her journey, rounding the tip of South Africa, sailing toward her homeland of New Zealand, and then sailing toward South America .
 She rounded Cape Horn on March 20, 2013, with only three months left in her journey . The polar vortex is the largest in the world .
 She sailed north along the east coast of South America and North ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES America, and then back to Portsmouth on June 8, 1978 .
 James agreed to embark on another voyage of exploration in the South Seas . He agreed to take part in another voyage to the South Sea .
 James married Eric Haythorne in 1990 and has spent much of her time since then writing and lecturing . She has spent most of her life writing, lecturing and speaking .
 Alone with the Sea describes her participation in a 1980 single transatlantic race and the events surrounding the event . Alone With the Sea is published by Simon Cowell, a British author .
 British aviator and horsewoman Beryl Markham spent most of her life in Kenya . Markham was born in England, and spent her life there .
 She became the first woman pilot to fly across the Atlantic from east to west . She was the first female pilot to do so in the 1930s .
 She became a celebrity in 1936 when she made a record-breaking solo flight across the Atlantic, from London to Nova Scotia . She crash-landed in Nova Scotia, Canada, where she crashed in her plane .
 She competed fearlessly with men, at a time when many women competed with other women men . She won the gold medal at the Olympics in 1964 .
 Born Beryl Clutterbuck in Leicestershire, England, on October 26, 1902, her father took her to live with him in Kenya when she was just four .
 Kenya came under British control in the late 19th century . Many Englishmen established farms there in the next few decades . Kenya was taken over by the British in the early 1900s .
 Young Beryl quickly adapted to her new surroundings, learning the tribal languages of Swahili, Nandi, and Masai .
 She learned to train and breed racehorses, a hobby that would one day develop into her livelihood . She trained and bred horses to become a professional horse breeder .
 When her father’s farm fell into financial difficulties, he returned to England . He left Beryl in Kenya to take charge of the farm and the horses .
 At 18 she became the first female horse trainer in Africa, obtaining a trainer’s license from the government . At age 18, she became a trainer's license from Africa's government .
 She learned to hunt during her childhood by befriending native Kenyans and accompanying them on hunts . She learned her hunting skills from her childhood . She says she was inspired to hunt in Kenya .
 After mastering hunting and horsewomanship, Markham set her sights on aviation . Markham was born in New York City .
 When her marriage to rugby player Mansfield Markham ended, she fell in love with hunter and aviator Denys Finch Hatton . She had only child with Markham .
 At the time, Hatton lived with fellow African expatriate Karen Blixen, who wrote about her own affair with him in her book Out of Africa . Hatton's affair with Karen Blixten was published under the pseudonym Isak Dinesen .
 She became the first woman in Kenya to receive a commercial pilot’s license in 1931 .
 By 1931 she had become a professional ‘bush pilot, carrying mail and passengers to locations all over North Africa . These flights could be tricky, as the more remote areas had no landing strips .
 During one flight to London, her plane was forced down several times due to bad weather . During one of her flights, she was forced to evacuate due to the weather .
 She landed in the Sudan when her engine failed; local people helped her push her plane onto firmer ground so she could try again . Local people helped push her to a firmer spot so she was able to land again .
 She successfully landed in Khartoum, where she discovered that the engine had a cracked piston ring . The plane's engine was found to have a crack .
 She was forced to land outside Cairo, Egypt, during a severe dust storm . Taking off again, she was then forced to take off again during a return flight .
 After repairing her plane, she flew across the Mediterranean Sea, wearing an inner tube around her neck as a lifesaving device . The inner tube was used to help her repair her plane .
 She borrowed the single-engined Percival Gull airplane that was fitted with extra gas tanks so that it could travel 3,800 miles without the need to refuel .
 Markham was still taking incredible chances, even with the extra boost . Even with this extra boost, however, Markham still took incredible chances .
 Her airplane had no radio; she would be totally isolated during her flight . Her plane would have no radio, she would have to be isolated .
 Ships spotted her airplane flying above them and reported her progress to those waiting on shore . Ships spotted the plane flying above the shoreline and reported its progress .
 Beryl Markham crash-landed in a peat bog . Markham had survived her trip, but she had crash landed in a bog . She had been travelling with a group of friends .
 She reportedly got out of her plane and greeted two fishermen by saying, “I'm Mrs. Mrs.
 Markham spent much of the 1940s in the United States, moving to California and marrying Raoul Schumacher . Markham moved to the U.S. in the early 1940s and married Raoul .
 Markham's relationship with Schumacher has called the writing of her autobiography into question . Markham’s relationship with the former Formula One star has called into question.
 Errol Trzebinski believes that Schumacher ghostwrote the book West with the Night . The book was published in 1993 . Errol says he believes he ghostwrote it .
 Another writer, Scott O’Dell, claimed to have seen the couple working on the book together . Markham was talking to her husband, while Schumacher was typing, O'Dell said .
 Critics argue that many writers dictate copy that editors polish . Other critics argue that editors should polish the content of articles .
 In 1952, Markham returned to Kenya to pursue her former occupation of horse breeder and trainer . Markham was a horse trainer in Kenya .
 Dutch/French dancer and spy Mata Hari popularized Asian culture throughout Europe with her exotic dance act . She was a dancer, prostitute, and spy, who popularized European culture with her act .
 The fame and fortune she gained as a result ultimately became her downfall . The fame she gained was ultimately lost in her own life .
 It was early morning in the Vincennes woods east of Paris on October 15, 1917 . It was the first World War One battle of the Great War .
 13 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES Passport of Mata Hari issued by the Dutch consul in Frankfurt am Main on August IS, 1914 . For three and a half years, war had enveloped all of Europe in an endless bloodbath .
 Twelve hardened young soldiers stood in the Vincennes woods waiting for orders to fire upon another kind of victim of the carnage of war . Twelve such hardened young men were killed that October morning .
 Margaretha Zelle MacLeod waited for the shots that would extinguish her life . The nun escorted the woman to a clearing in the forest, where she waited for her death . She was shot by a police officer .
 MacLeod crumpled to the ground amid a volley of shots . A few minutes later, MacLeod, a convicted spy better known as Mata Hari, crumples to the floor . MacLeod was convicted spy who was shot by police .
 Her father, a hatmaker in Leewarden, Holland, lost his wife to an illness and his business to creditors, when his eldest daughter was just 15 . Her father was a oncesuccessful hatmaker who lost his business and wife to illness .
 Unwilling to raise his independent-minded, headed-for-trouble teenage daughter Margaretha by himself, he placed her in the home of her uncle .
 Zelle Zelle began having an affair with the head schoolmaster . Zelle was training to be a schoolteacher when she began an affair .
 To escape the wrath of her family, she answered a prank advertisement calling for a wife for a Dutch army captain . She answered the ad to escape her family's wrath .
 Rudolph MacLeod was a captain in the Dutch Colonial Army, stationed on the island of Java (Java) Java is part of the East Indies, a group of islands that extends between the Asian mainland to the north and west .
 MacLeod’s friends had placed the ad as a joke on the 39-year-old MacLeod . MacLeod had not expected the prank to work .
 By the time the MacLeods’ son was two and their daughter newborn, the marriage had begun to sour . The MacLeod’s marriage began to sour when their son was 2 and their newborn .
 Rudolph MacLeod blamed his wife for her lack of interest in housekeeping . The life of a colonial wife did not suit the lively, socialite Margaretha .
 The final nail in the coffin of the couple's marriage was the death of their son . The couple were married for more than 20 years .
 The child did not survive a fever resulting from, his parents assumed, a tropical disease . His parents assumed it was a fever from a tropical virus .
 The Dutch dealt ruthlessly with their colonial charges in Sumatra . The Dutch, for all their reputation as a tolerant people, had dealt with their charges .
 They had cleared millions of acres of rain forest for tobacco plantations, thereby ruining the livelihood for the indigenous people . The indigenous people have lost their livelihood in the process .
 Many Sumatrans were willing to wage war against their colonizers . Furthermore, many Sumatran were willing war against the colonizer .
 The person who poisoned the MacLeods’ son may have acted for personal reasons . He was allegedly the lover of the boy’s nurse . He may have exacted revenge for colonial misrule .
 Margaretha Zelle MacLeod left her daughter with her former husband . MacLeod was a single woman who had few means of making a living . She had to leave her daughter to live with her ex-husband .
 While living in Java, MacLeod had attended numerous festivals and dances as the wife of an army officer . MacLeod was married to an officer in Java .
 She became convinced, after watching the entertainment that Parisiennes enjoyed, that she could make people pay to watch her dance . The dancing in particular had intrigued her .
 Paris night owls were open 14 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES to new innovations in the art form . The American dancer Isadora Duncan had just become a popular figure in Europe .
 MacLeod dressed herself in exotic costumes, labeling her act “sacred oriental art” to appeal to the more highbrow audiences . MacLeod's act is called "sacred Oriental art" by the artist .
 To appeal to the rest, she ignored the taboo on sinful undulations of the female body . Her audiences went wild. To appeal the rest of the rest. She ignored taboo .
 She invented—and allowed careless journalists to invent—various stories about her background . She invented, and allowed careless reporters to invent, about her past .
 Mata Hari quickly became a household name in the early 1900s and 1910s . Mata Hari quickly became a household name in the early 1919s and early 20s .
 She danced in France, Germany, Italy, Austria, and Belgium, carefully balancing decorum with daring . She carefully balanced decorum and daring .
 She began to age, and her wealth had turned her trim body to become more than voluptuous . Her trim body had turned into more than a trim body .
 As the attention of Europeans turned to the tensions that would ultimately erupt in war, entertainment became secondary . Her patrons seemed more interested in patriotism than foreignness .
 Mata Hari became a mistress to a string of servicemen from various nations when World War I started in Europe in 1914 in 1914 .
 She lived in Paris during the war, although she traveled frequently to Holland and Germany as well .
 German intelligence officer offered her money to keep him informed of any knowledge that her French lovers might unwittingly spill while enjoying her company . Soon, she was offered money to help her keep tabs on her lovers .
 She became a double agent when she agreed to perform the same service for the French . She agreed to do the same with the French when she was asked to do so .
 Not realizing the dangers involved, she inadvertently sealed her own fate by admitting she had been paid by a German intelligence officer . She had never given any information to anyone .
 Okamoto Ayako grew up mastering a sport other than golf . At the age of 20 she was one of Japans top women’s softball pitchers .
 She was so unfamiliar with golf that she and her softball teammates were chased off the golf course near their hotel because they were sitting on the green . Golfers had to chase them off the course near the hotel because of their behavior .
 At the age of 45, she won her 60th Japanese Ladies’ Professional Golf Association tournament . She won the 60th tournament in Japan .
 Since coming to the United States in 1981, she has won 17 Ladies’ Professional Golf Association Tour victories . She has also won 17 LPGA Tour titles in total .
 In 1987, she won LPGA Player of the Year, the first foreign woman so honored . She was the first female foreign woman to be honored in the sport's first major tournament .
 Okamoto was born in Hiroshima, Japan, on April 2, 1951 . Okamoto’s career in the far more lucrative sport of golf began at the age of 22 .
 She apprenticed by practicing and caddling at a private golf club in Osaka, Japan . She is now a professional golfer .
 Higuchi Chako, her mentor and role model, dominated Japanese women’s golf at the time . She became the first Japanese player to win the United States LPGA championship in 1977 .
 By the age of 25, she turned professional in Japan and won 20 JLPGA events between 1975 and 1981 . She won 20 of the 20 events in her career .
 She decided to come to the United States to compete with world champions, but also to escape the pressures of her celebrity status . She said she wanted to compete in the U.S. and escape the pressure of celebrity status.
 Okamoto had her career best scoring average in 1988 at 70.94, which represents the number of shots it took to complete an 18-hole golf course . Okamoto's career best score average was 70.95 in 1988, which was her best .
 Okamoto's celebrity in Japan is akin to basketball star Michael Jordan’s status in the U.S. She described Okamoto as being akin to Michael Jordan's status in Japan .
 Okamoto represents an anomaly in Japanese society . Back in the United States, the Japanese media follow the athlete wherever she goes, in part because of her popularity .
 Japanese journalists call Okamoto ‘grandmother’ behind her back . Single women over the age of 35 are considered old maids in Japan .
 Okamoto hit her stride in the world of golf just as Japan’s economic boom soared in the late 1980s . Okamoto's golf career spanned the 1980s and 1990s . She is one of the best golfers in the sport's history .
 By 1993, Japan’s economy was the second largest in the world, despite its lack of natural resources . Despite its lack natural resources, Japan's economy became the world's second largest by 1993 .
 For professional golfers like Okamoto, flush economic times meant rich endorsement deals . Okamoto has endorsement deals with everything from sports equipment companies to coffee creamer manufacturers .
 In addition to appearance fees, tournaments were paying $25,000 to $50,000 in appearance fees alone . The tournaments are paying up to $30,000 for appearance fees .
 Although her English is very good, she insists on using a translator for interviews . She insists she has to use a translator when she is interviewed .
 By the mid-1990s, perfection came less easily for the champion as back problems waylaid her . Back problems kept her out of contention until the end of her career .
 Okamoto stopped playing in tournaments regularly, and she Anally returned to Japan in 1995 . Okamoto returned to the sport in 1995, and stopped playing regularly .
 The Protopopovs exhibited a graceful, lyrical skating style that had won the hearts of figure skating judges all over the world . The Proopovovs are known for their graceful skating style .
 Rodnina/Ulanov team usurps the throne of world champion figure skaters . The Protopopovs were the first Russian team to win the title in the competition .
 Rodnina had won more medals than any other figure skater in history . By the time she retired in 1980, she had won the most medals in her career .
 A Soviet pair won every Olympic gold medal, and 28 out of 34 World Championships, in figure skating between 1964 and 1994 . Figure skating was a state-supported system of athletic training and competition . A Soviet team won every gold medal and 28 World Championships .
 The cold war is a term used to describe the intense antagonism and rivalry between the U.S. and western Europe, on one side, and eastern Europe on the other side .
 At times, such as during the Korean War, the cold war “heated up,” and a military conflict occurred . The cold war is often referred to as the Cold War . At times it heated up, and a conflict occurred during the cold .
 At other times, the rivalry between the two parts of the world took the form of cultural fights . At times, it also took the forms of cultural clashes .
 Athletic contests such as figure skating competitions took on political dimensions . Judges and spectators viewed skating styles as representing cultural differences between democracy and communism .
 Judges on both sides of the Iron Curtain were accused of nationalistic biases . Winston Churchill coined the phrase to mean the division between the communists in the East and democracies in the West .
 The controversy went so far that in 1977 an International Skating Union suspension prohibited all Soviet judges from participating in international competitions that year . In 1977, the suspension was imposed on Soviet judges . The suspension was followed by a suspension from the ISU that year.
 Irina Rodnina began skating at the age of six . She was born in Moscow on September 12, 1949, in 1949 .
 She was selected as a promising young athlete by the Soviet government . She began training under Stanislav Zhuk . She was trained under Zhuk in Soviet sport .
 She graduated from the Central Institute for Physical Culture in Moscow . She also taught at the same institute .
 In her teens, she began skating with Alexei Ulanov, and the two developed a new, energetic style . She brought couples’ figure skating into the space age with power, speed and stamina .
 The Rodnina/Ulanov team chose loud, boisterous music to accompany their skating routines . The team is known for their physical power and physical prowess .
 Figure skaters of the time selected classical, romantic music to underpin their graceful skating moves . Typically, figure skaters chose classical music to accompany their moves .
 The Rodnina/Ulanov team won their first championship in 1969 . They continued their dominance until 1972 . The team won the title in 1972 .
 Under Rodnina’s influence, figure skating developed into a more athletic sport, requiring more physical prowess and control . Figure skating has since become more physical than ever .
 Lifts are moves in which the male partner hoists the female above his head . Lifts is moves that the man hoists his partner above his own head .
 Both skaters should achieve full extension of their arms and legs . They should keep moving on the ice, not slowing down to perform the lift .
 The woman should be brought down at full speed, in control, and should land softly . She should have been brought down full speed and landing softly, she says .
 In a twist lift, the man releases the woman to rotate in the air, and then catches her at the end of the move . The move requires perfect timing, requiring perfect timing .
 In a throw, the male partner throws the female as she jumps, allowing her to increase momentum and achieve a higher jump . The male partner is also throwing the female to increase her momentum .
 Often, couples will introduce moves in which both partners will jump separately, but side-by-side . Other times, their movements will mirror each other .
 The Rodnina/Ulanov team won high praise for their “death spiral’s” in which Ulanov pivoted on his skates while holding Rodnino’�s hand; meanwhile, she bent her body backward, fully extended, almost
 The pivot began at a high speed, then slowly lost momentum as it continued . The pivot lost momentum in the first part of the pivot .
 At the end of the move, Rodnina gracefully came back to an upright position . The move was the first of its kind .
 Irina Rodnina lost her partner in 1972, when he announced his plans to marry a member of a rival skating team, Ludmila Smirnova . Ludmilla Smirnov was the daughter of a Russian ice skating team member .
 Rodnina began auditioning new partners and found a worthy match in Alexander Zaitsev . Rodinina's new partner, Alexander, has been named by Rodin as Alexander .
 Initially, the pairing seemed doubtful since Zaitsev was a full foot taller than Rodnina . The pair was paired up in a Russian exhibition match in Moscow .
 Couple together won two Olympic gold medals, in 1976 and 1980 . Couple ended the long-held notion that a couple had to be fairly equal in height to be a success .
 Rodnina and Zaitsev also introduced a side-by-side double axel to figure skating . Both skaters glide forward on one foot, jump and land on the opposite foot, spinning .
 Rodnina married a businessman, and the couple moved to the U.S. in 1990 . The couple had lived in the United States since 1990 .
 From Ancient Times to the Present, Volume 2, Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO, 1996. 1996. 1995. 1996 . 1996.
 Rudolph Rudolph suffered from polio in her youth, which left her partially paralyzed . Rudolph was a world champion in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Rudolph had to challenge the hurdles thrown in front of her by the prejudices of a racist society . Rudolph was diagnosed with poor health at the beginning of her life .
 Wilma Rudolph’s triumphs took place during the height of the Civil Rights movement in the U.S. Rudolph's triumphs were in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Wilma Rudolph was born in Bethlehem, Tennessee, on June 23, 1940 . She was the fifth of eight children .
 Ed Rudolph was a sleeping-car porter on the railroad, and her mother was a domestic servant . Ed Rudolph worked as a sleeping car porter, and his mother was domestic servant.
 Her household included an additional set of 11 children by her father’s previous marriage . Her father's previous marriage also included 11 children .
 When she contracted polio, a disease that causes the degeneration of limbs, in 1944, her family assumed that she would be spending the rest of her life wearing leg braces and special shoes . When she was diagnosed with polio, she was forced to wear leg braces .
 A specialist in Nashville recommended a therapy of massages on both her legs . The therapy is recommended for both legs .
 Wilma detested having to wear her braces, and she began to try walking without them, despite her parents’ insistence that she follow doctor’s orders . Wilma's parents insist that she must wear them .
 Once a week, Blanche Rudolph would drive her daughter to Nashville for more physical therapy . Rudolph's daughter was in the hospital for physical therapy at the time of her birth .
 At the end of five years of treatment, Wilma stunned her doctors by walking without braces . Wilma still needed a shoe designed to support her leg .
 When she started high school, Rudolph wanted to follow her sister Yolanda and join her sister's basketball team . Rudolph was inspired by her sister to join the basketball team in high school .
 The coach doubted her ability to play any kind of sport because of her polio . She had been told she would not be able to compete in any sport due to her condition .
 She convinced him to let her join the team, promising to work out every morning for 10 minutes before the team began practice . She promised to do 10 minutes a day before practice .
 Rudolph’s school, Burt High School in Clarksville, lacked funding and did not have a girls’ track team . Rudolph's school lacked funding . Rudolph: "Burt High is not a school that lacks funding and has no girls' track team"
 Before the Brown Board of Education Supreme Court case that mandated integration, schools in the South were segregated . Most black schools lacked an adequate tax base to afford all of the extracurricular activities that were available at white schools .
 Wilma Rudolph had never heard of the Olympics until 1956 . Rafer Johnson, an AfricanAmerican track star, won a silver medal in track and field .
 At the age of 16, she qualified for the Summer Olympics in Melbourne, Australia . She was the first person to qualify for the Games in Melbourne .
 In 1959, she pulled a muscle during a crucial meet between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in Philadelphia . She pulled it out during the crucial meeting between the two countries .
 She recovered in time for the 1960 Olympics in Rome, where Rafer Johnson became the first black man to carry the American flag at opening ceremonies . She recovered from her injuries in time to carry out the Olympics .
 Wilma Rudolph’s performance at the 1960 Olympics remains among the most outstanding in the history of the modern games . Rudolph won the gold medal at the Olympics in the women's gymnastics event .
 Rudolph won all three gold medals at the 1948 Olympics in London . Rudolph was not the first black woman to win a gold medal at the Olympics .
 She was invited to the White House to meet President John E Kennedy, becoming an instant sports celebrity . She came home to a ticker tape parade 18 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES .
 Despite all the attention, she noticed a distinct difference in the way that black athletes were treated . She noticed a difference in how she was treated .
 All of the endorsements that a white star of Rudolph’s stature would have received were not forthcoming . Rudolph's performance at the Golden Globes was a surprise surprise .
 There were no companies interested in promoting their products by using the name and image of an African-American athlete .
 Rudolph retired from amateur athletics in 1963, finished her college degree, and became a teacher, coach, and director of the Wilma Rudolph Foundation . Rudolph retired in 1963 and became an amateur athlete .
 She married her high school sweetheart, Robert Eldridge, with whom she had four children . She died at the age of 92 .
 She wrote her autobiography, Wilma, in 1977, and it was made into a television movie . Wilma's autobiography was published in 1977 .
 In 1991, she served as an ambassador to the European celebration of the dismantling of the Berlin Wall . She also served as a European ambassador for the celebration of that event .
 She was a member of the Olympic and the National Track and Field Hall of Fame . She was inducted into the Olympic Hall of Famer for her achievements .
 She died in 1994 of a malignant brain tumor . She died at her home in Brentwood, Tennessee, on November 12, 1994 .
 Sacagawea was captured by members of a Hidatsa tribe during a war raid when she was a child . She is believed to have been captured by the tribe in the Hidatas .
 Sacagawea, a member of the Lemhi band of the Shoshone Indians, was the interpreter for the 18th-century Lewis and Clark expedition . The Hidatsas sold her into slavery, and eventually she became the wife of Toussaint Charbonneau
 Sacagawea lived in a valley on the Nile River in ancient times . She was one of the most powerful women in the world . She is believed to have lived in the region for more than 300 years .
 She was born into the Lemhi band of the Shoshone Indians, who lived along the Salmon River in present-day central Idaho . She was also born in Lemhi, Idaho, and was born in Idaho .
 The Hidatsa Indians, also called Minitari or Gros Ventre, lived near the Mandan Indians on the Missouri River in what is now North Dakota . They lived in what now is North Dakota in the area .
 In 1800, Boinaiv’s band surprised some Hidatsa warriors at the Three Forks of the Missouri River in Montana, when they surprised some warriors .
 Conflict erupted, and the Hidatsas killed four men, four women, and a number of boys . Conflict erupted and four people were killed, including four men .
 French Canadian fur trapper Toussaint Charbonneau acquired Sacagawea and another girl as a prize from a gambling game . The Hidatsas lived among the Hidatas, who lived among them .
 Thomas Jefferson purchased the Louisiana Territory from French Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte in 1803 . Meanwhile, Thomas Jefferson bought the territory from Napoleon in 1802 .
 The United States suddenly included 827,987 square miles of land acquired from France for about $15 million . The U.S. suddenly included about $16 million of land .
 The Louisiana Purchase stretched west from the Mississippi River (the westernmost border of the U.S. at the time) to the Rocky Mountains, and north from the Gulf of Mexico to the Canadian border . Louisiana Purchase was the largest land deal in the United States .
 Jefferson had already been planning an expedition to chart a route through the lands west of the Mississippi to the Pacific Ocean . Jefferson planned to establish friendly relations with Native Americans .
 Much of what we know about Sacagaweas life from 1804 comes from the journals of Lewis and Clark . Much of the story is known only from journals of the journals from Lewis & Clark .
 The corps reached the Mandan and Hidatsa villages near the mouth of the Knife River in North Dakota in October 1804 . The Corps reached the villages in 1804.
 As winter weather approached, the expedition decided to stay in the area until the following spring . The expedition was unable to return to the site due to the weather .
 Lewis and Clark accepted Charbonneau’s offer in part because his two wives were Shoshone and could act as interpreters between the white corps and the native people they would encounter .
 The corps of discovery relied on Native Americans for supplies and for knowledge of the land they were ‘discovering” for the U.S. government . The corps relied heavily on Native American knowledge .
 Sacagawea would listen to the Shoshone language, relay the message in Gros Ventre to Charbonneau, who would then speak French to another individual . The message was then reinterpreted in English to Lewis and Clark, who then relayed it in English .
 Sacagawea gave birth to Jean Baptiste Charbonneau in February 1805 . She named her baby boy, whom she named Jean Baptéé Charbonnene .
 Sacagawea carried the infant in a cradleboard as the corps renewed their journey west in April after winter had passed . The infant was carried in the cradleboard during the journey to the west .
 Lewis recorded Sacagaweas knowledge of edible plants, such as wild artichoke, in his journal . Lewis recorded his knowledge of the plant in a journal .
 Lewis described a close call while navigating canoes on the Yellowstone River in May 1805 . Lewis described the close-call in 1805 as a parry .
 In June, Sacagawea fell ill, and both Lewis and Clark tended to her . Clark and Lewis expressed disgust at Charbonneau’s negligence .
 Sacagawea recovered and soon became reunited with part of her Shoshone family . She was reunited with her family in Shoshon, Oklahoma .
 In July 1805, the party passed the spot on the Three Forks where Sacagawea had been captured . The party passed over the spot in July 1804 .
 Sacagawea recognized her brother Cameahwait, who had become the LehmiShoshone chief . She left her adopted nephew, Bazil, in the care of her brother, Cameahwa .
 In August 1806, the party again reached the Mandan villages of North Dakota where they had spent the winter of 1804-05 . The party returned to North Dakota for the first time since 1806 .
 Sacagawea, Charbonneau, 20 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES and their son Jean Baptiste stayed behind as the corps of discovery returned to St. Charles-Discovery . Sacagwea stayed behind with her son, Jean-Baptiste
 Evidence exists that she died a few years after the expedition, in 1812 . Evidence suggests that she may have been killed in the early years of her expedition .
 Some historians claim that Sacagawea left her husband and went to live among the Comanche Indians . Some historians, however, claim that she went on to live in Comanche tribes .
 Later, she returned to the Shoshone Indians, some of whom were by then living in the Wind River Agency in Wyoming .
 Opponents of this theory argue that there was another woman calling herself Sacagawea who lived in the Wind River Agency . Opponents say there was also another woman who lived there in the area .
 If Sacagea did live to an old age, she would have seen the decline of tribal life among Native Americans . Native Americans are now dependent on the United States government for a meager living .
 For Native Americans, the Lewis and Clark expedition did not bring ‘civilization’ to the American West but rather marked the beginning of the end of their own cultures . The Lewis & Clark expedition marked the end to their own culture .
 Sacagawea has become one of the most celebrated women in American history . Sacawea was the first woman to be recorded as a woman in the U.S. history .
 In May 1999, First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton unveiled a new dollar coin memorializing the guide .
 She left England permanently in 1810, traveling around the Mediterranean before settling in Lebanon . She left the country permanently and settled in Lebanon in 1816 .
 She adopted the masculine clothes and manners of a Middle Eastern Bedouin after losing her suitcase of clothes in a shipwreck .
 Lady Hester Stanhope’s reputation endures as the forerunner of adventurous women travelers in the nineteenth century . Her reputation endors her as a forerunner to adventurous women traveling .
 Early women travelers, such as Alexandra DAVID-NEEL and Beryl MARKHAM, were from wealthy backgrounds . Many traveled because of Europe’s history of imperialism, beginning in the late 18th century .
 Many were missionaries, or daughters or wives of missionaries . Others traveled and lived abroad because of trade or military careers of their husbands .
 Lady Stanhope traveled for the sake of her health, but also out of a romance with Middle Eastern culture . She traveled to the Middle East for health reasons, and was fascinated by the region .
 Lady Hester Stanhope’s taste for adventure began while in the care of her grandmother . She was in her grandmother's care when she was at the age of 16 .
 She became famous as a horsewoman, especially her ability to train recalcitrant horses that others had deemed untrainable . Here, she became famous for her training ability, training recalcitrants .
 During her early thirties, she kept house and acted as a secretary to William Pitt the Younger . Her uncle William Pitt was her uncle and she was a secretary .
 During the renewal of war between Britain and France in 1803, she was made an honorary colonel of the Berkshire Militia and the 15th Light Dragoons .
 Sir John Moore, and her half-brother Charles died in battle near Cornelia, Spain . Lady Stanhope left England for the Mediterranean . Sir John and Charles Moore died in Spain .
 In 1810, she departed for the Middle East, accompanied by her brother James and her personal physician Charles Meryon . She would later write her lengthy six-volume memoir, Travels and Memoirs .
 When the embassy officials rejected her idea, she left in a huff, heading for Egypt . When she was rejected, she returned to the embassy in Cairo .
 She chartered a boat and continued her travels until she reached Cairo, Egypt, where she stayed for two years . She stayed in Egypt for two more years .
 The Pasha Mohammad Ali helped arrange her tours of Jerusalem, Acre, and Damascus .
 To say that Lady Stanhope took to the culture of the Middle East would be a gross understatement . She was a keen observer of the region's culture .
 She settled at Dar Djoun, an abandoned convent near Sidon, in present-day Lebanon . She settled there in 1881 .
 She offered advice to Druze Bedouins (a religious community combining aspects of Islam with gnosticism), and other European travelers, who sought her counsel .
 In this battle, the Pasha Mohammad Ali defeated the Turks; the Ottoman Empire was slowly breaking up . The Ottoman Empire had stretched from North Africa, through the Middle East, Turkey, and southeastern Europe .
 In 1838 the British government had appropriated her pension to satisfy creditors . Her pension was appropriated by the government in 1838 .
 She died in Dar Djoun, where she is buried . Stripped of her wealth, she died in 1839 .
 Freya Stark made her first trip over the Dolomite Mountains in Italy in a basket before she could walk . Stark is a British writer, author and author .
 Her father, Robert Stark, theorized that children go through various stages in becoming adults, just as humankind traveled through epochs in history . Stark: Children go through different stages of becoming adults .
 Stark spent part of her childhood in England, with her father’s family, and part in Italy, where the family of her mother lived . Stark also spent time with her mother's family in Italy and England .
 Freya was born January 31, 1893 in Paris . Her parents were art students in Paris when she was born . Freya's father was an art student in France .
 Flora Stark was a partner in a carpet manufacturing business in Dronero, Italy, in 1903 . The Starks moved to the Italian Piedmont in 1903, where Flora became a partner . She was married to Charles Stark, who died in 1946 .
 The business soon intruded upon the marriage, and the couple separated . The couple was married for over 30 years .
 Robert Stark left Italy to settle permanently in British Columbia . Robert Stark bequeathed large sums of money upon his two daughters .
 Freya spent her inheritance on her college 22 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES education . She attended Bedford College in London, but she did not finish a degree there .
 When she turned 21, World War I interrupted her studies, and she served as a nurse in Italy . When she was 21, she became a nurse . She served in Italy during the war .
 Alexandra DAVID-NEEL studied Arabic with an old missionary friar in Italy . Alexandra became fascinated by the Middle East in the 1930s .
 When the war ended, she returned to London and began studying Arabic at the School of Oriental Studies . She returned to the UK to study Arabic and became fluent in Arabic .
 Her inability to converse in the language she was learning became frustrating . So she decided to learn the living language by going to where it was spoken .
 Druze tribes throughout Syria and in parts of Lebanon rebelled against French officials in the 1920s . French officials attempted to upset tribal traditions in the region of Syria .
 The police wanted to keep European travelers out of the area, and they stopped the two women near the Syrian border .
 Determined to see more of the country and . acquaint herself with more people, she decided to pretend that she and her companion were guests of the officers, on holiday .
 The officials drove their passengers about in the town of Shahba, stopping wherever they wanted . The officials stopped wherever the women wanted .
 She was invited to stay with other expatriates in the British Club, but refused . Arabs were never allowed there, and she refused .
 Baghdad Times began publishing her observations of life in areas of the Middle East where few Westerners had gone before . The Baghdad Times has published more than 1,000 articles since 2003 .
 As her reputation grew, her pocket no longer provided the funds for her jaunts . Instead, English foundations, such as the Royal Geographic Society, picked up the bills .
 The Royal Geographic Society awarded her with the Burton Medal in 1933 . She was the first woman to receive the award .
 Stark, alarmed at the rise of fascism in Italy, moved to England in the 1930s . Stark offered her services to the British government in an effort to counter the rise in fascism .
 She went first to Aden, Yemen, as an assistant information officer to the British Ministry of Information . She then went to Yemen, where she worked as an information officer .
 Stark lectured at colleges and women's clubs while in the U.S. Stark was also a lecturer at colleges in the United States . Stark was awarded a Pulitzer Prize for his work in the field of art .
 She became interested in the Kurdish people and, in 1959, wrote Riding to the Tigris .
 Her supreme literary and scholarly achievement was her magnificent Rome on the Euphrates (an examination of the relationship between the Roman Empire and the Middle East), which she published in 1966 .
 The Minaret of Djam, about her visit to Afghanistan, was published in 1970 . She visited the Minaret in the 1970s and published a book about Afghanistan .
 At 12:30 A.M. on May 4, 1975, Tabei Junko lurched upright in her sleeping bag on a windswept peak near Mount Everest . Junko was a Japanese mountaineer who climbed to the summit of Mount Everest in 1975 .
 She and 14 other Japanese women climbers had been asleep in their tents after a grueling day of climbing . She was asleep in her tent when she and her fellow climbers were sleeping .
 She and her tent mates were thrown together and their tents collapsed around them . She was thrown together, and their tent mates also collapsed around her .
 Tabei had a vision of her two-year-old daughter Noriko playing at home, and then she blacked out . She had vision of Noriko, 2, playing with her daughter .
 When she regained consciousness, she found that the others had survived . When she was unconscious, she was able to find them .
 The group’s six Sherpas, or Himalayan climbing guides, had deftly pulled the women out of the snow and ice . The women were rescued by the Sherpas .
 Tabei suffered from bruises and a wrenched back, but two days later, the leader took her place at the front of the line and the group resumed their ascent .
 Tabei became the first woman to reach the summit of the highest mountain in the world . Twelve days later, she became the world's first female climber .
 Between 1975 and 1991, Tabei scaled the highest mountain peaks all over the world . Between 1975 to 1991, he scaled the most of the world's highest peaks .
 Tabei has also been a model climber-conservationist . In addition to the sport of climbing, he has been an environmentalist . He has been married to his wife for more than 20 years .
 To help preserve the pristine mountain environment she loves, she directs a group dedicated to preserving the Himalayan mountain range in its natural state .
 Tabei Junko was born Istibashi Junko on September 22, 1939 in Fukushima Prefecture, on the island of Honshu, north of Tokyo .
 Japan invaded the Chinese territory of Manchuria in 1931 . In 1931, Japan continued its aggressive moves by attacking Beijing, Shanghai, and Nanking . Japan invaded China's territory in 1931, and continued to attack Beijing and Shanghai .
 The nearly impassable mountains of western China and the guerrilla resistance staged by Chinese communists stalled the Japanese invasion of China .
 The United States had become alarmed by Japanese aggression in China . Meanwhile, the U.S. was alarmed by the Japanese aggression .
 Japan signed a defensive Tripartite Pact with Nazi Germany and Italy in September 1940 . Japan was encouraged by early German successes in World War II, and signed the pact .
 The United States responded by banning the sale of iron, steel, and fuel to Japan . The U.S. has banned all iron and steel exports to Japan in response to the crisis .
 The war years brought hardship for many Japanese people, including the Istibashi family . The family was forced to flee Japan during the war years .
 By the age of 10, Istibashi Junko had climbed her first mountain . By the time Japan surrendered in 1945, she had suffered from many illnesses, but was still in better health .
 Shortly after, she enrolled in a mountaineering school with some of her friends . Shortly thereafter, she enrolls in a mountain school with friends .
 Teacher led students on a climb of Mount Nasu, a 6,289-feet-high mountain in Japan . The teacher led the students on the climb of the mountain, which is more than 6,000 feet tall .
 Istibashi Junko liked the strenuous exercise and the cool mountain air . Junko was inspired by the strength of the mountain air and exercise .
 Tabei liked the feeling of accomplishment she got when she worked with others to reach the common goal of ascending a mountain peak . She said she was inspired by the experience of climbing .
 She formed a women’s hiking club and met and married fellow mountaineer Tabei Masanobu . She formed and married a fellow member of the hiking club .
 In 1970, Tabei Junko left Japan and began to explore mountain summits in foreign countries . Junko traveled around the world exploring the world's tallest peaks .
 She determined to try to become the first woman climber to reach the highest mountain in the world .
 Mount Everest is located in the Himalayas between the country of Nepal and the Tibet region of China . Mount Everest also located in Tibet region, China, is also known as Mount Everest .
 She applied to the Nepalese government for permission to lead a tour up Mount Everest in 1971 . She applied for permission for a tour of the Himalayan mountain in the Himalayas .
 At this time, Tabei was working as an editor of the Journal of Physical Society of Japan .
 During the four-year waiting period, she lined up corporate sponsorship of the trek . She also raised additional money by giving piano lessons and raising piano lessons .
 Tabei Junko continued traveling and climbing mountains all over the world . Junko was born in Japan .
 By 1992, she was the first female climber to reach the tops of the “seven summits,” the seven highest peaks on seven continents . She became the first woman to reach seven summits .
 In 1992, she scaled Carstensz Pyramid in Indonesia, at a height of 16,023 feet . Finally in 1992, in 1992 she scaled the Carstenz Pyramid at 16,000 feet . She also scaled a pyramid in Indonesia .
 In addition to her climbing career, Tabei directs the Himalayan Adventure Trust . The trust is dedicated to keeping the Himalayas clean so all climbers can enjoy them .
 In doing so, she has made people aware that if they want to continue enjoying the earth’s resources, they must be willing to preserve them and keep them clean .
 Nina Mazuchelli, Fanny Bullock Workman, Mary Vaux Walcott, Gertrude Benham, Junko Tabei. Nina Mazzhelli: "I'm a great writer. I'm a good writer"
 Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman in space and only the 10th human to orbit the earth . Valentina was seated in the spaceship Vostok VI in June 1963 .
 On her voyage, Tereshkova orbited the earth 48 times, traveling over 1. million miles before returning to earth three days later . On her orbit, Tereskova traveled over 1 million miles .
 Her achievements in space travel led to her political appointments, including her election to the presidency of the Committee of Soviet Women in later years . Her achievements led her to become a member of the Communist Party .
 Factory worker Tereshkova had become severely ill during the flight, according to defectors living in the U.S. She had become ill and was reluctant to embark on the journey . The factory worker died in the Soviet crash .
 When Tereshkova returned from her flight she received a hero’s welcome and kisses from a beaming Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . Khrushche announced that she symbolized the new Soviet woman . Tereshchekova was the first female Soviet woman to be
 The article goes on to question why it took 19 years to send another Soviet woman, Svetlana Savitskaya, into orbit .
 The Time article typified the competitive atmosphere pervasive during the cold war . It was published during the Cold War .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, the Soviet Union and the United States were engaged in the cold war . The Cold War was an ideological war of words and deeds that fell just short of military engagement .
 The cold war became ‘hot’ when tensions between the two nations heightened and military confrontations occurred . Cold war became hot during the Korean War, when the Soviets and China supported North Korea .
 One way that the two nations competed with each other for world supremacy that involved the military only indirectly was the so-called space race . The space race was one of the most intense military encounters between the two countries .
 The U.S.R. became the first nation to launch Sputnik I, an earth satellite, on October 4, 1957 . The United States soon followed by launching its own earth satellite .
 Neil Armstrong took “one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind” on the surface of the moon . Neil Armstrong left his space capsule Apollo 11 on July 11, 1969, on the Apollo 11 mission .
 Richard Nixon and Khrushchev engaged in a series of lively debates known as the “Kitchen Debates” at the American National Exhibit held in Moscow . On July 24, 1959, Vice President Richard Nixon held a debate in Moscow, Russia . The debates were held at the
 Nixon and Khrushchev squared off by comparing the technological advances their two nations had made . The two leaders chose the safer area of home appliances to compare the well-being of the American woman .
 Khrushchev announced that Soviet women were superior because they contributed directly to the economy . Nixon trumpeted the triumph of clothes and dishwashers that made life easier for American housewives . Khrushchchev said Soviet women contribute directly to economy .
 Tereshkova, indeed, symbolized women’s contributions to Soviet society, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 Valentina Vladimirovna Tereshkova-Nikolayeva was born on March 6, 1937 . She was born in 1937 in Moscow .
 Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin instituted purges in 1936 . The purges were a system of eradicating the government’s enemies by imprisonment, exile, or execution .
 In 1954, the future cosmonaut started working in a tire factory . She later joined her mother and sister operating looms in the cotton mill . Her sister worked in a cotton mill in the 1950s .
 In 1959, she became a member of an air sports club and took up parachuting . It was her proficiency in this hobby that led to her acceptance in the cosmonaut training unit .
 During her work as a cosmonaut, Tereshkova graduated from the Zhukovskii Military Aviation Academy in 1969 .
 After she stopped working as a cosmonaut, Tereshkova became a politician . She was also a member of the Russian parliament .
 She became president of the Committee of Soviet Women in 1968 . She was not reelected during the time in which the U.S. was taking on more democratic freedoms .
 In 1992 she was appointed chair of the Presidium of the Russian Association for International Cooperation . In 1992, she was also chair of a Russian Association of International Cooperation group .
 Tereshkova complained that her husband drank too much and had become abusive . Tereshkovsky said her husband was abusive and she was afraid to see him .
 As a member of the Committee of Soviet Women, Tereshkova was asked what she thought of women's lives in the last half of the 20th century .
 "I believe that a woman should always remain a woman," she said . "Nothing feminine should be alien to her. She believes that she should always be a woman"
 Tereshkova: "No work done by a woman in the field of science, or culture, however vigorous or demanding can enter into conflict with her ancient ‘wonderful mission’ She quoted the German poet Friedrich Schiller: ‘To love, to be loved
 American athlete Babe Didrikson Zaharias has been called the best allaround athlete of the 20th century . She was a member of the first generation of American athletes .
 She participated, and excelled, in almost every competitive sport imaginable . She excelled at almost every sports imaginable .
 She captured gold medals at Olympic competitions, and won numerous golf championships . She captured numerous gold medals .
 Brooklyn Dodgers once asked Babe Didrikson, then an amateur baseball player, to play at an exhibition game . The Brooklyn Dodgers asked Babe to play in the exhibition game at the time .
 Babe and her family relocated to Beaumont, Texas, soon after . Babe was born in Port Arthur, Texas . Babe's family moved to Texas soon after her birth .
 Babe was the sixth of seven children in a working-class family where everyone contributed to the family income . Babe was born to a working class family with everyone contributing to family income. Babe was one of seven kids in the working class .
 Babe’s mother, Hannah Marie Olsen, was a champion skier and skater . Both parents were raised in Norway, where Babe was born .
 Ole Didrikson, a laborer, ignited her interest in sports at an early age . Ole didrikson: "I'm a great athlete. I love sports," she says. "I love sports"
 Growing up in Beaumont, Babe exhibited both athletic aptitude and a penchant for performing, necessary traits in a successful competitor . Babe showed that he had both physical and mental ability to perform .
 She used the family’s hedge in the backyard to refine her hurdling techniques . She used it to help her hurdleleights .
 Babe loved to pick up her harmonica and play for neighborhood audiences . Babe's harmonica was a favorite of her neighbors .
 Her family encouraged her interest in sports and performance, however, the public school system did not . The school system didn't encourage her to play sports .
 Growing up at a time when girls were discouraged from becoming athletes . Growing up with a young girl in her 20s and 30s .
 Babe had to wait until she got a job as a typist, before she could compete . Babe's first job was as a typewriter .
 McCombs spotted her talent on the baseball diamond and offered her a job with Employers Casualty, an insurance company .
 The company sponsored teams that competed in amateur athletics, and McCombs could see that Babe would make their teams more apt to win .
 Babe Didrikson first came to national attention when she played for her insurance company basketball team . Her insurance company team also plays for the insurance company .
 Babe Babe won the national Amateur Athletic Union championships . Babe played basketball and played basketball . Babe won national championships in basketball .
 Her outstanding play earned her an All-American AAU award in 1929, when she was only 16 years old . She won the award at the age of 16 .
 In 1932, she entered the tryouts for the United States Olympic team at the national AAU competitions . She won a gold medal in the 1932 Winter Olympics .
 The following day, an Associated Press story made front-page news all over the United States . “Will lead the American Women’s Olympic track and field team,” announced the reporter .
 Babe Babe was clearly expected to win the gold for the U.S. by herself if she had to . She was expected to do so by herself .
 She won two golds, in hurdles and javelin, setting world records in both . She also set world records for both the hurdles and the javelins .
 The Associated Press named her its Woman Athlete of the Year that year . She was named the winner of the Associated Press's award in 1996 .
 Babe became interested in golf, winning her first tournament in Texas in 1934 . Babe won her first event in Texas .
 Her rivals on the green, however, began to question her status as an amateur athlete . Her rivals also questioned her status .
 One of the other players complained to the U.S. Golf Association that Babe was a professional athlete and did not belong in an amateur tournament . The other player complained that Babe didn't belong in the tournament .
 Babe countered that she was a professional only in those sports governed by the AAU, such as basketball and track and field . She said she was professional only for those sports governing by the organization .
 The USGA sided against her, declaring that because of her appearances as a professional in baseball and basketball, she would be barred from competing in all amateur golf tournaments . USGA: Because of her appearance as a pro golfer, she cannot compete in amateur tournaments .
 In 1947, she became the first American woman to win the prestigious British Women’s Amateur Championship . She won the British Amateur Championship in 1947 .
 The following year, she and Patty Berg formed the Ladies Pro Golf Association . She and Berg formed a Ladies Pro golf Association .
 Zaharias became her business 27 ADVENTURERS AND ATHLETES manager and one of Babe’s biggest supporters . Zahariaras is also a supporter of Babe and her family .
 Babe had surgery for colon cancer in 1953, but she recovered quickly and returned to golf . Babe won another tournament in 1954, winning another in 1954 .
 The following year, doctors discovered that the cancer had reached her bones, where it was inoperable . The next year, she was diagnosed with the cancer in her bones .
 She died on September 27, 1956, with her golf clubs standing in her hospital room, ready for another round . She died with her clubs still in her room .
 The warrior Queen Artemisia joined her ally, the Persian king Xerxes (r. Xerxes) in Xerxes' first Persian war . Artemisia is believed to have been the first Persian queen to join Xerxes in the war .
 She was one of Xerxes’ leading military advisers and is thought to be the first woman sea captain . She was thought to have been one of the first female sea captains .
 Before the battle of Salamis, Artemisia I wisely advised Xerxes not to engage the Greek naval power . The loss of his fleet would result in the sacrifice of his ground army as well .
 Xerxes, even as he praised Artemisia’s words, took the advice of his other generals who advocated battle . Xerxes chose battle over Artemisia's words, even though he praised her words .
 Artemisia was commended as the best tactician in Xerxes’ army . She was praised for her role in the battle . Artemisia died in the Battle of Xerxes in 7th century .
 She was the only naval officer to survive the defeat of the Persian armada . She was one of only naval officers to survive .
 Herodotus commended Artemisia for her courage, or andreia in the Greek language . Artemisia is known as Artemisia, or Artemisia and her courage .
 To exhibit andreia for a woman was literally impossible, since the word connoted manliness . The word 'reindreia' connealed manliness, and the word 'andreia', was impossible for women to exhibit .
 Artemisia was the daughter of Lygdamis, a Halicarnassian, and a Cretan mother . She was named after the Greek warrior goddess Artemis, sister to the Greek god Apollo . Artemisia is now the world's most famous sculptor .
 Artemisia assumed the throne upon his death, becoming Artemisia 1, Queen of Halicarnassus . Artemisia was the first queen of the kingdom .
 The archenemy of Harlicarnassus, the nearby island of Rhodes, took advantage of the king’s death to attack what they viewed as a weak female ruler . Hester STANHOPE was shipwrecked more than a thousand years later in Rhodes .
 A Rhodesian war ship attacked Artemisia I at a fortress in the town of Halicarnassus soon after she was crowned . Artemisia was the first queen of Greece .
 She divided her troops in half, leaving one squadron in ambush in the town, and led the remaining troops out of the city . She left one squadron behind, leaving another in ambush .
 She instructed the townspeople to surrender when the Rhodesians approached the city gate . She instructed them to surrender to Rhodesians .
 Artemisia received the signal that the Rhodesians had entered the city and reached the central market square . She launched a surprise attack against the Rhodesian ship anchored in the bay . Artemisia was the first ship to attack Rhodesian ships in the area .
 Capturing the ship, she advanced toward the city center . Captured, but not destroying, the ship was eventually destroyed . The ship was captured, but was not destroyed .
 Her ambushed soldiers sprang up out of hiding, trapping the Rhodesians between Artemisia’s two forces . The Rhodesians were trapped by Artemisia's forces . Artemisia and her soldiers were ambushed by her soldiers .
 The surviving Rhodesians limped back to their island . The brilliant strategy worked, and the Rhodesians were able to survive . The Rhodesians survived .
 Artemisia pursued her offensive by sailing the captured ship back to Rhodes . Artemisia was not satisfied, however, by sailing it back to the island of Rhodes .
 As the ship approached the island, she hoisted victory flags around the deck . The victory flag was hoisted around the ship .
 The Rhodesians were fooled into thinking that the Rhodesian army had triumphed, the Rhodesians rushed to greet their heroes .
 Artemisia’s quick intelligence served her well in the battle of Salamis . Artemisia's quick intelligence helped her to victory in Salamis, the first battle of the year. Artemisia was the first woman in the Greek city of Artemisia .
 Many Greek islands either chose to remain neutral or to side with Xerxes . Xerxes was Xerxes' vast force of power .
 His strategy was to march into Greece, destroy Athens, defeat the Greek army, and subject the Greek citizens to his rule, he says . He says he wanted to destroy Athens and defeat the army .
 "The vastness of his army proved to be a handicap," he says . "It was difficult to supply and control," he adds. "But the very vastness ... proved to prove to be the handicap"
 Persian invasion of Thermopylae succeeded, as the Greek army there could not resist . The Persian invasion succeeded, with the Greek Army unable to resist . Persian invasion was the first of its kind .
 The Persians went on to occupy Athens, although its population had been evacuated to Salamis . Athens was occupied by the Persians, but its population was evacuated to the city of Salamis.
 The narrow strait between the Greek mainland and the island of Salamis provided the backdrop to the most decisive battle in the war between Greece and Persia . The battle took place in the most dramatic strait during the Greek and Persian war .
 The Persian fleet, which was needed to outflank Greek defenses on the Isthmus of Corinth, was now ambushed and destroyed by the Greek navy at 30 AMAZONS, HEROINES, AND MILITARY LEADERS Salamis .
 Xerxes watched the battle from his golden throne perched above the shore . Xerxes sat on a golden throne in the middle of the battle .
 Xerxes returned to Asia with half of his army; the remaining troops wintered in Greece only to be defeated decisively by a Greek army the following year . Xerxes was defeated in the same year .
 Artemisia was the only one of Xerxes’ naval officers to survive the defeat of the Persian armada . Artemisia won Xerxes' praise as his best general, along with a complete suit of armor . Xerxes also gave Artemisia a complete armor suit .
 Bai struggled against British oppression, but also in retaliation against British officials who had refused to acknowledge her adopted son as heir to the throne . Bai struggled to resist British oppression against her son, who was born in China .
 Lakshmi Bai became a legendary heroine and an important symbol of resistance to British rule throughout India . She became a symbol of bravery and resistance against British rule in India . Lakshmi was a legendary hero and a symbol for resistance to the British rule .
 Merchant adventurers established trade on the subcontinent in the 17th century . Merchant adventurers first established trade in India in the early 1700s .
 The capitalists and their queen hoped to undercut the conquest of overseas markets begun by the Dutch . The capitalists wanted to stop the Dutch from expanding overseas markets .
 The East India Company succeeded in establishing a military and political presence in India . They failed to reach their goal in terms of trade, but the company's military presence endured for centuries .
 By the 19th century, constant challenges to British rule began disrupting commerce . By the end of the century, British rule had been considered a model of commerce .
 The Indian Mutiny, also known as the Sepoy Rebellion, began with Indian soldiers in the Bengal army of the East Indian Company . It developed into a widespread rebellion against British rule against the British .
 The doctrine of ‘lapse’ was implemented by British colonial administrator Lord Dalhousie . The British would annex the lands of any maharaja dying without a male heir .
 According to Hindu practice, a man needs a male heir to properly mourn his death and perform the necessary ancestral observances . A man needs to have an heir to perform ancestral mourning rituals .
 This new British policy struck directly at the heart of India’s practices regarding inheritance . It was widely condemned and hated throughout the subcontinent .
 Hindus interpreted her birth in the holy city of Varanasi favorably, as the holy Ganges River flows through the dry . Hindus interpreted the birth as a good sign that the holy river flows through dry land .
 Manu’s father, Moropant Tambe, had been advisor to Chimnaji Appa, the brother of Baji Rao II, the last of the maharajas .
 After the British deposed Baji Rao II, Moropant followed him to Bithur where he was put in charge of a military corps . He was put into charge of the military corps after the deposed .
 Lacking female companionship, Manu grew up playing and fighting with her male companions . Manu was born with no other female companions .
 She learned to read and write at a time when girls even of the Brahmin caste did not become literate . She was a child of her Brahmin family .
 Sbe also became an adept horsewoman and gained skills at hunting and using swords and other weapons .
 Maharaja Gangadhar Rao Newalkar of Jhansi needed a young wife to secure a male heir . He was a 40 or 50-year-old widower, a widower .
 After consulting horoscopes, Moropant agreed to marry Manu to Gangadhar Rao . The pair agreed to wed after consulting the horoscope .
 Her father arranged the match in 1842, when Manu was about eight, but the actual ceremony did not occur until 1849 . Manu's marriage to her father was arranged by her father when she was eight .
 At the time of her marriage, Manu chose the name Lakshmi, after the Hindu goddess of wealth and victory .
 Her husband confined her to court, watched her scrupulously, and prohibited her from playing outdoors . She was confined to court and forbidden from playing outside .
 She chafed under purdah, the Indian practice of secluding women from men . She said she was unhappy with the practice of separation from men and women .
 Her husband, who was at least 25 years older than she, was also aging rapidly . Her husband was also 25 years younger than she .
 British sources confirm this by pointing out that his political judgment became unsound, that he meted out punishment without justice, and that his petty demand to be saluted at every turn was widely ridiculed . British sources .
 Lakshmi fulhlled her marital obligation and gave birth to a son . Lakshmi was married to a man who had a child with her husband .
 Red-coated soldiers and sugar-bearing elephants heralded the birth of the male heir to the throne . The king's birth was the first of its kind .
 The grieving parents quickly adopted a newborn male relative of Gangadhar’s, whom they named Damodar Rao . The newborn baby was named after a relative of the deceased .
 Gangadhar died without an heir, leaving Jhansi to become a British protectorate . The governor-general of India, Lord Dalhousie, announced the decision . The British government ruled the region as a protectorate of India in the 1920s .
 According to Hindu law, a biological or adopted son had an obligation to perform sacrifices after his father’s death to prevent his father from eternal damnation . Lakshmi pleaded with authorities in London that Damodar Rao was Gangadhar's heir; that according to the Hindu law
 Lakshmi reasoned that since Damodar had performed these rituals, he had proved that he was Gangadhar’s rightful heir . Lakshmi decided that since he had done these rituals he was the rightful heir to the kingdom of Gangadhadh .
 Lakshmi put her girlhood training into practice. After all appeals to Britain regarding Damodar Rao had been refused, Lakshmi went to India . Lakshmi was the first woman to be sent to India by the British government .
 She assembled a volunteer army of 14,000 insurgents and ordered them to defend the city . She assembled the army and ordered it to defend it .
 The British noted Indian women manning weapons and carrying water and more ammunition to soldiers . The British note Indian women carrying water, ammunition and ammunition .
 A Bombay priest recorded the stench of burning flesh rising from the city after the British destroyed it . The stench indicated that innocent civilians had been killed, the priest said .
 British accounts claimed that the British army killed 4,000 Indian soldiers, and that civilians were spared . British accounts, on the other hand, claimed that 4,500 Indian soldiers were killed .
 Lakshmi and the surviving forces from Jhansi joined the battle against the British at Gwalior . Lakshmi's forces from Kalpi, Lakshmi, and the survivors of the battle, joined the fight .
 The Legends and the Lives of the Women Who Have Led Their Nations in War . Women who have led their nations in war . The Legends . and the lives of the women .
 According to writer Jerome R Adams, “No one fought longer or harder than the Mexicans to win independence. No one fought harder than Mexico to achieve independence,” says Adams .
 "No nation sacrificed more of its leaders and more than thousands of its people," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 Spaniards discovered silver mines in northern Mexico in the 1540s . Spaniards established estates called haciendas near the mines .
 The creoles, descendants of the 32 AMAZONS, HEROINES, and MILITARY LEADERS Spanish settlers, used the power of the colonial government to force indigenous Mexican Indians to work for them .
 Parish priest Miguel Hidalgo fomented a popular rebellion against the Spanish colonizers . Two centuries later, parish priest Miguel . He was a key figure in a popular revolt against Spanish colonialists .
 In 1807, the French occupied Spain and imprisoned King Ferdinand VII, causing confusion and panic in New Spain, as Mexico was then called . The French occupation of Spain in 1807 caused confusion in Mexico, as New Spain was called .
 Late on the night of September 15, 1810, Hidalgo called on Indians and mestizos, or people of mixed indigenous and European descent, to his church .
 He delivered a speech, known as the Grito de Dolores, demanding that Mexicans should govern Mexico . He delivered the speech, which is known for its demands for Mexicans to govern .
 Mexico’s president rings a bell and repeats the cry in celebration of Independence Day . Independence Day is observed on September 16 .
 The charismatic Hidalgo asked his ragtag bunch of rebels if they were ready and capable of reclaiming the land stolen from their ancestors by the creoles .
 Armed with crude spears and pitchforks, and carrying an icon of the Virgin of Guadalupe atop a staff, the fight for independence began in Mexico . Armed with litde other than crude spears, pitchfrenks, they carried icons of the virgin atop staff . The fight
 Little is known about precisely how Gertrudis Bocanegra joined the rebels . She is a former member of the National Guard .
 Bocanegra likely enjoyed a degree of wealth and status in Patzcuaro . As her parents were probably merchants or landowners, her parents probably were merchants .
 Given her prominence in the community, Bocanegra’s later agreement to fight for the cause of independence probably did not result from her own oppression as an individual, he says . He adds that she was likely oppressed by her oppression .
 Perhaps Hidalgo’s message of freedom appealed to her as a believer in a republican system of government, or as a Catholic, or perhaps as a woman . Perhaps the idea of freedom resonated with her as well as a . woman, she writes .
 We can assume that Bocanegra sought reform for Mexico’s indigenous population . She had organized a school for Indian children in Patzcuaro, Mexico .
 As Hidalgo’s rebels marched onward from Dolores, their numbers soon grew to 80,000 . The rebels are now in control of the city of San Siro .
 A massacre at his hometown of Guanajuato brought Hidalgo closer to his goal of Mexico City . Mexico City is one of Mexico's most important cities .
 It was probably here that Bocanegra first encountered the rebels and decided to join them . It is probably where he first encountered rebels and joined them .
 Bocanegra’s husband and son both joined the insurgents, and he began gathering supplies and carrying messages . The mayor's son and husband are among the insurgents .
 On December 15, 1810, Hidalgo issued a statement calling for a congress of men that would overthrow the existing government in Mexico City and establish a new one . The congress was called for a new government .
 A Spanish officer led 6,000 soldiers against Hidalgo’s army at Calderon Bridge, near Guadalajara . Heeding the threat, on January 17, 1811, a Spanish officer leads 6,00 soldiers against the army .
 The priest and other leaders were taken to Chihuahua where Hidalgo, Ignacio Allende, and Juan de Aldama were executed . Their heads were mounted on the corners of a roof at Guanajuato .
 Spanish officials offered a reward for every rebel brought before them . Spanish officials then offered to reward every rebel they encountered .
 Bocanegra’s husband and son were both killed in battle . She joined the patriotic forces herself, with her son-in-law .
 She organized an army of women warriors . Eventually, she was sent back to Patzcuaro, where she organized her own army .
 While she was in prison, guards asked her to name other rebels, but she refused . She refused to say other rebels .
 On November 11, 1818, Gertrudis Bocanegra was executed by a firing squad . The execution took place in 1818 . The death penalty was the largest execution in American history .
 After Hidalgo’s death, Jose Maria Morelos continued the struggle for independence . Morelos fought for independence from Mexico .
 In 1821, Juan de O’Donoju, the last viceroy of New Spain, was forced to sign the Treaty of Cordoba, acknowledging that independence had at last been won . The treaty was signed in 1821 .
 Eighteenth-century writers hailed Captain Anne Bonney as the spunkiest and most notorious of women pirates . Captain Bonney was the most notorious pirate in the world .
 Captain Charles Johnson recorded Anne Bonney's exploits in A General History of the Most Notorious Pyrates in 1724 .
 The Jamaican Vice Admiralty Court convicted Captain Bonney of acts of piracy in 1721 . Bonney was convicted of piracy by a Jamaican court of piracy .
 Romance writers have created a mythology about Anne Bonney and her relationships with various male pirates, especially Calico Jack Rackham . Bonney's relationship with the pirate Calico Rackham is said to have been romantic .
 Anne Bonney was born near Cork, Ireland, the illegitimate daughter of a prosperous lawyer and a serving wench . She was born in Ireland and married to a wealthy lawyer .
 The scandal drove the couple and their daughter to Charleston, South Carolina, where Anne enjoyed a comfortable childhood . Anne and Anne moved to South Carolina after the scandal .
 As she grew older, Bonney began seeking adventure . Bonney became bored with the confines of plantation society . She left plantation society to seek adventure .
 Against her father’s wishes, she married a poor seaman, James Bonney, in 1718 . She married him against her father's wishes .
 The two sailed for the Providence Islands, south of the Bahamas and north of the Dominican Republic . The two sail for the Providence Island and the Dominican Republic .
 Providence Islands were a known haven for piracy in the early 18th century . The Providence Islands are now known as the Providence Islands .
 Pirates have been illegally boarding ships and raiding coastal towns since ancient times . Pirates, or people who attack and rob ships, have had to board ships and raid coastal towns for centuries .
 Piracy flourished in the I6th through the 18th centuries on the Mediterranean and Caribbean seas . Piracy thrived in the Mediterranean, Caribbean and the Caribbean seas.
 An estimated 1,000 to 5,000 Anglo-American pirates cruised the seas in the 18th century, looking for ships .
 Others left legitimate ship trade, or military navies, because of harsh treatment on board ships and because of poor pay . Others left due to harsh treatment, or poor pay, as well as harsh treatment .
 Although writers have mythologized the adventurous life of pirates, most pirates probably lived rather miserable lives . Most pirates lived a miserable life, most of them lived miserable lives, says author .
 Many died from alcoholism, while others died from disease from wounds left untreated . Many died of alcoholism, others died of disease from disease .
 Pirates developed rules and regulations to govern their ships . Despite their reputation as outlaws, pirates actually developed rules to govern ships .
 Crew members elected a ship’s captain and other officers, and they drew up codes of punishment for misbehavior . Crews elected a captain, other officers and drew up a code of punishment .
 They developed intricate pay scales to determine each member’s share of the booty . Pay scales were developed to determine how much each member got .
 Neophyte crew members were inducted into the techniques used to capture a ship . Neophytes crew members learned about capturing a ship from the sea .
 Pirates seize trade ships by maneuvering their ship next to the trade vessel . Pirates seized trade ships with maneuvering ships next to each other in order to seize the trade ship .
 Ropes and hooks were then used to keep the ships together while the outlaws boarded the victim ship . The outlaws used hooks and ropes to keep ships together .
 Hand-to-hand combat usually resulted in the defeat of the trade ship crew, because pirate crews far outnumbered legitimate crews . Hand to hand combat usually ended up defeating pirate crews .
 Romances often describe a stereotypical “walking the plank” method of disposing of victims’ bodies . But there is little evidence to suggest that such a ritual was typical .
 Captain Anne Bonney captured a ship from Holland bound for the Caribbean in 1718 . The details of her life from her marriage to James Bonney and her first forays into piracy are obscure .
 Bonney observed Mary Read, disguised as a man, in a sword fight with another sailor . During the skirmish, Bonney saw Mary Read in a man-made sword fight .
 Both were wounded when Read suddenly ended the duel by shooting her opponent in the head . Both were terribly wounded . Read then shot her opponent dead .
 Bonney liked what she saw, and instinctively she knew the scrapper was a woman . Bonney: "I like what I saw and instinctively I know she's a woman" Bonney says, "It's not just a scraper"
 The two women pirates returned to New Providence, where one day Anne met a local dressmaker by the name of Pierre . Anne met Pierre in New Providence and the two pirates were reunited .
 Craftsman lamented his inability to make fine dresses with limited quantities of high quality cloth .
 Bonney piqued his interest in piracy when she mentioned that, in her experience, the bolts of silks and velvets among many ships’ cargoes would make fine gowns . Bonney: "The bolts of velveats and silks ... would make
 Pierre expressed his desire to accompany Bonney and Read on their next excursion, provided that his lover would accompany them . Pierre expressed an interest in being able to accompany Read and Bonney on their latest excursion .
 Calico Jack Rackham (the moniker derived from the calico coat Pierre had sewn for him) be allowed to share the adventure .
 For Bonney, Pierre fashioned a pair of velvet trousers made with silver coin buttons . Pierre fashioned the trousers for Bonney .
 Bonney's crew captured a merchant ship containing several trunks of fancy dresses to be delivered to a whorehouse in Boston . Bonney’s crew captured the ship in their most notorious escapade .
 Bonney ordered rounds of drinks for all to celebrate the loot . Inebriation ensued, several sailors, male and female, donned the gowns as a joke .
 Later that evening, Bonney spied another merchant ship on the horizon and quickly planned her next scheme . Bonney's next scheme was to find a new merchant ship in the sky .
 She called “all hands on deck” and instructed sailors to hide their weapons, lie down on the deck, and daub their faces with red paint to make it appear as though the ship had been attacked .
 In 1820 Bonney and her three mates retired to an estate in Jamaica, but, as other pirates harbored ill will and a vengeful spirit, they were eventually captured by a government ship .
 Seafarer Laskarina Bouboulina commanded a fleet of ships during the Greek War for Independence against the Ottoman Empire against the Empire .
 Bouboulina attacked Turkish troops in two cities, set up a blockade of the Aegean coast, and helped to liberate a Turkish stronghold . He was an adept helmsman and shrewd strategist .
 Bouboulina prevented Greek soldiers from seeking revenge upon Turkish women held as prisoners by releasing them and granting them passage to return home . The women were released and allowed to return to Turkey .
 Because war has traditionally been considered “men’s work,” female warriors have been overlooked by historians . War has been traditionally considered ‘men's work’
 Freedom-fighter Laskarina Bouboulina’s life remains shrouded in mystery . Freedom-fighters were killed in 1998 in a battle for freedom in Afghanistan .
 Laskarina Bouboulina played an important role in the Greek War of Independence against the Ottoman Empire . Her father and both her husbands were wealthy seamen who died at the hands of pirates .
 Other details of her life can be snatched here and there, but no definitive sources exist . Her life is still unknown .
 The Ottoman Empire represented the rising power of the Muslim world in the Middle Ages . The Empire represented a rising power in the Mideast region .
 Sultan Muhammad II seized the seat of the decaying Byzantine Empire, Gonstantinople . He then turned his eye toward the Middle East . In the 15th century, the Muslim Ottoman ruler took over the seat .
 At the height of its power, under Suleiman I , the Ottoman Empire controlled much of the Middle East and North Africa, Southeast Europe, and the eastern Mediterranean . The Ottoman Empire was founded in 1903 .
 The Ottoman Empire lost its vigor and was showing signs of internal decay, due to factions among the ruling elite and divisive forces in the empire at large . Ottoman Empire was showing internal decay .
 Under CATHERINE THE GREAT, Russia expanded southward, defeating the Turks, gaining some land, and protecting Greek Orthodox Christians within the Ottoman Empire .
 By the start of the 19th century, nationalist revolts by Serbians and Greeks challenged the unity of the Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman Empire was ruled by the Ottomans until 1918 .
 With the help of Great Britain and Russia, Greek rebels launched the War for Independence in 1821 . Greece's independence was declared by the Greeks in 1822 .
 Laskarina married Captain Bouboulis and, upon his death, took over the command of his ships, along with her brothers and sons . She took over command of the ships from her brother and sons, and took over his command .
 In any case, it is her command of her warships that guarantees her place in history .
 She beseiged Monemvasia and Nauplia, both coastal cities in the Peloponnesian region of Greece, and blockaded the entire northern Aegean coast of Greece . She blocked the entire north of Greece's northern coast .
 She then went to Tripolis, an inland city in Peloponnesos that served as the Ottoman administrative center, to aid in that city’s liberation . She helped in the liberation of Tripolis .
 Some historians describe her triumphant entry into the city, on horseback, at the head of a liberating army . Some historians have described her as a triumphant entry to the city .
 What she did next infuriated her countrymen, which may explain her relative obscurity . Her actions may explain why she is now in relative obscurity in Russia .
 Ottoman commander Khurshid Pasha was unable to defend Tripolis . He had been called away to fight a battle in Yannitsa, in northern Greece .
 When the Greek army routed the Turkish defense in Tripolis, they took revenge on the women of the Turkish harems . The Greek army took revenge .
 When the women heard of Bouboulina’s arrival, they pleaded with her to help them escape the vengeance of the Greek soldiers . The women were forced to flee the Greek army with the help of the women .
 She is said to have appealed to her countrymen, not as a captain, but as a mother, explaining to them that the Turkish women were guiltless in the war and should therefore be spared .
 The Greek soldiers set fire to the fortress, and in the ensuing confusion, Bouboulina was able to steer many of the women on board a ship, which carried them safely to the coast of Asia Minor .
 In either case, the incident is a stark reminder of the innocent victims of war . The incident is either a reminder of those who were killed by war .
 As a warrior, Laskarina Bouboulina helped to free a Greek city from enemy occupation . She helped to help the Greek city escape enemy occupation from enemy forces .
 As a woman warrior, she repudiated the act of rape . Often the means by which soldiers seek revenge in war is often the means of revenge .
 Though defeated, Boudicca’s valor in battle gives the lie to the notion that women will not—or cannot—fight as aggressively as men . The story goes back to the original version of this week's episode .
 According to Tacitus, Boudicca’s motivations came not from her prestigious lineage, nor her desire to recover her kingdom and its plunder . Tacitus says she was motivated by a desire to return her kingdom to its former glory .
 She fought for the cause of liberty, and to avenge the humiliation the Roman centurions had caused her and her daughters . Instead of fighting for her family, she fought for liberty .
 In the 60s, Roman general Pompey conquered eastern Asia Minor, Syria, and Judaea . Pompey was a Roman general who conquered eastern Syria and eastern Syria . The Roman general is believed to have taken over Asia Minor and Syria .
 He returned to Rome a hero, but the Roman Senate refused to acknowledge his victories . The Roman Senate did not acknowledge his victory .
 Pompey, Julius Caesar, and Marcus Crassus shared power in 57 B C.E. During the First Triumvirate, Pompey and Julius Caesar shared power . Pompey was one of the first three men to hold power .
 Julius Caesar went on to conquer Gaul west of the Rhine River and then invaded England, but he soon turned back . Julius Caesar turned back and conquered Gaul, but then turned back to England .
 Caesar marched his troops across the Rubicon, a stream that separated Italy from Gaul, and invaded Italy in 49 B.C.E., defeating Pompey . Caesar refused to give up his power and marched his forces across the border .
 This time, native tribes rebelled against the invasion but were subdued . This time the invasion was successful, but was subdued by the Indians .
 Iceni surrendered to the Romans but created a joint government with their conquerors . The Iceni government was created by the Romans in order to protect themselves .
 She married Prasutagus, king of the Iceni tribe, with whom she had two daughters, Camorra and Tasca . She died in childbirth .
 When Prasutagus submitted to the Romans, he made an arrangement with them that allowed him to remain in his kingdom as regent . When he submitted to them, he was allowed to remain as a regent of his kingdom .
 He left half of his kingdom to the Roman Empire and half to Boudicca, Camorra, and Tasca . He attempted to insure continued peace and prosperity between the two powers by leaving half his kingdom .
 British law allowed royal inheritance to be passed to daughters in the absence of a male heir . Roman law made no such provisions in Roman law .
 When Prasutagus died in 60, Suetonius Paulinus ignored his will and took control of Boudiccas Iceni kingdom . The Roman governor and military commander took over the kingdom from the kingdom .
 The Iceni chieftains of the Iceni were deprived of their family estates as if the whole country had been handed over to the Romans .
 She organized about 120,000 soldiers from her tribe and from the Trinovantes, a southern tribe . She organized the soldiers in her honor .
 She carefully planned her attack to coincide with Suetonius Paulinus’s departure for Wales, where he was subduing another revolt, she said .
 Her army sacked and burned the Roman colony Camulodunum (presentday Colchester) and destroyed a temple that had been erected to worship the Roman Emperor Claudius . Her army also destroyed the temple that was built in the temple of Claudius.
 The Romans sent a cadre of soldiers to defend their holdings, but Boudiccas army turned them back . The Romans were forced to retreat from their holdings . The Roman army turned the army back .
 The insurgents then marched on to Londinium (presentday London) and Verulanium . They killed Romans and burned buildings in Verulium .
 Suetonius Paulinus gathered all Roman troops in Britain and surrounded the rebels in a narrow valley . The Roman general gathered the Roman troops and surrounded them in a valley .
 Boudicca fled to her kingdom, where she and her daughters ended their lives by drinking poison . Her daughters died of poison .
 In 1902, British sculptor T Thornycroft created a bronze statue of Boudicca, Camorra and Tasca riding a chariot into battle .
 Guards at two different Algerian prisons tortured her with electric shock, cigarette burns, kicks, and rape during her imprisonment . She was tortured at two prisons, El-Biar and Hussein Dey .
 The government released Boupacha after Algeria declared independence from France in 1962 . The government later released him .
 Since her discharge, she has become a national hero and women’s rights activist . She has become an activist and has been an activist since her discharge .
 Algerian colonization and independence is itself a tortuous path . The story of Algerian independence and colonization and colonization is itself tortuous .
 French soldiers invaded and gained control over northern Algerian cities in 1830, which were inhabited by Arabs and Berbers . Algeria’s two main ethnic groups are Arab and Berber, which are both Arab .
 French king Charles X hoped that overseas victory would bolster his rule at home . Charles X wanted to win overseas victory in order to strengthen his rule .
 To strengthen its hold on Algeria, the French government gave large amounts of land to European settlers . They gained control over most of Algeria’s economy .
 As a further incentive all nonFrench settlers were granted immediate French citizenship . All non-French settlers of the French colony were given immediate citizenship .
 By 1914, on the eve of World War I, France had colonized all of Algeria . Algeria was one of the most densely populated countries in the world .
 After World War II, Algerians’ attempts at gaining a voice in government were blocked by colons . nationalist forces began calling for independence from Algeria .
 By 1954, France had been forced to withdraw from its colony in Vietnam after the disastrous battle of Dien Bien Phu . The French government was forced to pull out of the colony in 1954 .
 France’s military forces were then moved from Vietnam to Algeria, its largest and oldest colony . France's military forces are then moved to Algeria .
 More than 500,000 French soldiers had been deployed in Algeria in 1956 . By 1956, more than 50,000 had been sent to Algeria .
 The organization carried out numerous bombings, assassinations, and raids against colons and French military forces in Algeria . The organization was active in Algeria during the 1960s .
 In retaliation, French soldiers destroyed crops and orchards and herded Algerians into concentration camps, torturing rebel leaders . In retaliation for the deaths of Algerian rebels, French troops destroyed crops .
 Boupacha was born into a middle-class family, the daughter of a well-off businessman . She was born in a middle class family .
 Djamila's parents were French citizens, and they sent their daughter to school in France . Her parents were also French citizens and she was sent to France .
 She attended a French vocational school in preparation for becoming a seamstress . She now hopes to become a fashion designer and model .
 Like many young, educated Algerians, Boupacha became involved in the nationalist uprisings . Like many others, he became involved with the Algerian nationalist movement .
 Boupacha’s arrest, imprisonment, and torture coincided with French intellectuals’ call for an end to the war and to use of barbarism against the enemy in wartime . The arrest and torture coincides with the call to end the war .
 Gisele Halimi, Boupacha’s defense attorney, teamed up with Simone de Beauvoir to write a book about her client in 1962 . The author's defense attorney teamed up to write the book .
 Halimi paints an intriguing portrait of this middle-class, Frencheducated young woman . Halimi: "I'm not sure what's going on here"
 A group of French intellectuals formed the Djamila Boupacha Committee . They were moved by allegations of sexual brutality against women and by racist acts .
 The committee launched a public opinion campaign to defend the civil rights of Boupacha . The committee is currently campaigning for the rights of the country .
 The Djamila Boupacha Committee included Halimi, Beau-oir, and sympathetic French intellectuals Francois Mauriac and Cermaine Tillion . The committee was formed by Halimi and the French government .
 Pablo Picasso painted a portrait of Boupacha on the cover of Jeune Afrique'm February 1962 . In the meantime, a portrait was painted of her by Picasso .
 In 1962, a plebescite held in Algeria resulted in the declaration of Algerian independence from France . The vote was held in 1962 to declare Algeria's independence from French .
 The following year, rebel leader Ahmed Ben Bella became Algeria’s first president . Ben Bella was the first president of Algeria .
 Bella proclaimed Algeria a socialist state, urging Algerians to take over the farms and businesses abandoned by colons . Bella proclaimed the state of Algeria, urging Algeria to take control of its own farms .
 The government began a massive program to industrialize the nation, financed by government-owned natural gas and petroleum industries . The program was funded by the government, mostly through the government .
 The constitution also made Islam the state religion and declared Arabic the official language . Islam was also declared an official religion and Arabic the state language .
 Control of Algeria has wavered between socialist politicians and Islamic fundamentalists . Algeria has been ruled by Al-Qaeda-linked militants since 1979 .
 Voters elected 10 women deputies of 38 AMAZONS, HEROINES, AND MILITARY LEADERS the new National Assembly in 1963 . Voters elected the new assembly of 38 women deputies .
 Others acknowledge that inequality exists between the sexes, but that the immediate postwar period had brought gains for Algerian women, which have since been eroded . Others say the immediate post-war gains for women have been eroded since then .
 Boupacha took part in the heady atmosphere of the early independence period after independence .
 By passing the Family Act in 1984, the National Assembly placed women under the tutelage of their husbands . The future of women at that point seemed dark .
 Argentine revolutionary lived all of her life with intensity, her friend said .
 Tamara Bunke was the only woman to join the legendary leftist rebel Ernesto "Che" Guevara on his last mission in Bolivia . Bunke and eight other guerrilla fighters were killed in an attempt to export a Cuban-style revolution .
 During the 40th anniversary of the Cuban revolution in 1998, workers exhumed Bunke’s body, cremated it, and filled an urn with her ashes . Bunke's ashes were filled with an Iurn filled with ashes .
 The urn was flown to Cuba, where it was displayed in a civic building in downtown Santa Clara .
 Bunke’s ashes were buried with state honors at a mausoleum alongside Guevara and other Cuban revolutionaries . Days later, Bunke's ashes were also buried in Cuba .
 Tamara Bunke was born on November 19, 1937, to Nadja and Erich Bunke, who had fled Nazi Germany and settled in Argentina . She was born Haydee Tamara Bider in 1937 .
 After World War II Bunke's communist parents returned to Germany to participate in the creation of the German Democratic Republic . Bunke’s communist parents went back to Germany in the 1950s .
 Her parents imbued her with the notion that ethnic and national identity should take a back seat to the inevitable communist revolution, she says . Her parents believe that ethnic identity should not be taken into account for the future .
 Like all communists at the time, Bunke believed that the working classes would eventually rise up against the upper or capitalist classes in a worldwide revolution . Bunke: "The proletariat, or working classes, would eventually come up against each other"
 Property would be communally held, eliminating the class divisions that caused the unequal distribution of wealth in capitalist societies . Property would also be held communally, eliminating class divisions in capitalist society .
 In January 1959, she wrote to friends, “We are thrilled about the news coming from Cuba [where socialist rebels had overthrown the dictator Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar] and are constandy watching for dispatches from there .
 Bunke met Che Guevara when he traveled to the German Democratic Republic as part of a Cuban trade delegation . Bunke was a member of the Cuban delegation in the 1960s .
 In May 1961 she left Germany to live in Cuba, a nation that had always fascinated her . Impressed with his efforts, she joined Guevaras revolutionary band, and joined him .
 Cuba had become a socialist republic in 1959, when Fidel Castro became premier . Fidel Castro was prime minister of Cuba from 1959 to 1961 .
 Sixty years earlier, the United States had defeated Spanish colonizers in Cuba . The U.S. established its own military rule in Cuba until 1902 .
 From 1902 until 1934, the U.S. controlled much of Cuba’s land and economy while a series of Cuban dictators presided as president . The United States controlled the land and the economy of Cuba .
 The United States retreated from Cuba in 1934, retaining only its Guantanamo Bay naval base . In 1934, the U.S. withdrew from Cuba .
 Cuba’s economy prospered largely because of its sugar trade with the U.S. Cuba's sugar trade was largely tied to its sugar exports to the United States . Cuba's economy thrived largely due to the sugar trade .
 Socialist Castro stirred up popular discontent into a two-year guerrilla war against dictator Fulgencio Batista . Castro won in 1958 with the help of Che Guevara .
 Castro became Cuba’s premier; Guevara became Cuba's minister of industry . Castro was Cuba's premier . Gueevara directed much of the government's economic planning . Castro became the Cuban president in 1959 .
 Castro initiated extensive economic and social reforms along socialist principles . The reforms included the nationalization of banking and industry, many owned by the United States . The U.S. broke off diplomatic ties with Castro's government .
 Later, she worked as a translator for the Ministry of Education, the Cuban Institute of Friendship with the Peoples, and the Federation of Cuban Women .
 Her ultimate goal, however, was to learn about the Cuban Revolution and export it elsewhere in Latin America . She said she wanted to export it to Latin America, but her ultimate goal is to learn more about it .
 By 1962, she had grown restless at her translating job, and she commented that this was not the kind of revolutionary work to which she had aspired .
 Since 1957, Bunke had taken up marksmanship and military training with the idea of ultimately participating in a revolution . Bunke was inspired by the idea that he wanted to be involved in the revolution .
 She trained in the German Democratic Republic Association for Sports and Skills, which included mastery of defense sports, sending Morse Code messages, and operating radio equipment .
 Bunke traveled to Brazil to learn various intelligence-gathering techniques that would be used to gather information on foreign governments . Bunke learned how to use various intelligence gathering techniques .
 She learned how to write invisibly, obtain data and check data undercover, and how to identify counterintelligence . She learned to write in secret to avoid detection .
 After a yearlong training period, she met with Guevara in March 1964 . She met with the revolutionary leader during her training .
 Guevara told her that she would be sent to Bolivia to make contacts with the Bolivian government and armed forces . She will travel through the interior to study the situation of miners, peasants and workers .
 Laura Guitierez Bauer is an ethnologist studying Bolivian folklore . She flew to La Paz, Bolivia, as Laura Guitez Bauer .
 She married a Bolivian man and then divorced him after obtaining citizenship . She now has a daughter of Bolivians .
 In May 1966, Bunke took on a new identity, Tania, in communicating with revolutionaries in Guba, who were now prepared to ignite the revolution in Bolivia . Bunke was a member of the Bolivian revolutionary movement .
 Ghe Guevara and his followers decided to go ahead with their plans . Lacking sufficient recruits among the Bolivian people, they decided to carry out the attack .
 Tamara Bunke marched next-to-last in a line of guerrilla troops crossing the cold waters of the Vado del Yeso River . Bunke was the last member of the guerrilla army to cross the river in 1967 .
 Bolivian soldiers waiting in ambush across the river suddenly fired a volley of shots, killing all eight soldiers . Bolivians were waiting in an ambush across a river across the border . The soldiers were killed in the ambush, which is believed to be the first of its kind .
 Bunke’s badly decomposed body was found seven days later and was flown to Vallegrande, Bolivia . Bunke was found in a shallow grave in the country's capital, San Diego .
 The Bolivian people, he commented, were largely happy with their own Revolution of 1952 . Bolivians were happy with the revolution, he said .
 Tamara Bunke’s story tells us that revolutionary social change more likely succeeds in a nation when it originates at home . Bunke: "Revolutionary social change is more likely to succeed in a country when it comes home"
 DARLING, GRACE (Grace Horsely Darling) British heroine Go, tell the wide world over What English pluck can do; And sing of brave Grace Darling Who nobly saved the crew .
 The lyrics to “The Grace Darling Song’ recite the sole act for which the British people ennobled their heroine Grace Darling . The lyrics recite the only act for the act that made her famous .
 She helped her father, William Darling, rescue the shipwrecked passengers and crew of the steamer Forfashirem 1838 .
 Grace Darling was in some ways the forerunner of another British icon, opera star Jenny LIND . She was one of the first celebrities in modern history .
 Grace Darling shunned the attention her deed provoked . Unlike Jenny Lind, she shunned attention .
 Grace Darling was born on November 24, 1815, to the lighthouse keeper William Darling . She spent all of her short life living in lighthouses on the rocky shores of the islands off the British mainland .
 Lighthouses had been in use as navigational aids for mariners for thousands of years . Lighthouseouses were used to provide navigational aid to mariners around the world .
 In the 19th century, lighthouses helped sailors determine their position, informed them that land was near, and warned of dangerous rocks and reefs .
 There are only about 1,400 lighthouses currently in use worldwide, due to increases in electronic navigational devices .
 Grace was born on the island of Brownsman, but moved to Northumberland when she was 11 . She was born in Brownsman and moved to Longstone, Northumberlands, when she turned 11 . Grace is the youngest ever to be born in the UK .
 Grace was the sixth of seven children born to the Darlings, and her father and her mother, Thomasin Horsely Darling, were the only three occupants of the lighthouse in 1838 .
 The Forfashire was one of the first luxury steamers in British maritime history . It carried 60 passengers and crew members as it made its way from Hull, north of London, to Dundee, Scotland .
 A powerful gust dashed the ship upon rocky cliffs near Big Hawker Rock on the Fame Islands, Northumberland .
 Eight crew members and one male passenger escaped with the ship’s lifeboat . The ship's lifeboat is believed to have been the last of the ship's .
 A passing sloop picked the sodden sailors up and dropped them in nearby North Shields . The sailors were picked up by a passing ship and taken to North Shields.
 William Darling’s 20-year-old daughter Grace shook the sleep from him at seven o’clock in the morning . William Darling's daughter Grace is 20 years old .
 She saw figures moving about on Big Hawker Rock, she told him, about three-quarters of a mile from Longstone lighthouse . She said figures were moving about about three miles from the lighthouse .
 William and Grace launched their coble -- a short, flat-bottomed rowboat -- with the help of Thomasin Darling . Thomasin is the wife of William's first wife, Grace, who was born in New York .
 Grace rowed as close as she could so that her father could jump ashore . When they reached the rock, Grace rowbed as close to the rock as possible . Grace's father jumped ashore .
 When he did, she continued to navigate the coble away from the rock to prevent the current and the wind from smashing the boat on the rock .
 She labored to keep the boat afloat, until her father beckoned her back to the rock to pick up him and his weary passengers . Her father and his passengers were picked up by her father .
 Grace and her mother nursed the injured and exhausted back to health . Grace's mother says she is proud of her daughter's bravery . Grace is a proud member of the family .
 At the same time, the press investigated the accident, especially the events surrounding the lifeboat escape of the eight 41 AMAZONS, HEROINES, AND MILITARY LEADERS crew members, who did nothing, reporters charged .
 William and Grace Darling were the subject of numerous portraits by several English artists . As a result of all the publicity, they became the subjects of numerous paintings by several artists .
 Grace Darling died of consumption on October 20, 1842 at the age of 26 .
 Much of the story of the Forfashire disaster comes from William Darling’s lighthouse journal which he kept at his bedside . William Darling kept the lighthouse journal at the bedside of his dying bed .
 A printed version of the journal is now housed at the Grace Darling Museum in the village of Hamburgh, on the British mainland .
 William Darling’s entry on the night of September 7, 1838, in which he recounts the rescue, does not mention his daughter at all . William Darling did not mention the rescue .
 Deborah, also known as the “Mother of Israel,” was a judge and military leader . The ancient Hebrew people called upon Deborah to guide them in their war against the Canaanites some 13th centuries before the birth of Christ . Deborah was also called upon by the ancient Hebrew
 Deborah functioned as a judge of the Hebrews, as well as their political and military adviser . Deborah served as an adviser to the Jewish community . She was also a judge and military advisor to the Israelites .
 When she became aware of the cruel treatment her people suffered under Canaanite rule, she outlined a plan of action . She outlined the plan to help her people .
 She instructed General Barak to raise an army of 10,000 troops and lead them into battle against their oppressors . She instructed him to raise the army, which she said would be the largest in the Arab world .
 The verbal exchange between General Barak and Deborah is recorded in the Hebrew Bible, in the book of Judges 4:8-9 . Deborah and Barak are recorded in Judges 4-9 in Judges .
 According to the Hebrew Bible, God directed Abraham, who had been living in Mesopotamia (now southeastern Iraq) around 1800 to 1500 B.C.E., to setde in Canaan, the area now known as Palestine . Abraham lived in Canaan and died in the region now known
 Abraham became the patriarch of the people who came to be called Hebrews, or Israelites . Abraham was the son of Abraham, Abraham and the father of the Hebrews . Abraham became Abraham's son and father of Abraham's descendants, Abraham, and Abraham himself .
 The Pentateuch consists of the creation story found in Genesis and the books that explain the laws that became the basis of Judaism . It is based on the creation of the Bible .
 The Writings include the poetry of the Psalms and the Song of Solomon and wisdom books such as Job .
 The Prophet books recount stories of the Hebrew prophets, whose function was to warn the Hebrew people of the consequences of sin and to exort them to renew their religious faith .
 Judges in Hebrew culture were not judges in the modern sense; that is, they did not render legal decisions or determine punishments for crimes committed . Judges were not Judges in modern sense, but they were not legal in the sense of the modern era .
 They were those whom God had called to lead the tribe of Israel during critical times . They were not only those who had been called to do so, they were those who were called by God .
 Several judges, including Debo42, were also military leaders who advised the tribes where and when they should go into battle .
 Judges tells the history of the Israelites’ conquest of Canaan, later known as Palestine . Chapters 1-3 of Judges tell the history . of the Canaan conquest .
 The second section of the book of Judges, chapters 4-16, records the stories of various judges at the time . Deborah, Gideon, and Samson are among the judges in the book .
 The Canaanites, according to the Hebrew Bible, were under the command of Jabon, their king . The Canaanite were under Jabon's command .
 For 20 years Jabon had oppressed the children of Israel by destroying their vineyards, dishonoring their women, and murdering their children . Jabon was responsible for destroying the children's vineyards .
 Canaanites planned on conquering Israelites by severing connections between the Israelites in Galilee and those in the central hill country of Ephraim and Manasseh .
 In the face of impending doom, many Israelites had turned to the worship of idols . The Israelite had turned their worship to idol worship .
 Deborah felt a call to rise up against such fear and complacency, for she carried in her heart a fervent hope that God would come to her people’s rescue, provided that they honor him, she says . Deborah felt the call .
 Deborah directed him to go toward Mount Tabor and take 3,000 men of the children of Zebulun, according to Judges 4:6 . Deborah told him to take the men from Zebula and Tabor .
 She convinced Barak that the Lord would deliver the Canaanite General Sisera and his chariots into their hands . She convinced him that the General's chariots would be delivered to the hands of Barak .
 When Barak called upon the tribes of Naphtali and Zebulun to muster at Kedesh, he saw that none was well armed and none commanded chariots . None of the tribes were well armed, and none of the chariots commanded .
 A heavy rainstorm aided the Israelite army by trapping the chariots of the Canaanite army in a mud bath . The Canaanite chariots were trapped by the heavy rain .
 Deborah secured the assistance of Jael, the wife of a tribal general supposedly allied with Sisera . Deborah secured help from Jael from a tribal tribal general . Deborah was able to get the help of the general's wife .
 Jael lured Sisera into her tent and, after lulling him to sleep, drove a stake through his head . She then killed him with a stake to death .
 Deborah's song of victory commemorating the batde with Jabon's forces is recorded in Judges 5 . Deborah’s song is one of the oldest Hebrew verses . Deborah is a member of the tribe of the Israelites .
 Some remaining Canaanites became part of Israelite society, while others settled northwest of Palestine and became known as the Phoenicians . Some remained part of the Israelite culture, but others became known in the region .
 During the Tokugawa shogunate in Japan and the Manchu dynasty in China , piracy ruled the seas between the two nations . HSI KAI CHING was a Chinese pirate .
 Hsi Kai Ching was one of the most successful pirate ship’s captains in Chinese history . He was first a captive of pirate conquest, later joined her captors .
 Like Anne BONNEY, Hsi Kai was pursued by pirate hunters . However, unlike Anne Bonney, however, he did not get caught .
 Piracy in Europe and North America pales in comparison to that in East Asia . Piracy is down to piracy in Asia, but piracy is down in Europe .
 Chinese pirate communities consisted of men, women, and children who roamed the waters looking for trade ships to attack . Rather than the stereotypical male pirate culture described in Western romance novels, Chinese pirates lived in search of trade ships .
 Emperor Chia Ching sent 40 warships after him . Emperor sent 40 ships after his fleet . His fleet caused so much damage that the Emperor sent them after .
 He threatened to dethrone the emperor and rule China himself . Flush with victory, he threatened to rule China .
 Ching Yih demanded to see the women that had been captured during the raid . The women were captured in the raid on the Chinese capital .
 Twenty bound women were brought before him, among them Hsi Kai, who immediately caught his attention . The women were bound bound, bound and bound in chains .
 When Ching Yih ordered her unbound so he could inspect her, she charged at him, spitting and clawing at his face . When he was ordered unbound, she spat and clawed at him .
 Ching’s guards dragged Hsi Kai off him, but apparently the encounter excited Ching, because he asked Hsi Ksi Kai to marry him . Ching's guards dragged him off, but he asked to marry Ksi Kong .
 He offered her gold, silk, slaves, property, and property, but none of his riches interested her in the least . She refused to take the riches of the man .
 What she really wanted was to share command of his fleet and the booty that they looted together . Ching soon found out, she wanted to take command of the fleet .
 Ching's fleet divided into six parts: blue, green, yellow, black, red, and white squadrons . Bride in command of the red and white fleets .
 Hsi Kai came to the meeting dressed in her husband's captain’s uniform . Over which she donned a purple robe embroidered with golden dragons .
 Your most powerful fleet, the white, was under my command, and took more prizes than any other, says the author . "Your most powerful fleets, the . white, were under your command,," he says .
 Captain Hsi Kai Ching expanded her operation to 2,000 vessels and more than 70,000 pirates . Chang Pao, her loyal lieutenant, was her loyal captain .
 So intimidating was she that she could charge a ‘protection fee’ in exchange for safe passage over her domain . She could also charge a "protection fee" to pass over her domains .
 In desperation, the government forbade all shipping in the Sea of Japan in hopes of starving her out . The government has been desperate to starve her out of sea .
 A generous bounty was offered to a pirate hunter who could capture this trophy . A pirate hunter was offered a reward for capturing the trophy .
 Captain Ching surrendered in 1810 in exchange for total amnesty . Finally, in 1812, he surrendered in order to receive total amnesty from the Chinese government .
 Not content with the civilian life, however, she soon embarked on a career in smuggled goods . She became a smuggler in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Joan, who called herself ‘the Maid,’ claimed to hear the voice of God, who told her to rescue the French people from English rule . Joan claimed to have been instructed by God to rescue French people . Joan died at the age of 13 in France .
 44 AMAZONS, HEROINES, AND MILITARY LEADERS turned her over to the Catholic Church to be tried for heresy . The English captured and imprisoned her, and then imprisoned her .
 A tribunal of clergy, sympathetic to the English, sentenced her to death . She was sentenced to death by a court of clergy sympathetic to English .
 Joan finally relented and agreed to sign a confession when prison guards led her to the stake to be burned alive . Joan refused to recant the statements she had made during her trial . Joan finally signed a confession to the prison guards when she was led to her stake .
 She was lashed to the stake when she donned the male attire she had fought in and, by doing so, was considered by the court to be a relapsed heretic . Ultimately, she was considered to be considered a relapse heretic.
 Pope Benedict XV declared Joan Joan a saint of the Roman Catholic Church in 1920 . Joan Joan was a member of the Catholic Church . Joan died in 1918 at the hands of the Pope .
 The One Hundred Years’ War (1618-48) was caused by simple territorial greed . Unlike other European conflicts such as the Thirty Years' War, it was not caused by war-like greed .
 The French king Philip VI, whose sister was married to the English king Edward III, announced that he would take over all English lands controlled by his brother-in-law in France . Philip VI's sister's marriage to Edward III led to the death of Edward III .
 Philip Vi’s plan was a particularly bold one, considering that in the I4th century, the nation of France did not really exist . Philip Vi's plan was particularly bold considering the fact that the country of France didn't exist .
 In 1392, the insanity of the French King Charles VI had called control of the kingdom into question . The insanity of Charles VI called control into question in 1392 . Charles VI's insanity had led to the death of Charles III III of France .
 Two aristocratic factions vied for the right to the throne, but it was John the Fearless, duke of Burgundy, who finally took the reins of power .
 England’s King Henry V invaded France from Burgundy in 1415 and led his troops to a heartening victory at Agincourt in the same year . Taking advantage of the chaos, Henry V led his forces to a victory in Agin court .
 Henry V died in 1422, leaving his infant son as ruler of both kingdoms . Henry V ruled both England and France from 1422 .
 Joan of Arc heard voices telling her to free France from the English . Charles VII kept a wary eye on the city of Orleans, gateway to the city .
 She led the army that repulsed the siege of Orleans, but was wounded in battle near Paris . She was wounded during the siege .
 Charles VII. to the troubled province of Burgundy . Portrait from the Vigils of Charles VII .
 When Joan of Arc was born, the war had already raged some 65 years before her birth . Joan was born in the middle of the war, when the war was still raging .
 She was born a devout Roman Catholic in Domremy, near Nancy in eastern France . She is a devout Catholic and a devout Christian .
 She called herself Jeanne la Pucelle (the Maid), but others called her clairvoyant, because she seemed to have the power to foretell the future . Others called her 'clairvoyants' because she foretells the future, or 'clairvoyant'
 Voices from God exhorted her to drive the English from French soil, she said . Later, voices that she understood to be from God told her to kill the English .
 Joan persisted, however, until the commander gave her the use of a horse and soldiers who were to act as escorts . Joan persisted until she was given permission to use the horse and the soldiers who would escort her .
 Some feudal lords, including the Burgundians, sided with the English against the French . Because France was not yet a nation, some feudal lords supported the English .
 Charles VII had not been crowned yet, because the city of Reims, where coronations had historically taken place, had fallen into English hands . Charles VII was not crowned yet because of the loss of the city .
 If the English continued their rampage and took Orleans, Charles VII knew all would be lost . Charles VII died in Orleans .
 When an unknown maid named Joan demanded an audience, he had nothing left to lose . Therefore, when an unknown Maid named Joan asked him to give her an audience he refused .
 He asked her to tell him what he had asked of God during his prayers the night before . He then asked her what she had asked him to do with his prayers .
 Joan was able to repeat the king’s prayers exactly as he had said them . Joan was later able to recite the king's prayers . Joan's prayers were the same as those of her own .
 Courtiers feared the Maid’s powers, declaring them to be the work of the devil . Some courtiers feared their power, declaring it to be Satan's work .
 Charles VII gave her armor, an army of troops, and a banner . Charles VII remained convinced, and he gave her a banner and armor .
 Maid escorted Charles VII to his coronation in 1429 . No longer needing an escort herself, the Maid escorted him to the coronation .
 She convinced him to let her try to chase the English from Paris . Next, she convinced him that she would chase the French from Paris.
 The Burgundians captured her on May 23, 1430, at Compiegne, where she had been wounded in battle . She was captured by Burgundian forces in 1430 .
 A soldier named John of Luxembourg sold Joan to the English for an enormous bounty . Joan was sold to England by a soldier who sold her to a soldier in Luxembourg .
 The English turned her over to the Catholic Church to be tried for heresy . She was turned over for heresy by the English . She died in 1777 .
 Joan’s biographers speculate that the English feared her supernatural powers and wanted to see her put to death as a witch and a heretic . Joan's biographers believe that Joan's supernatural powers were feared by the English .
 Joan appeared before her judges at the ecclesiastical court on February 21, 1431 . Joan was the first woman to appear before the court in 1431. Joan's daughter Joan was also a nun .
 Though a prisoner of the church, she was confined at the Castle of Rouen, she had been confined at a secular prison where licentious guards watched over her . She had been kept in the secular prison .
 She repeatedly asked to be moved to a church prison, where she would have been attended by female guards . She asked for a move to a prison where female guards would have attended her .
 She wore the men’s clothing that she had worn throughout her soldiering days, probably to protect her modesty .
 As the trial progressed, Joan responded to her prosecutors with alacrity and resoluteness . Joan responded with alcrity, resolutess and resolute .
 During the course of questioning on March 1, Joan announced that within seven years time the English would have to give up a bigger prize than Orleans . Joan announced in seven years that within 7 years time England would have given up bigger prize .
 On November 12, 1437, Henry VI lost control of Paris that day . Her prophesy came to pass . Henry VI was overthrown in 1437 .
 Cauchon perceived that the sympathies of many of the judges were turning in favor of Joan, so he had the trial moved to her prison cell . Many judges were excused . Joan's trial was moved to the prison cell, and many of them excused.
 If she refused to retract her statements, she would be handed over to secular authorities, who would surely put her to death . She would surely be put to death by secular authorities .
 Admonitions against Joan were duly spoken, and the accused was asked to recant twice, on April 18 and May 2, but she refused both times . Joan's trial was held in New York City, New Jersey, on May 2 and 3 .
 On May 9, her captors threatened torture, but still Joan held fast to her convictions . Joan held on to her conviction despite being threatened with torture .
 Officials erected a stake in the cemetery of Rouen, France, on May 23, 1431, in front of a gathering of people . In front of people she was once more publicly admonished for her sins .
 Joan stated that she only retracted because she felt that it was now God’s will . Joan said that she retracted her retraction because she believed it was 'God's will' Joan said she retracted the retraction .
 If Joan were to don the apparel again, it would be considered a relapse . Joan was condemned for wearing men’s clothing .
 Whether Joan put on clothes to cover her body as she stood naked before her guards is not known . Whether there were no other clothes in her cell, or whether Joan simply put on clothing to cover herself .
 Joan was burned at the stake on May 30, 1431 . The 19-year-old Joan was a relapsed heretic, and her judges ruled that she was a heretic .
 In 1456, Pope Callistus III granted a new hearing on request from Joan's parents . Joan died in 1456 . Joan was married to Joan of the same name in 1454 .
 Rhodesian security forces tried to hunt her down because they wanted to use her image in propaganda posters . Rhodesian authorities tried to find her after she was found in Rhodesia .
 In 1978, fighter planes attacked the military camp where she was an officer . The camp was attacked by fighter planes at the time .
 At the time, she was pregnant with her first child, but she continued to fight during the raid . She was pregnant at the time .
 Since Zimbabwe won independence from the British in 1980, Nhongo has held various governmental offices . He has worked to improve the lives of Zimbabwean women . Since 1980, he has worked in various government offices .
 Mount Darwin, Zimbabwe, close to the Mozambique border on February 2, 1955 . Mount Darwin was located on Mount Darwin in Zimbabwe's Mount Darwin .
 When she passed her exit exam in school, she joined the boys from her village who had run away to join in the liberation of Zimbabwe . She left her family to join the boys who had joined the liberation movement .
 Cecil Rhodes founded the British South African Company in 1899 to colonize and promote trade in the southern portion of the African continent . The company was founded by British diamond magnate and statesman Cecil Rhodes .
 The Ndebele and Shona people rose up in defense of their homeland, but by 1887, the British had subdued them . The Shona and Ndebi people were subdued by the British .
 Rhodesia voted to become a self-governing British colony in 1923 . In 1923, 34,000 Europeans living in what became known as Rhodesia vote for independence . Rhodesia is now a British colony of Rhodesia .
 In 1953, Rhodesia united with Malawi and Zambia to form the Federation of Rhodesia . Rhodesia became the first African nation to join the federation of Rhodesians .
 The Federation of Rhodesia dissolved in 1963, and Rhodesia reverted to its former status . Rhodesia was one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 Rhodesia declared independence from Great Britain in 1965, which resulted in economic sanctions against the former colony . Rhodesia is now a former colony of Rhodesia .
 ZAPU and ZANU members formed guerrilla groups in Zambia and Mozambique, respectively, from which they launched attacks on Rhodesian security forces . Members of the two guerrilla groups were Rhodesians .
 After basic training, Joice Nhongo’s superiors assigned her to field operations . After receiving basic training she was assigned to field ops .
 Nhongo became a member of the General Staff of the ZANLA and commander of the Women’s Detachment . He is currently the commander of ZANla's Women's Detachment.
 Like other soldiers in the war against colonial rule, she stopped using her English name, Joice, and selected a ‘Chimurenga’ name instead .
 Nhongo was appointed camp commander of Chimoio, the largest guerrilla and refugee camp in Mozambique . A year later, he was appointed Camp commander of the camp . He is now the leader of a guerrilla and refugees camp in the country .
 In 1977, Teurai Ropa Nhongo became a member of the ZANU National Executive of the Central Committee . She was the first woman ever to be appointed to such a political party and named secretary of Women’s Affairs .
 Rhodesian security forces attempted to hunt her down in Rhodesian capital Rhodesia . The following year, Rhodesian authorities attempted to track her down .
 The white minority agreed to hold multiracial elections in 1980 . After thousands of people died and were uprooted from their homes, the white minority decided to hold elections .
 Robert Mugabe won a landslide victory and ZANU took control of the government . Mugabe's election was the first election since independence from Zimbabwe .
 During her time in government, Nhongo realized that Zimbabwean women suffered from the same problems affecting women all over the African continent . She realized that the same issues are affecting women across the continent .
 They married too young, had too many children too quickly, and lost out on opportunities to become educated . They lost out of opportunities to be educated, they say .
 When younger women left the countryside to work in factories, employers paid them slightly under the minimum wage . Employers paid the younger women slightly less than minimum wage in some cases .
 One of Nhongo's primary concerns was to improve women's lives in Zimbabwe . She worked hard to make governmental resources available for the cause .
 Nhongo found that women experienced discrimination in marriage in Zimbabwe . Women also experienced discrimination against each other in marriage, he said .
 During colonial times, laws differentiated between white marriages and African marriages . Laws were made to distinguish between white and black marriages .
 A black woman who married in a Christian ceremony fell under the Native Marriage Act and was considered a minor and ward of her husband . She married in Christian ceremony . She was considered to be a minor by her husband and a ward of his husband .
 Zimbabwe women could then open bank accounts and enter contracts like any other adult . Zimbabwe women would then be able to enter into contracts like normal adults .
 Nhongo’s desire for equality for Zimbabwean women arose as a direct consequence of her experiences in the liberation army . She says she wants equality for women in Zimbabwean politics .
 At the Women’s Day rally held in 1983 in Harare, Nhongo called for equality for all citizens before the law .
 Nhongo expressed optimism, however, that women and men will transform Zimbabwe into a more equitable society . He expressed optimism that Zimbabwe will transform into an equal society .
 Nhongo was minister of Youth, Sport, and Recreation in 1980 . He also served as minister of Community Development and Women's Affairs from 1985 to 1988 .
 Since 1997, she has been the minister of Rural Resources and Water Development . She has been in office since 1997 .
 Black & White Film Company, JBA Production, Onland Productions, written by Ingrid Sinclair with Barbara Jago .
 American patriot Molly Pitcher’s heroism during the Revolutionary War at the battle of Monmouth has been celebrated by American patriots ever since . Pitcher's heroism in the 17th century at Monmouth is celebrated by Americans ever since.
 Pitcher fought valiantly for seven years in the Pennsylvania State Regiment of Artillery . Pitcher served in the Army during his early years .
 She served as second in command at her husband’s artillery post . She swabbed the cannon's bore between shots, swabbing it between shots . Her husband died in 1918 .
 Mary Ludwig Hays, better known as Molly Pitcher, was the first American woman to receive a military pension from a state government . Her nickname is "Molly Pitcher," which most people know is her nickname .
 Last name may have been Ludwig, though this is in dispute, and derives from her carrying water in pitchers to thirsty soldiers during the Monmouth battle .
 In recognition of her services during the war, the Pennsylvania state legislature in 1822 awarded her payment of $40 immediately, with the same sum to be paid annually until her death .
 Her place of burial is recorded as Carlisle, Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania . Some claim she lies in the graveyard at West Point . Her burial place is unknown .
 Pitcher was born probably on October 3, 1754, near Trenton, New Jersey . She was possibly the daughter of John George Ludwig . Pitcher died in 1754 .
 Ludwig had immigrated from the German state of Palatinate in 1749 and had settled in Mercer County, New Jersey, where he and his family operated a dairy farm . Ludwig had moved to New Jersey from Germany and lived there with his family .
 Pitcher left home as a teenager to become a domestic servant at the home of Dr. Dr. David Pitcher . Pitcher was a domestic worker at the time of his marriage to Dr. James Pitcher. Pitcher died at the age of 92 .
 She met and married John Caspar Hays, the local barber, with whom she had one son, John L Hays . She had a son with him, John Hays; he died in 2007 .
 The American Revolution determined that the future of Great Britain’s 13 colonies, located on the Adantic seaboard of North America, would be as an independent nation, the United States . The United States was established in 17th century .
 Golonists demanding independence from Great Britain argued that humans have the right to seek liberty when oppressed . Thomas Jefferson and Thomas Paine were among those who argued for independence .
 Great Britain’s economic policies, such as taxing the colonists without providing them with a 49 AMAZONS, HEROINES, AND MILITARY LEADERS voice in Parliament, were seen as so egregious that some colonists demanded war .
 Throughout the course of the war, many Americans, especially royal officeholders, and farmers who benefited from trade with Great Britain, remained loyal to the crown .
 Others, including small businessmen, grew weary of the repressive taxes Great Britain had burdened its colonists with, and they heeded the call to arms .
 For many men, the colonial army offered three meals a day and a paycheck . For many, it was a three-month-old job .
 John Caspar Hays enlisted as a gunner in Thomas Proctor’s First Company of Pennsylvania Artillery in December 1775 . Hays was a member of the First Company .
 William Irvine, had formed the Seventh Pennsylvania Regiment, which he commanded . Irvine was the son of William Irvine . Irvine, a former soldier, died in 1918 . Irvine commanded the 7th Pennsylvania Regiment .
 Mary Hays remained in Carlisle, until she joined her husband’s regiment as a camp follower . For a time, she remained with her husband's regiment until her death .
 Most camp followers were women who wanted to join their husbands in battle . The camp followers of the camp included women who joined their husbands .
 Camp followers performed wifely duties at camp, such as cooking meals, washing clothes, obtaining water supplies, and treating wounds . Camp followers cooked meals, washed clothes, and received water supplies .
 Generally, wives took care of their own families, not of the whole company . Wives often brought their young children with them .
 The term camp follower also represents the women who traveled with the military and worked as prostitutes . Camp follower is a term used to refer to a camp follower who worked as a prostitute . Camp followers are also known as camp followers .
 Mary Hays chose to become more of a soldier than most camp followers, assisting her husband on the battlefront . Hays was a soldier in the First World War, helping her husband in battle .
 During the retreat of the American soldiers from Fort Clinton, Hays’s comrades in arms took note of her courage and daring . Hays was a soldier in the U.S. Army in the Second World War .
 Cannoneers who were forced to abandon their weapons in a retreat usually tried to load them for a parting shot as the enemy closed in on their position . Cannoneer often tried to fire them for parting shot during retreat .
 Mary Hays, following behind her husband, deftly picked up the dropped match and set off the cannon in the face of the British attackers . The cannon was set off by the Hays family in 17th century .
 She narrowly escaped the volley of shots that peppered the battlefield . She narrowly avoided being hit by a volley of bullets .
 Mary Hays assisted her husband at his cannon on Sunday, June 28, 1778, on an unusually hot sum50 mer day . Hays helped her husband fire a cannon on the unusually hot day .
 As the battle raged, soldiers began crying out for water on the front lines . Soldiers were crying for water as they fought for their lives in the battle .
 She quickly filled it with water at a nearby spring and delivered the cool, soothing liquid to parched soldiers’ throats .
 Captain John Caspar Hays was killed by British artillery later that day . Captain Hays died in a firefight with the British forces .
 Mary Hays knew that if no one were to take her husband's place at his cannon, the battle, and other lives, would be lost . Hays was killed in the Battle of Gettysburg, Massachusetts .
 So she took her husband’s place behind the cannon, loading and firing the weapon, so the story goes, as adeptly as her husband . The story goes that she was able to load and fire the weapon herself .
 After the battle of Monmouth Pitcher returned to Carlisle, where she married John McCauley . She was again widowed in 1808 or 1809 .
 Pitcher spent her days cleaning and performing other odd domestic jobs for her subsistence . Pitcher was the only person in the world to survive .
 When she died on January 22, 1832, her obituaries in local newspapers made no mention of her war service at all .
 Like Pitcher, Corbin also served as a cannoneer . She took over her husband's duties after he had been shot dead .
 In July 1779, Congress passed a resolution calling for the payment to Corbin of the sum of one-half the monthly pay drawn by a soldier for the rest of her life . Corbin died in 1779 .
 Pitcher became a celebrity during the nation’s centennial celebration in 1876 . A Carlisle resident who remembered her story suggested that a tombstone be placed over her grave . Pitcher's story was remembered in Carlisle .
 In 1905, a cannon, flag, and flagstaff were added to the burial site . In 1916, a state monument was erected and dedicated at her burial site in 1916 .
 Residents of Monmouth, New Jersey, dedicated a bronze statue of Molly Pitcher to her cannon . The statue was dedicated to a statue of a barefoot woman standing beside her cannon and a water pail .
 Keenan, Sheila. Keenan . Keenan: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future" Keenan and Keenan have been married for more than 20 years .
 Chinese revolutionary and poet Qiu Jin was one of the first women to protest traditional Chinese customs and advocate freedom for men and women .
 She incited women’s rebellion against social pressures in China . In a more radical position, she advocated and planned an uprising against the Manchu government .
 When government officials captured and beheaded her in 1907, she became a martyr in the revolutionary cause . She was captured by government officials and executed in 1907 .
 The Manchu dynasty (sometimes called the Ch’ing or Qing dynasty) took power in 1644 and ruled until 1911 . The Qing dynasty ruled China from 1644 to 1911 .
 Under Manchu rule, China became one of the greatest powers in the world, as well as richest and most sophisticated .
 The Manchus were nomadic warriors from Manchuria, but once they conquered China, they adopted Chinese culture to consolidate their rule . The Chinese people adopted Manchu culture in order to consolidate the rule .
 China grew prosperous under the Manchu dynasty, developing trade networks and a sophisticated, urban population . China's economic boom was largely due to the rise of modern urbanization .
 Agriculture became far more productive than it had ever been, and population growth began in earnest . Population growth began to grow in earnest in the early 1900s .
 By the 19th century, population growth began to exceed productivity, resulting in a large impoverished peasant population . The population of China's peasant population grew rapidly in the late 1800s and early 1900s .
 This segment of society began to rebel, and China was forced to make trade concessions with foreign nations . China has made concessions to foreign nations, forcing them to make concessions . China's economy has been hit hard by anti-government protests .
 Opium War or the Anglo-Chinese War had as its cause upper-class Chinese dependence on opium . The underlying issue was British access to Chinese markets, which the Manchu rulers resisted .
 The war resulted in a humiliating defeat by the British, leaving China at the mercy of European incursions . The war ended in a crushing defeat by China .
 In the late 1890s, European missionaries provoked antiforeign riots in various parts of China . The riots were sparked by European missionaries .
 Dowager Tz’u Hsi incited peasant rebellions against the missionaries and all foreigners in China . Instead of against the Manchu dynasty, instead of against Manchu .
 In 1900, the Boxers went on a rampage, killing missionaries and Chinese Christian converts . Westerners began calling this group of rebels the Boxer, and in 1900, they killed missionaries and converts .
 Despite the apparent victory, the Manchu dynasty was toppled in 1911 . Western powers withdrew from China, but the peace treaty included staggering indemnities .
 Lakshmi BAI's childhood included swordplay, riding horses, and fighting with boys . Lakshmi's childhood was like that of her, with swordplay and riding horses .
 Her family insisted that she become well educated, and she grew up a voracious reader . Her family also insisted she was well educated .
 Qiu Jin’s parents arranged her marriage to Wang Ting-Chun at the age of 21 . She felt confined by her much older husband, whose conventional ways conflicted with her free spirit . Her parents arranged the marriage at age 21 .
 Like many European and American women of the early 20th century, Qiu Jin began wearing men’s clothes .
 She wrote articles celebrating historical Chinese women, and poems in which she referred to the practice of binding the feet of four-year-old girls .
 Beginning in the 10th century, girls’ mothers bent each daughter’s feet backward so that the toes broke and the foot formed a ball wrapped with silk bandages . Girls’ feet were bent backward to create the ball, wrapped with bandages, in order to keep
 Tiny wrapped feet became a symbol of beauty for Chinese women . Over time, the tiny wrapped feet were a symbol for beauty .
 The underlying purpose of the custom was to keep women immobile and sexually accessible only to their husbands . However, the underlying purpose was to allow women to be sexually accessible to their husband .
 Chinese women and men began protesting the widespread custom in the early 20th century . Women and men protested the widespread practice in China .
 Qiu Jin returned to China in 1906 and began to publish a woman’s magazine, in which she recommended that women train and educate themselves to 51 AMAZONS, HEROINES, AND MILITARY LEADERS work .
 Qiu Jin began to believe that women’s lives in China would never change unless the Manchu dynasty was overthrown . Increasingly, she believed that women's lives would not change if the dynasty were overthrown.
 She joined forces with her cousin Hsu Hsi-lin to form secret revolutionary societies . The two formed secret revolutionary groups and military units . She was a member of a secret revolutionary society .
 Qiu Jin founded a women’s journal in Shanghai . She became the principal of the Ta’Tung College of Physical Culture .
 On July 6, 1907, the government arrested Hsu Hsi-lin on charges of treason . The Chinese government arrested him on treason charges in 1907 . He was later executed in prison for treason .
 He admitted his revolutionary views under interrogation, and he was executed . He was executed after he admitted his views .
 She immediately became a martyr for the cause of women’s rights in China . She became the first woman to be executed in the country .
 Indian warrior Muslims of Turkish descent . Sultana Raziya is the name of a woman of the same name .
 Razia was the only woman ever to occupy the throne at Delhi, India’s capital city located in the northern half of the subcontinent . Razia is the only female ruler of Delhi .
 Muslim princesses were often trained to administer kingdoms and lead armies . Sultana Razia was no exception .
 Authorities consulted women trained in the political and martial arts only if no male royal family member was available . Authorities generally consulted women only if there were no male royals available to consult .
 Sultana Razia's talents in politics and fighting were far superior to her brothers’ . Razia’s father, Iltutmish chose her over her brothers to be his successor. Razia was chosen to succeed him in the throne .
 Turkish Muslim merchants had settled in the port city of Gujarat, northwestern India, and along the southern coast of India, as early as the 10th century . Turkish Muslims had lived in Gujarat, northwest India, between 10th and 11th century, as well as southern India .
 Mahmud of Ghanzi rode into India with 30,000 mounted warriors, pillaging and killing Indians as they went . In 1023 he rode into the country killing Indians and pillaging them .
 Mahmud deemed himself the ‘image breaker’ because he delighted in leveling Hindu and Buddhist temples and slaughtering non-Muslims . Mahmud considered himself the "image breaker" because of his willingness to slaughter non-Muslim non-muslims .
 The Buddhist university at Nalanda, including its library of priceless manuscripts, was destroyed . Buddhism in India (the religion was founded by the Indian Siddarta Gautama, ca.3-483 B.C.E.E.) never recovered from the blow .
 Glashes between Muslims and Hindus who resisted Muslim rule continued into the 12th century . But the inability of Hindus to unite resulted in Muslim domination of India .
 A series of Turkish-Afghan rulers known as the “Slave Sultans of Delhi” extended and unified Muslim power over North India for nearly all of the 13th century . The years of Sultana Razia’s reign included the years of her reign
 After Razia’s father, Iltutmish, died, Delhi's emirs— Turkish aristocrats—opposed Razia's succession to the throne . Razia was ruled by Razia in 17th century, ruled by Delhi's ruler .
 She stepped down from the throne in favor of her stepbrother Ruknuddin . To appease them and preserve peace, she stepped down as the queen .
 Ruknuddin led a hedonistic life and had no interest in administering the sultanate . However, like Razia’s brothers, he led a lifestyle that included drinking and smoking .
 Razia became the victim of an assassination attempt by Ruknuddin’s mother . As the emirs began to second-guess their original opposition to Razia, Razia was assassinated . Razia's assassination attempt was the result of a coup by her mother .
 Razia called a meeting of the emirs and told them of the plot to kill her . Razia told them she had been targeted by the emirates .
 In 1236, the emirs rescinded their initial opposition, and Razia ascended the throne . Razia's reign lasted until 1236 and she became the queen of the kingdom .
 Sultana Razia exhibited the political astuteness that had impressed her father when she was young . Razia's father says Razia is a strong leader in the country .
 She used her new power to encourage trade, build roads and improve water supplies in the city . She also used her power to build roads to make trading more efficient .
 A welleducated woman who could read and recite from the 52 AMAZONS, HEROINES, AND MILITARY LEADERS Qur’an, Sultana Razia encouraged and supported the arts and education in Delhi . Razia was a well-educated woman .
 In public, she appeared without her veil, wearing the tunic and headdress of a man .
 She instituted a more accessible government by opening meetings to the public . She opened meetings to be more accessible to the people .
 She tried to appease her Hindu subjects by exhibiting a tolerant attitude toward them . She also tried to show her tolerance towards them .
 The emirs’ opposition to this move was too vigorous, and the tax remained in place . She attempted to abolish the tax upon Hindus, but the emirs' opposition was too strong .
 The emirs’ open hostility to Razia’s liberal rule ultimately resulted in her downfall . Razia was ruled by Sultana Razia, who ruled the country for more than a decade .
 One of the emirs’ chief complaints was Razia’s reliance upon her adviser, Jamal Uddin Yaqut, who was not of Turkish descent . The emirs were unhappy with Razia's reliance on her adviser . Razia is the prime minister of Saudi
 Jamal was master of horses, an honorary position previously enjoyed only by Turkish courtiers . She had bestowed special favors upon Jamal, including making him master horses .
 One governor, Altunia, planned and carried out an armed rebellion against the Sultana . Altunia carried out a revolt against the sultana. Altunia was one of the governors who carried out the rebellion .
 With Jamal at her side, Razia led her troops into a long battle against Altunia’s forces . Razia was joined by Jamal at the end of the battle .
 In Delhi, the emirs proclaimed one of Razia’s brothers to be the new sultan . Razia's brother was declared the sultan in Delhi . The emirs declared Razia as the new ruler of Delhi .
 Razia married her captor and former governor, Altunia, and husband and wife rode back to Delhi to reclaim the throne . Razia and Altunia were able to reclaim Delhi .
 Razia’s mourners erected a tomb in her honor on the banks of the Yamuna River, which flows through Delhi . Razia's funeral was held in the city of Delhi .
 The burial site became a memorial to the only female monarch ever to rule Delhi . It is the burial site of the last female monarch who ruled Delhi .
 In the midst of the Revolutionary War, General George Washington ruminated about his ragtag, ruffian army . In 1777, General Washington was ruminating about his ruffy army .
 Camp followers were camp followers who made up General Washington’s unprofessional army . The women he alluded to, known as camp followers, joined their uniformed husbands . The camp followers were the wives of Washington's soldiers .
 Deborah Sampson wanted to participate more actively in the military . Sampson is a patriotic young woman who wants to serve in the armed forces .
 She knew that the only way women could join the American cause was to help their husbands in military camps and on the front lines, or to service soldiers by becoming prostitutes .
 To become a soldier herself, Sampson reasoned, she would have to convince the military that she was a man . Sampson: "To be a soldier, I want to be a man. To be a woman, I need to be in the military."
 With a fivefoot, seven-inch frame and a sturdy physique, she was already on her way . With a 5foot, 7in frame, she is already on the way .
 Deborah Sampson was born in Plympton, in Plymouth Gounty, Massachusetts, on December 17, 1760 . Sampson died in 1760 at the age of 50 .
 It was the schoolbooks she read, she later contended, that drove her desire to leave her tiny village and see the wider world . She later contended that it was that she wanted to leave .
 In 1782, she dressed as a man and enlisted at Bellingham, Massachusetts, under the name Robert Shirtliff . Along with a group of about 50 recruits, Sampson marched to West Point for training . Sampson was one of the first women to enlist at West Point .
 She was assigned an infantry position in Colonel Henry Jackson’s Fourth Massachusetts Regiment . She served in the 4th Massachusetts Regiment during her service .
 Sampson's company joined with a contingent of French soldiers under the command of General Lafayette . Sampson’s company joined forces with a French contingent of soldiers under Lafayette .
 Deborah Sampson killed a British soldier in Yorktown . The force engaged the British at Yorktown, where she killed her fellow soldier .
 She suffered a saber wound, which she cleaned and dressed herself rather than reveal her gender in the first aid tent .
 Sampson took a bullet in her thigh and one in her head . Sampson was shot in the head and thigh .
 Although the wounds were only superficial, she lost a great deal of blood . She lost a large amount of blood after the attack .
 She extracted the musket ball from her thigh, rather than have her gender discovered by a surgeon . The ball was extracted from the thigh of her thigh rather than having her gender found out by surgery .
 She rejoined her unit after recovering but requested to stay behind with another wounded soldier, Richard Snow . She was allowed to stay with Richard Snow, who was injured in the attack .
 Richard Snow died, and dozens of hungry cats began swarming into the attic . To her sorrow and alarm, Richard Snow . Snow died .
 She escaped the next day and returned with soldiers, captured the Tories, and recovered Snow’s body . Later, she returned to Britain and recovered the body of Snow .
 In October 1783, Sampson was discharged from active duty by General Henry Knox at West Point and was working for General Patterson in Philadelphia as an aide . The Treaty of Paris ending the war had signed in September .
 Deborah Sampson was honorably discharged from the army in 1783, a month after the Treaty of Paris, formally recognized American independence . Sampson served in the Army from 1783 .
 Deborah Sampson Gannet gave birth to one son and two daughters . The two lived in Sharon, Massachusetts, where she gave birth . The couple was married and had three children .
 Gannet petitioned the U.S. government to receive compensation for her service in the Army of the United States . In 1792, she petitioned for compensation from her service .
 She appeared in court to have her petition heard before the Massachusetts Supreme Gourt . The petition is expected to be heard in the next month .
 Document reveals the paradoxical way in which women soldiers were treated in the Revolutionary period . Document reveals how women were treated by women soldiers in the revolutionary period .
 Gannet received praise for being “one of the boys” by fulfilling the duties of a soldier . On the one hand, he was praised for his role in the fight in Afghanistan .
 The court praised her for being a "good girl" by remaining a chaste virgin . On the other hand, the court said she was a 'good girl'
 By dressing and acting as a man, Gannet challenged the boundaries between masculinity and femininity . By crossing the boundaries, he challenged those boundaries . He said: 'By dressing as a male, he crossed the boundaries'
 The court seemed to be reinforcing the boundaries in the face of Gannet’s challenge, by reminding society that chaste femininity would remain the standard for proper womanhood .
 Historians know little of the details of Trinidad Tescon’s long life . Philippine revolutionary soldier .
 She fought with a guerrilla army for Philippine freedom from colonial rule . She was badly wounded during an attack at the town of San Miguel under the command of General Soliman . She organized a group of women to nurse wounded soldiers back to health .
 Like many other native Filipinos, she came to resent Spanish control of the Philippine Islands . She came to believe that only through armed force could indigenous people regain control of their land .
 Filipino warriors killed Magellan several weeks later and his fleet returned to Spain . Magellan was killed by Filipino warriors in the Philippines .
 Spanish explorers succeeded in claiming the islands for Spain . However, another group of Spanish explorers claimed the islands . The islands were claimed by Spanish explorers .
 They divided the land among themselves and employed Filipinos as tenant farmers, laborers, and servants . The land was divided among them and they employed them as tenants, laborers .
 Numerous uprisings punctuated the Spanish colonial rule of the Philippines . The Philippines was ruled by the Spanish during the early 1900s .
 Before the late 19th century, revolts were confined to Philippine religious leaders who resented Spanish Roman Catholicism . Revolts were largely confined to religious leaders .
 During the late 1800s, a Filipino educated, middle class emerged (due to the opening of Philippine markets to foreign trade) with a yearning for independence . The Filipino educated and middle-class emerged due to opening the Philippine markets .
 The martyrdom of three Filipino priests in 1872 sparked anti-Spanish sentiment . Jose Burgos, Mariano Gomez and Jacinto Zamora were martyrs for supposedly conspiring with rebels .
 Like Italian patriot Cristina TRIVULZIO, Filipinos began taking their cause abroad . They raised antiSpanish sentiments among the European and American public .
 Jose Rizal emerged as a leader of the movement when he published his novel Noli me tangere (published in English as The Lost Eden, 1961) in 1886 .
 The Philippine Revolution began when Andres Bonifacio organized a secret revolutionary society called the Katipunan . The society was organized by a self-educated warehouse clerk . The revolution began in the Philippines in the early 1900s .
 The Katipunan tried, but failed, to overthrow the colonial government in 1896 . They tried to oust the government but failed to do so .
 Emilio Aguinaldo proclaimed himself the leader of the revolutionary forces and its government . Emilio was a local chief of the Katipunan, Emilio . Aguinaldos declared himself the government .
 Aguinaldo himself suffered reverses at the hands of Spanish troops, and he was forced to flee to Biak-na-Bato in Bulacan Province, on the island of Luzon, on Luzon .
 He negotiated an armistice between himself and the Spanish governor . From there, he negotiated an end to the conflict with Spain .
 The rebel leader would go into exile in Hong Kong, in exchange for political reform of the colonial government . He would go to Hong Kong in return for political reforms .
 Trinidad Tescon fought valiantly in the battle of Zaragoza, on the island of Luzon . During the three years of armed struggle for independence, he fought for independence from Spain .
 After recovering from her wounds, she participated in another military confrontation with the Spanish under the command of General del Pilar . She was wounded in the battle .
 She set up a makeshift field hospital at Biak-na-Bato, site of the treaty declaration between Aguinaldo and Spanish officials . The hospital was set up at the Spanish-Turkish border .
 Her patients lovingly called her “Ina ng Biak-Na-Bato,” or Mother of the biak-na-Bata . Her patients called her "Ina," or "Mother of the Biak," she said .
 The Philippine Revolution ended in the military defeat of the Filipino guerrilla army and its failure to oust the Spanish from the islands . The Philippine revolution ended in a military defeat .
 It was intimately connected to the Spanish-American War, which took place between April and August 1898 . American forces defeated the Spanish .
 The SpanishAmerican War developed over the issue of Spanish rule over Cuba . The war was over the Spanish American claim to the island .
 The first important battle in the war took place on May 1, 1898, when American forces destroyed all the Spanish ships in Manila Bay .
 Aguinaldo returned to the Philippines from Hong Kong and started the revolution anew, this time against American forces . In the meantime, Aguinaldos returned to Hong Kong to start the revolution again, but was killed by American troops .
 The United States government assumed title to the Philippines as a result of defeating the Spanish . The Philippines was ruled by the U.S. government in 1881 .
 Aguinaldo was captured in 1901 and appealed to the Katipunan to accept American sovereignty . Aguinalido was captured by the Americans in 1901 . He appealed to them to accept America's sovereignty .
 Olive Beech lay in a hospital room after giving birth to her second daughter, Mary Lynn . Beech was an American business executive in the 1930s . She was the mother of two children .
 Beech Aircraft Corporation President Walter Beech, fell gravely ill with encephalitis . Beech was president of the Beech aircraft company . He died in 1953 at the age of 92 .
 Olive Beech ran Beech Aircraft from the hospital, calling a meeting of the board of directors around her hospital bed . Beech called the meeting to be held around her bed in the hospital .
 One of her executives was trying to take over her husbands job, she fired the man . She fired him after she discovered he was an executive trying to get her husband's job .
 The Aviation Hall of Fame inducted Beech as a member in 1981 . She became known as the First Lady of Aviation, though she had never piloted a plane .
 Olive Beech earned a reputation for being very strict, a character trait for which many male executives might be commended . Beech was a very strict and strict leader of the Beech administration .
 Beech rigged up a system for letting her employees know what kind of mood she was in on a particular day . She rigged up the system to tell her employees what she's in a mood . Beech says she's been in a bad mood for years .
 A black flag with "woe" written on it indicated a foul mood . A royal blue flag with “Oh happy day” scrawled across the bottom meant smooth sailing . A black or blue flag had “woe” written on the bottom indicated a bad mood
 Olive Beech was born on September 25, 1903, in Waverly, Kansas . She was born in Paola, Kansas, in 1903 . Beech grew up in farming communities and attended school .
 Frank Mellor worked as a carpenter and construction manager in small towns . Mellor: "Small towns are small towns. Small towns are not small towns"
 Olive learned stenography and bookkeeping at the American Business College in Wichita, Kansas . Olive says she is proud of her daughter's success at the college .
 In 1920, at the age of 17, she began working at Staley Electric Company . Four years later the owner died and the business folded . The owner died .
 Beech quickly found another job at an airplane manufacturing plant called Travel Air Manufacturing Company of Wichita . Beech found the job at the company .
 Beech recalled that she knew nothing at all about airplanes when she accepted the position . Beech knew nothing about airplanes before accepting the job .
 Travel Air staff teased her about her incompetence after she confused some technical terms .
 Beech asked the chief engineer to draw a diagram of an airplane with all of the parts labeled . Beech wanted the diagram of the airplane to be shown to him . The diagram was an airplane diagram of a plane with all its parts labeled.
 Walter H Beech, president of Travel Air, had caught hold of the flight fervor sweeping the nation in the first years of the 20th century . Beech was president of the Travel Air .
 In 1902, about a year before the Wright Brothers made their first successful airplane flight, the Wright brothers made a successful flight . The Wright Brothers were the first to make their first airplane flight .
 He never got off the ground, but 22 years later he founded his own airplane manufacturing company . He never had a chance to start his own business .
 The stock market crash of 1929 brought lean times to the aircraft industry . Travel Air merged with Curtiss-Wright Corporation, a large aviation conglomerate .
 In 1932, Walter Beech quit his position and the couple moved back to Kansas . The couple formed a new company, Beech Aircraft, in 1932 .
 The first few years were very tough; the company sold very few airplanes . The company sold many of its first planes in the 1970s .
 Olive Beech served on the company's board of directors in 1936 . Olive served as a member of the Beech family . Olive was Olive's grandmother .
 Beech persuaded her husband to allow a female pilot to fly a Beech airplane in a transcontinental speed race from New Jersey to Los Angeles . Louise Thaden was the only female pilot in the race . Thaden won the race in New Jersey .
 Olive Beech helped convince aviator enthusiasts that women could pilot airplanes . Thaden won the race, and Olive was the first woman to fly in a plane . Beech was a pioneer in aviation .
 During World War II, the U.S. government called upon American businesses to join the ‘total war’ effort . The United States government called on businesses to help in the war effort .
 Olive Beech took over as her husband struggled to cope with his illness . She was in charge of Olive's company at the time of her husband's illness .
 Beechcraft Model 18 was used as a bomber trainer and a short-haul airship . Beech Aircraft manufactured the Model 18, used as an airship and bomber trainer .
 Sales of the Beechcraft Model 17 and 18 were so brisk that a backlog of orders was created . Sales of both vehicles created so quickly that the backlog was created for the aircraft .
 When the war ended in 1945, Beech had built more than 7,300 military aircraft . The Army and Navy awarded the company for its efficiency . Beech was awarded the most efficient aircraft company .
 Beech diversified by manufacturing such items as corn harvesters, cotton pickers, washing machines, and even pie plates . Beech also diversified into manufacturing items such as washing machines .
 Olive Beech was the first woman to head a major aircraft company . She was president and director of the Beech Aircraft Corporation . Beech died in 1950, and Olive became president in 1950 .
 Beech Aircraft again focused on the military uses of its airplanes . During the Korean War, Beech aircraft was focused on military uses .
 In 1953, Beech Aircraft arranged the construction of a new building in which to build its new twin-engine T36 trainer airplanes with the U.S. Air Force .
 Just as the building was finished, however, the government canceled the contract . The contract was canceled just as the government completed the building .
 Olive Beech rejected a suggestion that the U.S. military had taken steps to insure that the company would not falter economically . Beech said the military had been taking steps to ensure the company wouldn't falter financially .
 She won numerous awards and served on several charity organizations before her death on July 6, 1993 . She died in 1993 .
 The economy is a shambles, buildings have been reduced to rubble, and you do not know how you will ever recover from the devastation, or how your country will ever regain its former glory . The country is in a 'shambles'
 You realize that you have a talent that could be turned into a product that people might just be willing to buy . Suddenly, you realize that . you have to turn your talent into something you might just want to sell .
 A new energy engulfs you as you realize that your product could lift you and your family out of economic doldrums . The product could also brighten the lives of those around you .
 Her sweater designs form the foundation of one of the most successful clothing companies in the world, Benetton .
 Giuliana Benetton’s success is due to skill, creativity, good business sense, and timing . A combination of factors, including skill and creativity, all resulted in the success of the business enterprise .
 Knit sweaters were a good product to start Benetton’s fashion empire in the postwar era .
 Knitting is a process in which yarn is wound around itself, forming interlocking stitches that cannot come apart, unless the entire garment is unraveled . Knitting involves winding yarn around itself in a way that cannot be unraveled until the garment is completely untied .
 Weaving uses two sources of yarn, which also interlock, but there is a certain amount of wasted yarn in weaving . The loom requires extra yarn that does not become part of the finished garment .
 Knitting is the most efficient form of garment-making, an important factor in times of poor economy . Knitting can be an efficient way of making garments, especially in poor times of economic times . Knitted is an important part of the garment making process, especially for women .
 Giuliana Benetton, born on July 8, 1937, developed a passion for knitting when she was only five years old . Giuliana was born Giuliana in 1937 and has been knitting since then .
 Her father died when she was eight, and the Benetton children were forced to struggle to make a living . She was forced to live with her family after her father died aged eight .
 Giuliana grew up in Italy’s northeast corner, Veneto, in a region called Veneto . Giuliana's family lived in Italy's northeast corner .
 The city of Treviso, where she was born, is 30 kilometers north of Venice, Italy .
 The Benettons were born into a poor economy but lived in an area that became an advantage to them . Although they were born in poor economy, they were able to gain an advantage in the area .
 Northern Italy represents the industrial area of the country, and while the world war destroyed much of its power, it offered a system of rivers that produced cheap electricity, and a transportation network that would benefit the Benetton business .
 Giuliana Benetton lived in the same area as her sister . Giuliana's family is famous for their work in the fashion industry .
 Artisans or people who make their living practicing a craft thrive in the region . It is a 59-strong region in which artisans thrive . The region is a region of 59 business leaders and legal experts .
 Giuliana Benetton’s knitting skills were encouraged early on in her life . Giuliana was encouraged to knit by her mother, who is now a fashion designer .
 As soon as she became a teenager, she began turning her knitting skill into a way of earning money .
 Her business partner, Luciano Benetton, bicycled across Treviso delivering his sister’s sweaters to distributors . Her brother Luciano also bicycles bicycles to deliver his sister's sweaters .
 Luciano, two years older than Giuliana, worked as a salesman in a clothing shop, gaining needed business experience . Giuliana's sister Giuliana is also two years old, and Luciano is two years younger .
 Luciano's parents sold a younger brother’s bicycle along with his accordion to buy a secondhand knitting machine . Luciano and his brother sold the accordion and a brother's bicycle in order to buy the machine . They sold the bicycles and an accordion for a knitting
 Knitting machines produce a finished garment in a fraction of the time it takes to hand-knit . Knitting machine can knit a garment in less than a few hours .
 Giuliana's cheerful colors and designs became popular in a depressed, bereaved society . Giuliana quickly received more orders. Giuliana received more .
 One year later, the Benettons hired two girls, ages 11 and 12, as laborers . The Benetons hired the girls as laborers in 2010 . One year after they hired them, two girls were found to be laborers .
 Luciano and his two younger brothers peddled sweaters door-to-door . Rather than selling the sweaters to local stores, Luciano began peddling them door to door . The sweaters are now being sold in the U.S. for $1 million .
 Selling directly to consumers enabled the family to take all the profits, rather than having to share profits with store owners . The family sold the products directly to the public rather than sharing profits with other stores .
 Luciano opened his own store in Belluno, Italy . Luciano reinvested his profits by opening his own .
 By 1965, the Benettons were producing 20,000 sweaters a year . The business thrived, and by 1965, they had produced 20,500 sweaters .
 By the mid-1980s, Benetton rang up sales of $351 million from 2,600 stores worldwide . By the same time, the company had sold 2,300 stores .
 Nine factories produce the clothing the company sells; seven in Italy, one in Scotland, and one in France . Nine factories make clothing for the company .
 The company’s advertising campaigns, which have included anti-capital punishment themes, have stirred controversy in recent years .
 Giuliana Benetton has been responsible for the creation of the knitwear collections, supervising and coordinating product lines . From the outset, she was responsible for creating the collections and supervising .
 Benetton looks for designs that can easily be produced on an industrial scale, keeping costs, and prices to consumers, low . The Italian fashion brand is known for its low-cost designs .
 The designer has designed a range of designs that consumers will really fall for . She says she hopes her designs will be seen in the next generation .
 The following year she formed Hazel Bishop, Incorporated, to manufacture her product . By 1954, the company boasted sales in excess of $10,000,000 .
 Bishop’s varied career included stints as a research chemist, a financial analyst, a stockbroker, and an adjunct lecturer . Bishop's varied career includes stints in research chemist and financial analyst roles .
 Hazel Bishop was born August 17, 1906, in Hoboken, New Jersey, to Henry and Mabel Billington Bishop . Hazel’s business acumen was homegrown .
 Hazel graduated from the Bergen School for Girls in Jersey City, New Jersey, and planned a career as a physician . Hazel planned to be a doctor .
 When she completed her premedical degree at Barnard College in 1929, the stock market crashed and she altered her plans . But she changed her plans when she completed a premedical course in 1929 .
 In 60 BUSINESS LEADERS AND LAWYERS 1935, she accepted a position with the world-renowned dermatologist Dr. Dr. Martin . She accepted a job with the dermatologist in 1935 .
 When the U.S. entered the war in 1941, the government proclaimed that the struggle was a “total war” in which all citizens must participate .
 Private enterprises, such as the petroleum industry, were encouraged to devote their resources to the war effort . Private enterprises were encouraged by the government to devote resources to war efforts .
 For women, the draft meant an opening of career opportunities in traditionally male fields . For women it was a huge step up in the process of entering the workforce .
 Bishop’s work aided the development of a special gasoline used to fuel bomber airplanes . Bishop's work helped develop a special gas that could be used by bomber planes .
 Bishop hired the Raymond Spector Company advertising agency to handle product promotion . Bishop's relationship with Spector turned sour after he hired the agency to promote his products .
 Executive Raymond Spector became the major stockholder of Hazel Bishop, Inc., and disagreed on how the company should be run . Bishop and Spector disagreed on the company's future direction .
 Hazel Bishop, Inc. filed suit against Raymond Spector Company and six individuals in 1952 . Bishop filed suit in March 1952, charging diversion of assets and mismanagement of company .
 Two years later, the case was settled with the stipulation that Hazel Bishop, Inc. (of which Spector was C.E. and 92 percent owner) purchase Bishop’s remaining eight percent of the company’�s stock for a cash setdement of $
 Bishop had formed another company called Hazel Bishop Laboratories, Inc. to conduct research and develop other household and personal care products .
 In November 1962, Bishop turned to a new career in the world of finance . Bishop was born in New York City .
 She became a stockbroker with the firm of Bache and Company . She later worked as a financial analyst for Evans and Company. She became an analyst at Evans and Co.
 In 1978, at the age of 72, she became an adjunct lecturer at the Manhattan Fashion Institute of Technology . Her career began in 1978 .
 Bishop warned young women that their looks were more important than whatever drive and intelligence they might possess . Oddly, however, Bishop also warned that young women should not be worried about their looks .
 American lawyer and publisher Myra Bradwell touted as America’s first female lawyer . Bradwell never actually practiced law . Myra Colby Bradwell was publisher and lawyer .
 In 1869, 1870, and again in 1873, courts in the U.S. denied her ability to ply her trade because she was a woman . She was denied the right to trade in the United States because of her gender .
 Myra Bradwell, after passing Illinois’s bar exam, was forced to sue the state in 1873 for her to right to practice law . Bradwell sued the state for her right to be a lawyer .
 She lost and the United States Supreme Court would not extend the protection of the Fourteenth Amendment to women until 1971 .
 Illinois Supreme Court finally admitted her to the bar in 1890—when she was nearly 60 years old . She chose instead to continue her work for women's rights through her publication, the Chicago Legal News .
 She used her activism outside the courts to help erase many of the restrictions that prevented women from obtaining full citizenship rights in the United States . Refusing to accept the confines of being female in American society, she refused to accept being a woman .
 At the age of 19, she began teaching in Illinois schools, until her marriage to an impoverished law student, James Bolesworth Bradwell . She was married to a wealthy law student who she left behind .
 The couple then moved to Memphis, Tennessee, where they both taught in a private school . The couple later moved to private schools . They now live in Tennessee .
 James became a successful lawyer and ultimately a judge in Cook County . In 1854 the pair returned to Chicago, where James was a successful judge .
 Myra Bradwell gave birth to four children, of whom two survived to adulthood . Two of the children survived to survive the ordeal .
 The Illinois Supreme Court admitted James Bradwell to the court in 1856 . He began teaching the intricacies of the law to his wife . Bradwell was admitted to the state's highest court .
 Myra Bradwell launched her own legal and publishing career with the first issue of her weekly publication, the Chicago Legal News . Eight years later, in 1868, in Chicago, she published her own weekly publication . Bradwell's weekly publication was published by 1868 .
 The paper quickly became the Northwest’s most prestigious legal journal . She acted as business manager and editor in chief .
 Bradwell published the legal opinions handed down in recent state and federal court cases, as well as other legal information vital to attorneys practicing law in Illinois .
 She attacked judges and lawyers for their lack of competency and moral fortitude . Her editorials took on a muckraking tone as she attacked judges, lawyers for being incompetent .
 She urged reform of the Cook County Courthouse whenever she perceived a lack of integrity . The former mayor of Chicago's Cook County, Illinois, campaigned for reform .
 Her column, “The Law Relating to Women,” promoted sexual equality in areas of property rights and admission to law and other schools .
 Bradwell demanded that women be allowed to serve on juries in numbers equal to men . Bradwell said women should be allowed on jury juries at equal numbers .
 As her reputation for fairness and reform grew, lobbyists and lawyers sought her assistance in writing of two pieces of legislation pertaining to women’s rights .
 The Illinois Married Women’s Property Act, which granted married women equal access to their own and their husband's property, passed in 1861 . The Earnings Act gave women more control over their financial lives .
 In the same year, she organized Chicago’s first woman suffrage convention . She organized Chicago's first women suffrage conventions .
 Bradwell passed the Illinois State law exam in 1869 . She was inspired by her success in passing the exam .
 The Supreme Court of Illinois denied her application on the grounds that as a married woman, she had legal disabilities that prohibited her from practicing law . The court said she had a disability that prevented her from practice law .
 Bradwell responded by filing a brief with the court in which she argued that the Married Women’s Property Act should be interpreted as allowing married 62 BUSINESS LEADERS AND LAWYERS women to enter into contract .
 Bradwell understood the purchasing of a piece of property, in which one exchanges money for the right of ownership, to he akin to entering into a contract . Bradwell: "The purchase of a property is akin to a contract"
 The court denied Bradwell’s application based solely upon her sex . Bradwell's application was denied by the court based solely on her sex. When the court denied the application, the court said it was based on the fact that she was a woman .
 The Chicago Legal News, Illinois’s most respected law publication, was edited by Myra Bradwell . Bradwell was denied the right to practice law because she was a married woman . The court avoided the issue of married women's property .
 She took her case against the Illinois Supreme Court to the United States Supreme Court . She took the case to the U.S. Supreme Court.
 Senator Matthew Hale Carpenter, argued that the court had infringed upon Bradwell’s right to a livelihood, which was protected by the privileges and immunities clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution .
 In 1873, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Illinois Supreme Court’s decision to deny Bradwell access to the bar . The decision was narrowly interpreted by narrowly interpreting the privileges and immunities clause .
 The court's majority opinion did not address Bradwell’s “womanhood,” but the concurring opinion, written by Justice Joseph Bradley, stated that women's “natural and proper timidity” prevented them from working in the same fields as men .
 In 1890, the Illinois State Supreme Court reversed itself on its own initiative, and admitted Bradwell to the bar . In 1892, the U.S. Supreme Court did likewise, waiting until Bradwell was over 60 years old .
 Her daughter Bessie Bradwell Helmer, followed her mother’s career in law, as well as taking over the publication of Chicago Legal News .
 Veuve Clicquot’s wines graced the tables of choosy gastronomes all over Europe in the 19th century . The wines were created in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Nicole-Barbe Clicquot ran a winery business that became known all over Europe as “Veuve Clicqueot,” or “Widow Clicqot” after her marital status as a widow . Married at age 19 and
 Clicquot invented the riddling table, designed to eliminate sediment from the fermented white grape, while retaining champagne’s signature effervescence, explains her success .
 Veuve Clicquot’s business became a household name through sheer tenacity . The winery operated her winery under extremely difficult circumstances .
 At the time she took over her husband’s wine operation, the French businesses suffered from economic blockades that prevented them from trading with other nations . She took over from her husband's wine business .
 The British set up a naval blockade of the French coast, preventing goods from entering or exiting France in 1803 . Napoleon had already conquered Austria and Italy, and was about to invade England .
 Napoleon was heavily taxed to help pay for his perpetual wars . Napoleon’s perpetual wars were the main source of revenue for Napoleon . Napoleon's perpetual wars cost Napoleon a fortune in taxes .
 Clicquot’s determination enabled her business to survive and even thrive . Her determination helped her business continue to thrive .
 Philippe ClicquotMuiron added a small wine operation to his main business in the 1770s . The cloth merchant's father-in-law was a cloth merchant and wine merchant .
 Wine stored in casks or barrels was easier to make and ship than bottles . Bottles represented a risk, due to greater expense and risk of breakage . Casks were used to store wine in barrels or barrels .
 The strategy of selling wine to only a few customers, usually royal courts, paid off . Soon Clicquot shipped his wine to Russia and even America .
 Clicquot did not bottle the wine he sold; instead, he purchased already bottled wines from local suppliers . He purchased the wines from already bottled wine suppliers .
 Philippe ClicquototMuiron died in 1800, his son, Franq;ois, decided to make the business his primary occupation . He was born in Paris, France .
 Nicole-Barbe Ponsardin was the daughter of Reims’s mayor . She was born east of Paris in Reims, France, and was born there .
 When her husband died in 1805, no one expected Veuve Clicquot to continue the business . No one expected the company to continue after her husband's death .
 For one thing, women running businesses in 19th-century France were few and far between . For one reason, women ran businesses in the 19th century .
 The war between England and France caused the business to suffer because of the war . Furthermore, the business suffered from the war between the two countries .
 Locals expected Clicquot to sell her husband’s business to vintners nearby . When the British blockade began the following year, locals expected her to sell the business .
 Champagne’s vintners own the exclusive rights to the term champagne . There, grape growers had developed a method of aging wines rather than selling them as soon as they were cashed .
 Champagne vintners produced wine for a small, upscale market . The process added to expense, and thus Champagne was produced for the small market . Champagne is now produced for an upscale market.
 If red grapes are pressed lightly and quickly enough, they produce a clear or white wine . These vintners discovered that if red grapes were pressed lightly, they produced a clear wine .
 Preparation of white, sparkling wine included bottling . Bottling preserved foam produced during the second fermentation of the wine .
 A cloudy sediment formed in the bottle during fermentation . Nevertheless, the sparkling wine still suffered from a cloudy sediment .
 Veuve Clicquot invented a table de remuage, or riddling table, to clarify her wines . It was invented to clarify wines .
 The riddling table included a series of narrow holes, which held the wine bottles upside down . The table was designed for wine bottles to be held upside down in order to keep the bottles in order .
 The idea behind the table de remuage was to bring the sediment that formed at the bottom of the bottle to the top of the cork . The sediment formed in the sediment collected in the bottle, so that it could collect in a bottle .
 The bottle was then returned to its upright position, uncorked, emptied of sediment, and then recorked without losing any of its bubbly effervescence . Gradually, the bottle was returned .
 Even with her invention, Clicquot faced difficulties in shipping her product, due to the war . Even with the invention, however, the product was difficult to ship .
 Napoleon would be deposed as ruler of France, and that the war would end . In early 1814, however, there were signs that soon BUSINESS LEADERS and LAWYERS Napoleon was deposed . Napoleon would soon be overthrown and end the war .
 Russia had also closed its borders to French businesses . France had also been at war with Russia and had closed its border to businesses in Russia .
 At the end of 1814, the harbor opened, and Clicquot delivered her wines to her Russian clients . The harbor opened in 1814 .
 Marie Gerin-Lajoie was one of the very few French-speaking women identified with the early phase of the suffrage movement in Quebec . She influenced the provincial government to reform its laws relating to women and ultimately to grant women the vote .
 Gerin-Lajoie founded the Federation nationale Saint Jean-Baptiste (National Federation of Saint John the Baptist) to increase the effectiveness of womens organizations by consolidating and focusing their activities on legal issues .
 She founded the Ligue des Droits de la Femme (League for the Rights of Women) to improve the legal status of married women by amending the Quebec Civil Code . Later, she founded the . Ligue .
 Through Gerin-Lajoie, woman suffrage became an acceptable issue within traditional French Canadian culture . Gerin Lajoie's story became an accepted issue in traditional French culture .
 The Ganadian woman suffrage movement began in the 1880s and reached its goal following World War I . Except in Quebec, women were allowed to vote for the first time in Canada .
 About 80 percent of the people living in Quebec, Ganada’s largest province, are of French ancestry . About 80 per cent of people in Quebec are French .
 Montreal ranks second only to Paris among French-speaking cities in the world . Montreal is the city of Quebec, Quebec and Montreal .
 About 90 percent of Quebecois are Catholics, and many Quebec schools teach Catholicism . Many Quebecois schoolchildren are Catholic .
 Quebecois are descended from French settlers who came to the region during the 1600s and 1700s . Most Quebecois descend from settlers who arrived in the region from France .
 Not many British settlers arrived in Quebec until the early 1800s . Once they did, they soon controlled the economic and political life of the province .
 French Canadians lived separately from the British and continued to follow their own ways of life . The French Canadians were part of Canada's First World War .
 Marie Gerin-Lajoie was born in Montreal on October 19, 1867, and was educated at the Hochelaga Gonvent . She was the daughter of Sir Alexandre Lacoste , the chief justice of Quebec, and Marie .
 She acquired her extensive knowledge of the law solely through reading her father's law books and discussing law with him . She had no other formal legal education .
 Gerin-Lajoie developed her sense of women's inferior legal status in Quebec by reading about women’s legal disabilities under the Quebec Civil Code . She says women are not entitled to the right to have their own legal disabilities .
 Marie Gerin-Lajoie’s feminist consciousness grew out of her awareness that the government was usurping women's authority in the home . The government took advantage of women's rights to take control of the home, she says .
 The home and the public were no longer separate entities but instead were becoming more and more intertwined . The home --traditionally the woman’s sphere -- and the . public are no longer . separate entities .
 Gerin-Lajoie noted that it was the government that determined the contents of the air people breathed, the quality of food they ate . Gerin Lajoie said the government is responsible for air quality and food quality .
 She concluded that such decisions used to be determined primarily by women, as mothers, but were now dictated by the government . She concluded such decisions now dictate decisions by women .
 As Catholics, francophone women did not want to disrupt the traditional family that supported the Catholic Church and the community, even while they believed that reform was needed . However, as Catholics, they did want to protect the family, even though they believed reform needed .
 After Gerin-Lajoie and five others delivered eloquent speeches, Taschereau responded with disconcerting frankness .
 The women returned to Montreal disheartened but no less determined to secure the franchise in their province . The women are determined to win the franchise .
 In November 1922, Gerin-Lajoie resigned her position as francophone president of the Provincial Franchise Committee . The bishop of Montreal pressured her to resign under pressure from the bishop .
 She continued to meet with Montreal lawmakers regarding suffrage legislation . She met with them in the 1920s and '50s .
 In March 1926, lawmakers attempted to extend the municipal vote to women . Lawmakers attempted to do the same in March 1926 .
 Gerin-Lajoie and two other suffragists had made an appointment to speak with those considering the Dillon Amendment . The women were kept waiting from nine o’clock in the morning until almost midnight outside the locked chamber door .
 A newspaper quoted the women as agreeing that it was the most humiliating experience in their lives . The women were quoted as saying that they were humiliated by the experience .
 The Dillon Amendment passed the House of Commons, but was rejected by the Senate . The Senate rejected it, saying it was a constitutional amendment .
 In 1929, Premier Taschereau established the Dorion Commission to investigate the question of reforming the Quebec Civil Code relating to married women’s legal status . The commission was set up by the Quebec Premier in 1929 .
 Quebec Civil Code was changed to grant women those rights . This time, she succeeded, and the Quebec civil code was changed .
 Pope Pius XI awarded Gerin-Lajoie a medal in recognition of her work for the welfare of women . Although the Catholic Church remained wary of women’s rights, she was awarded the medal .
 While the pontiff’s marriage encyclical warned against abortion, divorce, and birth control for women, a 1931 encyclic pressed for social reform .
 The French government also honored Gerin-Lajoie with an academic award . Gerin Lajoie was awarded a French academic award for his work .
 She created her wealth through wise investments, not a talent generally ascribed to women . Rather, she created wealth via wise investments .
 Shrewd investing and studied knowledge of finances and human psychology accounted for her stunning success .
 She was born on November 21, 1834, to Edward Mott Robinson, the owner of a whaling company . Abbey Slocum Howland was a member of one of the oldest and wealthiest New England families .
 Hetty 66 spent most of her childhood at her maternal grandfather’s home . Her Aunt Sylvia Howland looked after her when she was a child .
 When her mother died in 1860, Edward Robinson took her mother’s entire trust fund, leaving Hetty with only $8,000 in real estate from her mother's assets . Edward Robinson died in 1864 .
 Sylvia Howland claimed that her sister had wanted Hetty to have the trust fund, and the family squabbles over money began in earnest . Sylvia Howlands claimed that she had wanted her sister to have a trust fund .
 As the unwed Sylvia Howland’s only heir, Hetty did everything she could to insure that her inheritance from her aunt would be bigger than what she received from her mother . Sylvia Howlands was unwed and her aunt died in 1918 .
 Hetty insisted on petty frugalities, such as using bathwater for washing vegetables, to conserve on expenses .
 She continued to badger her aunt, while at the same time cajoling her father into writing his will to favor his daughter . She continued badgering her aunt while writing her will .
 Her father left her only $ 1 million outright; the rest of the money was placed in trust . Her father died at the age of 92 .
 She challenged Sylvia Howland’s will, claiming that Howland had issued a later will stipulating that much more of her wealth go to Hetty . She challenged Howland's will . Howland died in 1953 at the age of 92 .
 Experts determined that the same person had written all three signatures to the will . The will was signed by a single person . Experts determined the will was written by the same man .
 Hetty’s opponents hired a statistician, who reported that the chances of three signatures being alike were one to 2. septillion . The chances of the signatures being identical are one to two septillions, the statistician said .
 Hetty Robinson married Edward Green, an international trader of silk . Robinson was married to a silk merchant in London .
 Hetty Green arranged a prenuptial agreement specifying that she would never be held responsible for Edward Green’s debts, and that he was responsible for all household expenses . Edward Green was the subject of the agreement .
 In an era when most state laws mandated that a married woman’s wealth became her husband's. In the 1970s, many state laws said that a woman's wealth should not be her husband’.
 Green’s prenuptial document served to protect her from such provisions . Green was married to a man who died in 2008 .
 The family moved to London, where Hetty invested in gold and in railroads . The family later moved to New York .
 The Panic of 1873 sent the Greens back to the U.S. where Hetty shifted course and began investing in real estate . The Greens moved to the United States after the collapse of Jay Cooke and Company collapsed .
 The Greens spent the next decade in Bellows Falls, Vermont, where Hetty Green's life ended . The Greens lived there for 10 years before they were forced to leave .
 Her son, Ned Green, suffered an injury from a sledding accident, and she allegedly refused at first to take him to a doctor . Hetty, always looking for ways to save money, allegedly refused to take her son to the hospital .
 Later, she realized that he needed professional help, but she determined to take him to a free clinic . She decided to take her son to the clinic, which she took him to .
 In 1885, Hetty Green and her husband separated when Edward Green’s business failed . Edward Green's business failed, and the couple divorced in 1885 . The couple had been married for more than 30 years .
 The Greens kept separate bank accounts, but both accounts were at the Cisco Bank . The Greens had separate accounts at Cisco Bank, which they used to keep separate accounts .
 Officials at Cisco demanded that Hetty make good on her husband’s debts . Cisco officials demanded that she pay back her husband's debts .
 Hetty had more than $25 million in money and securities at Cisco . She responded to their demands by threatening to remove all of it and take it to Chemical National Bank . She threatened to take the money to the bank .
 After two weeks of tantrums in the bank president’s office, Hetty Green paid the debt, threw her husband out of the house, and loaded a hansom cab with her money and drove to the bank .
 Cisco Bank collapsed as a result, and financier Jay Gould had to step in to prevent further financial panic . Jay Gould stepped in after the collapse .
 She knew how and when to start rumors that she was either going to sell or buy a particular stock, which would then cause investors to behave in predictable ways and make the price of the stock fluctuate in her favor . She knew exactly 67 business leaders and lawyers how to make the rumors
 The "witch" had other tricks up her sleeve to insure that her money remained her own . But the “witch’s” money was never found .
 She wore the same clothes, an old-fashioned black dress, day in and day out . She wore it out in the most of her life .
 The two sure things in life -- death and taxes -- finally got the better of Hetty Green .
 Sylvia and Ned Green had to pay $50,000 in taxes on their mother’s estate . Sylvia Green's mother died in 2008 .
 The Story of Twelve Significant Fortunes from the Renaissance to the Present Day. The Story . of Twelve significant Fortunas from the . Renaissance . from the 16th century to the 21st century. The story of the Renaissance is told in a book called The Renaissance .
 In November 1997, businesswoman Rebiya Kadeer launched her “Thousand Mothers Movement” to advance the economic opportunities of Uyghur women at her store in Urumqi, Xinjiang Uyaghur Autonomous Region .
 The ‘Thousand Mothers’ met again in December to hear Kadeer lecture on the social and cultural power of women . She wants Uyghur mothers to gain much needed business education and experience .
 The ‘Thousand Mothers’ reconvened later the same month, but in February 1998, government authorities froze the organization’s financial assets, and the group disbanded . The group was frozen in 1998 .
 A businesswoman since she was a teenager, Kadeer, also known as the “millionaire woman of Xinjiang,” has been in prison since August 1999 . She is under the charge of providing secret information to foreigners . She was a businesswoman and businesswoman .
 Amnesty International has documented Kadeer’s plight . The human rights organization has documented the plight of the man .
 Silk trader Kadeer was born to a barber and used to earn her living by smuggling and by washing and ironing clothing . Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region’s richest entrepreneur described by Wall Street Journal reporter .
 Chen became a success by selling lambskin hats in Xinjiang Province . She then decided to go into trade with other Chinese provinces, Chen said .
 As of 1994, the Muslim businesswoman owned eight companies, including her flagship Xinjiang Akida Industry and Trade Company . She was born in Xinjiang, Xinjiang .
 Xinjiang Uyghur (sometimes spelled Uighur or Uygur) Autonomous Region borders Mongolia to the northeast; Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan to the northwest; Afghanistan to the southwest; and the Chinese provinces of Gansu and Qinghai
 Xinjiang was on the Silk Road, an ancient trade route that connected the Middle East and Europe with China . Xinjiang is on the ancient Silk Road - a trade route between China and Europe . The region is now home to the U.S.
 Kublai Khan , founder of the Mongol, or Yuan Dynasty, conquered the territory in the 13th century . Kublia Khan conquered the region in the 14th century and ruled it for centuries .
 Xinjiang came under the control of the Qing Dynasty in the 18th century . Xinjiang became a Chinese province in 1884 . It is now Xinjiang province of China .
 Semi independent warlords dominated Xinjiang’s government until the Communist Revolution in 1949 . Semi-independent warlords ruled Xinjiang from the 1950s to the 1960s . The region has been plagued by ethnic unrest in recent years .
 Xinjiang Autonomous Region with its capital city located at Urumqi, home to about a million inhabitants . In 1955, Xinjiang became known as the Xinjiang Region .
 China has come under severe criticism for its treatment of ethnic minorities living in China, particularly the Uyghur population . Over the past decade, China has been criticized for its harsh treatment of minorities living there .
 There are more than 40 different ethnic groups living in Xinjiang Province . The Uyghur people constitute approximately half of the population . There are over 40 different groups living there .
 Chinese government accused of relocating Han Chinese people to Xinjiang, in an effort to dominate the Uyghur population . Xinjiang has been the site of industrialization and the discovery of zinc, lead, copper and tungsten .
 Rebiya Kadeer was married to Sidik Rouzi at the age of 16; the couple had 10 children . Rebiiya was married .
 Kadeer began her business career by selling children’s clothing out of her home . She now runs a successful clothing company .
 She dabbled in a number of other business ventures, including a successful fur retail outlet . She has also had a successful fashion store in London .
 A seven-story building, known by Urumqi inhabitants as ‘the Kadeer building’ has dominated the city’s skyline since 1992 . The building is known as “Kadeer Building’ by inhabitants as a seven-floor building .
 Two years later, Kadeer could boast a total of eight businesses under her control . Two years on, she was able to control eight of her businesses .
 Kadeer began trading in the newly established autonomous republics as well as the U.S.R. when it was formed .
 In 1995, she was elected delegate to the U.N. Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing . She is a member of the International Women's Union .
 In March 1997, Rebiya Kadeer waited at the airport for her flight to Kazakhstan, where she had hoped to conduct some business . She had planned to conduct business .
 The previous year, Sidik Rouzi had written antigovernment editorials in the newspaper . He left for the United States, where he was granted asylum . Rouzi's husband had written anti-government editorials for the paper .
 The Chinese government accused Rouzi of fomenting support for the separation of Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region from the People’s Republic of China . Rouzi has been accused of inciting support for separation from the PPPI .
 Five of Kadeer and Rouzi’s children emigrated to the U.S. soon after . Five of the couple's children were born in the United States .
 On August 11, 1999, the Chinese government authorities arrested Kadeer in Urumqi . She was on her way to meet with members of the U.S. Congressional Research Service .
 Amnesty International considers her a prisoner of conscience . Rights group says her rights to freedom of expression and association have been needlessly restricted .
 Belva Ann Bennett McNall was an American lawyer and political activist . Lockwood embodied the ideal of lifelong learning .
 The undercurrent of her life’s work was the righting of social injustices . Her life-work was to righting social injustice, she said .
 She had discovered that as a woman, she made half as much money teaching school as her male colleagues did . As a teacher, she was paid half as little as they did as their male colleagues .
 Four years later, she married a sawmill operator and farmer, Uriah McNall . She met and married him four years later . She is now married to a man who she met at a farm .
 Belva Lockwood was the first female lawyer to practice before the U.S. Supreme Court . Lockwood died in 1946 at the age of 92 .
 Belva Lockwood died in a sawmill accident in 1853, leaving her husband to raise their only child, Laura, by herself . Lockwood earned her bachelor’s degree at Genesee College in 1854 .
 Lockwood became an education reformer after hearing Susan B ANTHONY lecture on women’s rights at a teachers’ conference . Lockwood was inspired by Susan B. Anthony's lecture .
 Lockwood opened one of the first coeducational academies in the nation's capital . Lockwood moved to Washington, D.G. after the end of the G.C. War .
 In her spare time, she attended public hearings, congressional debates, political rallies, and trials .
 Becoming interested in the nature of political power, she decided to pursue a law degree . She decided to focus on the role of power in politics . She is now a lawyer .
 Ezekiel Lockwood, a Baptist minister and dentist, agreed to take over operating her school . Lockwood is a dentist and minister who has agreed to run the school . The idea was feasible, Lockwood says .
 She ran into a brick wall when she could not find a law school in Washington, D.C., that would admit a female student . She says she was disappointed that she couldn't find a place to study law in Washington .
 Samson apparently only thought of women in relation to how they affected men . Samson apparently could only think of women only as women . Samson thought of how women affected men. Samson apparently didn't think of how men affected him .
 As a law student, Lockwood cofounded the first suffrage organization in the nation’s capital . Lockwood lobbied for passage of legislation to liberalize the property rights of women .
 When she completed her studies, in 1873, the school tried to deny all female graduates their degrees . The school was trying to deny women all the right to graduate from university .
 The women were told that the male students did not want to graduate with their female counterparts . They were told they would graduate together if they did not .
 In one of her most famous cases, Lockwood won a $5 million United States land claim settlement in favor of the Eastern Cherokee Indians . Lockwood was a pioneer of Native American law .
 She fought for the right of women to try cases in state and federal courts throughout the nation . She also fought for women to be allowed to have a voice in the courtroom .
 Lockwood is considered the first ‘viable’ female presidential candidate in the U.S. Victoria WOODHULL ran in 1872 . Lockwood ran in the same year as Victoria .
 The U.S. Constitution requires a president to be over the age of 35 . Woodhull was under 35 at the time, and she was in jail during much of her campaign .
 Lockwood added the cause of world peace to the long list of social injustices for which she fought, until ill health caught up with her . Lockwood fought for world peace until she died at the age of 92 .
 Lukens achieved a remarkable degree of success against formidable odds at a time when most women ran households instead of businesses . Lukens' success was a remarkable feat for Lukens, who ran a successful family business .
 Lukens’s role in industry brought her personal satisfaction and wealth, but it also had national consequences as well . Lukens: ‘I’m not just a woman, but a woman’. I’ll be a woman in the U.S.
 Lukens’s company, Brandywine Iron Works, benefited from—and helped propel—the Industrial Revolution in the early national period of U.S. history . Lukens's company helped propel the Industrial Revolution .
 Rebecca Pennock was born in Chester County, Pennsylvania, on January 6, 1794 . Rebecca was the daughter of Martha Webb and Isaac Pennock .
 Isaac Pennock operated the Federal Slitting Mill at Bucks Run in Chester County, Chester County . The mill was used to make money from the federal government .
 Pennock had a knack for correctly prejudging the course that the history of his country would take, a trait that his daughter inherited .
 He knew that after independence and the Revolutionary War won, the new nation might no longer rely on goods from England . But he knew that, after independence, it might not be the case .
 Industrialists needed to produce goods for growing markets within the U.S. In addition, they knew that industrialists would need to produce more goods .
 Pennock met another businessman, Jesse Kersey, in 1810, who agreed to a partnership . Pennock and Kersey met in the early 1800s, and Pennock married in 1815 .
 Kersey’s fatherin-law, Moses Coates, sold property to the two men that they used to expand and convert a sawmill into an iron manufactory . Kersey and Coates converted the sawmill to an iron manufacturing facility .
 Brandywine Iron Works and Nail Factory are supplying builders with iron nails . The partners have been supplying the nails to their customers .
 Isaac and Martha Pennock’s house in Chester County included nine children . Rebecca Pennock was the oldest surviving child . Rebecca was the youngest surviving child in the family .
 The Pennocks’ Quaker household emphasized hard work and learning for both sexes . The Pennock family was Quaker members of a Quaker family .
 Rebecca had several years of education at private academies, beginning at the age of 12 . Rebecca is now in a relationship with the Duchess of Cambridge .
 Her favorite subjects at school were chemistry, French and chemistry . Her iron company was founded in 1903 . The company went on to win the world's largest market share of iron .
 Isaac Pennock took his eldest daughter with him to Philadelphia in 1810 . Pennock's purchase of Coates’s land necessitated a business trip to Philadelphia .
 Rebecca and Lukens were married in 1813 . Lukens was the first couple to marry Rebecca in the same year . Rebecca died in 1812 .
 Lukens gave up his medical practice to join his father-in-law in the iron business . Lukens joined his father in-law's iron business in the 1970s .
 Lukens foresaw the growing demand for iron boilerplates, which were used with steam engines . Lukens proved himself himself an able industrialist .
 James Watt invented the steam engine in 1769, which revolutionized transportation systems throughout the industrializing world . Watt's invention revolutionized the transportation system throughout the world .
 Steam engines utilize boilers, metal containers in which a liquid is heated and changed into steam, to propel turbines that drive engines . Steam engines are powered by boilers that heat a liquid and change it into steam .
 Lukens converted the Brandywine mill from a nail to a boilerplate factory . Lukens wisely converted the  mill into a boiler plate factory .
 The first iron-hulled vessel in the Unites States, the Codorus, ordered plates from the Brandywine firm .
 Isaac Pennock died in 1824 and left an ambiguous will that did not clearly name an heir to his estate . Rebecca Lukens was haunted by the will that haunted her for almost the rest of her life . Lukens is the daughter of Pennock's wife, Rebecca .
 Charles Lukens died the following year, when she was pregnant with their sixth child . The following year she became pregnant with the couple's first child . Charles died when the couple was in the middle of their pregnancy .
 The conversion in Brandywine mill had left the company heavily in debt . The conversion left the Brandywins in debt, leaving the company in deep debt .
 Given the uncertainty regarding exactly who held title to the company, it may well have seemed that the best and easiest thing for Rebecca to do would be to sell the whole lot to the highest bidder . Rebecca is currently the CEO of the company .
 On his deathbed, her husband had begged her to continue his iron-making legacy . Her husband had asked her to carry on with his legacy .
 She had a brother-in-law, Solomon Lukens, who was willing to oversee production at the mill . In addition to the mill, she also had a son, Solomon .
 Lukens faced a formidable task of transportation, which also became the very means by which she would prove her metde as an industrialist . Lukens was the first woman to become a successful industrialist in Europe .
 In the pre-railroad era, waterways provided cheap and quick transport, but only during temperate weather . Waterways provided cheap transport, only to be carried out in temperate conditions .
 In winter months when rivers froze over, Lukens had to move her product overland . Lukens paid teamsters $4 a ton to move the product, paying them $4 per ton .
 The problem was solved beginning in the 1830s, when rail lines were established . It was solved in the 18th century, with the help of rail lines and other rail lines .
 With rail transport, Lukens could expand her customer base beyond the 75-mile radius that transportation problems and costs had held her to in earlier times . Lukens hopes to expand her business with rail transport to 75 miles from her home .
 The railways solve her transportation problem, they also became her newest customer . The railways became her latest customer .
 Early rail systems also depended upon iron boilerplates . Early rail lines also depended on iron boiler plates .
 Lukens’s foresight, Brandywine began manufacturing boilerplates for steam locomotives . Lukens' foresight was that Brandywife would manufacture boilerplates .
 By 1844, Brandywine produced boilerplates for ship and rail manufacturers all up and down the northeastern seaboard, and in New Orleans .
 Lukens received a generous inheritance and clear title to the company . In 1853, the court case involving her father’s will finally ended, and Lukens was awarded a large inheritance . Lukens died in 1853 .
 "There was difficulty and danger on every side,” Rebecca Lukens admitted toward the end of her life . Lukens: “There was trouble and danger ... every side"
 Sandra Day O’Connor became the first woman appointed to the United States Supreme Court in 1981 . Sandra Day passed the bar examination in the state of California in 1952 . O'Connor was the first female Supreme Court justice in the country .
 National Archives. the most prestigious law firms in the state . The law firm is one of the state's most prominent law firms .
 The only “opportunity” she received, however, was an offer to be a legal secretary, not a lawyer . She said she was offered an opportunity to be an attorney, not an attorney .
 Sandra Day O’Connor went on to become the first woman to serve as justice of the United States Supreme Court . She was appointed by President Ronald Reagan in 1981 . O'Connor was the first female Supreme Court justice .
 Being a woman had placed obstacles in her career path, O’Connor has not been a feminist justice . Despite the fact that being a woman has placed obstacles, she was not a feminist .
 At least one court watcher views O’Connor’s voting record on the bench as colored more by her identity as a westerner than as a woman .
 Sandra Day grew up on the Lazy B Ranch on the Arizona—New Mexico border . The ranch had been in her family's hands since 1881 . Sandra Day was born March 26, 1930 .
 Day in her childhood lived in a ranch house that had no electricity or running water . Day lived in the ranch house with no running water and no electricity . Day says she still struggles to find a way to survive .
 By the time she left for school, she was branding cattle and fixing fence lines . She was branding livestock and fixing fences when she left school .
 Sandra lived with her grandmother in El Paso, Texas, and attended the private Radford School for Girls . Her parents decided that schools in rural Arizona would hinder their obviously bright daughter . Sandra graduated from Austin High School in Texas .
 She enrolled in law classes even before she graduated and, in 1952, finished her law degree . She completed her degree in 1952 .
 Her 73 BUSINESS LEADERS AND LAWYERS graduating class included future Supreme Court Justice William H Rehnquist, who finished first place . Her 73 business leaders and lawyers graduated from Harvard University .
 Day accepted a position as deputy county attorney in San Mateo, California, until her husband, John Jay O’Connor, finished his law degree at Stanford .
 Sandra O’Connor spent much of the next few years raising her three boys in Phoenix, Arizona . When the couple returned to the U.S. in 1957, they relocated in Phoenix . Sandra O'Connor's three boys were raised in Phoenix by her husband .
 O’Connor and another attorney opened a law office in suburban Maryvale, Arizona, where she worked part-time . She also served on a county zoning appeal board and became active in local Republican politics .
 Governor Jack Williams appointed her to fill a state Senate seat that had been vacated . She was appointed to fill the vacant seat in the state Senate .
 In 1972, Republican colleagues chose her to become their majority leader in the Arizona State Senate . It was an honor never before bestowed upon a female legislator .
 Two years later, political pollsters told Ronald Reagan that there was a distinct lack of support for him among female voters . Ronald Reagan was the candidate for the 1980 presidential campaign .
 Reagan promised that, if elected, he would appoint a female Supreme Court justice . To appease them, Reagan promised to appoint a woman .
 He made good on that promise, and the United States Senate gave its unanimous consent to her nomination in 1981 . She was nominated by President Richard Nixon .
 Sandra Day O’Connor will be a judge in the U.S. Supreme Court . Sandra Day Day O'Connor has been a judge for more than 20 years .
 O’Connor had been a founder of both the Arizona Women Lawyers Association and the National Association of Women Judges . O'Connor was a founding member of both Arizona women lawyers and the national association of women judges .
 She had fought to insure women’s equal access to the bar in Arizona . She had been an early supporter of the Equal Rights Amendment to the U.S. Constitution .
 She backed away from her position regarding the ERA when Arizona’s two Republican senators came out against it . However, she backed up from her original position when Arizona's two Republican Senators came out .
 First introduced into the U.S. Congress in 1923, it was finally approved by the United States Senate 49 years later in March 1972 .
 It fell short of the requisite 38 states needed to ratify by 1982 and has not been resurrected since . The bill was passed in 1982 but has not since been resurrected .
 By and large, however, conservatives have approved of the O’Connor appointment .
 She voted with the majority to strike down the core of the federal Brady Act . The Brady Act requires background checks on prospective gun purchasers . Furthermore, she voted against the Brady Act requiring background checks .
 States’ rights, law and order, pro-gun legislation are all hot-button issues in the U.S. intermountain West . Conservative politics are the order of the day .
 Sandra Day O’Connor has blazed a trail for women all across the U.S. Regardless of how she votes in the Supreme Court, however, she has been a trailblazer for women everywhere .
 In 1997, she earned the American Bar Association Medal, the aba’s highest honor . She earned the award in 1997 .
 Omu Okwei wore regalia of ivory bracelets and anklets, strings of coral beads, a gilt-edged crown, and a rich velvet gown with a floral imprint . Okwei was crowned Market Queen in Onitsha, Nigeria, in 2007 .
 Okwei's stellar reputation as a fair-minded businesswoman explains her ascension to the station she had achieved . The fortune amassed by Okwei, coupled with her stellar reputation, explains her rise .
 Okwei's fortune represents the resilience of traditional tribal culture in Nigeria . European businessmen attempted to alter the primacy of women’s roles in trade in the country . Okwei also represents Nigeria's resilience of tribal culture .
 Omu Okwei was elected Market Queen and president of the Council of Mothers . The council of Mothers was a political and economic powerhouse that determined trade relations, settled disputes, determined prices, and oversaw the general welfare of the village . Okwei is the Market Queen of the Village .
 Omu Okwei stood as a symbol of continued female control of the local economy . The presence of British tradesmen in Nigeria reduced the power of the Council of Mothers in Nigeria .
 British authorities first annexed the former Nigerian capital of Lagos in 1861 . Lagos was first annexed by the British authorities in 1861.
 British merchants opened Nigeria's interior to the busy port trade along Africa’s gold coast . The development of cash as a medium of exchange, and the building of roads and railroads to enhance commercialization .
 Nigerian men acted as agents between European traders and interior producers . The development of trade routes resulted in European businessmen conducting transactions with producers, eliminating the need for middlemen .
 As the agriculture-based economy shifted gradually to supporting manufacturing and industry, women lost much of their economic control . However, as the economy shifted to support manufacturing, women have lost much economic control.
 In 1916, control of Onitsha’s market was transferred from the Council of Mothers to the Town Council . In fact, in 1916, in fact, it was transferred to the Onitshha Town Council. The council took over control of the market in 1916 .
 Okwei was born in the bustling trade town of Ossomari to a regal family of potentates who had been successful traders for generations . He was born to a royal family of successful traders .
 Her father, Osuna Afubeho, descended from King Nzedegwu, won admiration as a warrior . In addition, her father was a warrior who won admiration for his bravery .
 Nzedegwu negotiated commercial treaties with British traders in 1854 . He later invited Catholic missionaries to Ossomari . He invited them to meet Catholic missionaries .
 Okwei’s maternal great-grandfather arranged treaties between the British and the village of Abo in the 1830s .
 Omu Okwei rose from humble beginnings, primarily because of the ire her marriages evoked among her family . Despite her formidable background, she rose from modest beginnings to formidable success .
 Okwei Okwei married Joseph Allagoa in 1888 . After a four-year apprenticeship under her aunt, she learned the important language of trade . She learned the trade trade from her aunt .
 Under Igbo custom, women may not inherit property except through the dowry . Women may not be allowed to inherit property unless they receive a dowry from their mother .
 Okwei’s parents did not approve of Allagoa, Okwei began her adult life with no capital . Okwei's parents did, as well as her parents, she had no money .
 Allagoa was one of the traditional middlemen that conducted business arrangements between Europeans and interior producers . The Britishowned Royal Niger Company seized control of trade along the Niger River in 1903 .
 Okwei’s first marriage, which produced one son, dissolved within the year . Okwei's first marriage produced one child .
 Okwei Okwei made the best of a bad situation by starting a business on her own . Okwei started a business in her hometown in Nairobi, Kenya .
 Through Allagoa, she made valuable contacts with European traders and African agents . She also made contacts with African agents in Africa .
 She bought an assortment of food items in exchange for imported goods that she bought from agents on credit . She bought the items on credit and bought them on credit from agents .
 She sold the food to consumers at premium 75 BUSINESS LEADERS AND LAWYERS prices . She made good on the loan in addition to securing a tidy profit for herself .
 Okwei married a man named Opene, the son of a wealthy woman from Abo, in 1895 . Okwei was married to Opene's son, Opene . Opene was a wealthy Abo woman who lived in Abo .
 Okwei’s relatives did not approve of the match . Opene was not of royal stock, they reasoned, and he had no means of making a living . Okwei's relatives didn't approve of Opene's marriage .
 The marriage proved beneficial to Okweis business aspirations . Nevertheless, the marriage proved to be a success story .
 Okwei expanded her business to include local goods, tobacco, and cotton . Okwei now sells local and imported goods .
 By 1915, she had overcome her initial lack of capital and began carefully reinvesting her profits through shrewd—if not exploitative—means . By 1915 she had invested her profits in a series of ways .
 In some cases, Okwei "adopted" her servants and gave them to businessmen in marriage . Okwei gave the servants away from her servants to get married .
 She gained ‘most-favored’ status in business transactions she conducted . Through these arrangements, she gained “most’tavored” status .
 By the 1930s, Onitsha, too, gained similar ‘most-favored’ status as a trade center, largely through the Okweis empire . By the 1940s, it had similar “most- favored” status .
 Omu Okwei testifies to the ability of smart businesswomen to continue to play a key role in Nigerian commerce . Despite the increasing control English businesses wielded over the Nigerian economy, Omu's career continues .
 Okwei refused to adopt the Christian ways and urged her constituents to heed the Igbo traditions . She urged them to heed her Igbo tradition .
 She herself used traditional charms that promoted good health and profitable trade .
 Onitsha’s inhabitants erected a life-size marble statue of the Market Queen to mark her death in 1943 .
 Pedersen was honored again in 1971 when she became the first woman judge on the European Court of Human Rights . The court was established in 1950 to enforce certain rights outlined in the 1948 U.N. Universal Declaration of Human rights .
 Pedersen continually climbed up the ladder throughout her career in government and politics . Pedersen continued to climb the ranks of politicians and politicians throughout her life .
 Pedersen served on the U.N. Commission on the Status of Women . Pedersen was a member of the United Nations Commission on Women's Rights .
 Her career culminated with an invitation to serve on the European Court of Human Rights . She was invited to serve as a member of the court .
 To practice law in Denmark, she had to have secured a letter of appointment from the minister of justice, to have graduated from a Danish university, and to have three years practical training .
 Denmark’s government, and its legal system, has been considered one of the most liberal in 19th-century Europe . Denmark's government and legal system is considered liberal in the 19th century .
 Denmark became a constitutional monarchy in 1849, when the nation adopted its first written constitution . Denmark is now a state of constitutional monarchy . Denmark's first constitution was adopted in 1839 .
 The document mandated representative government based on a judicial branch that operated independent courts, and a legislative branch in which authority rested jointly in the king . Until 1955 women could not ascend the throne; Queen Margrethe II has ruled the nation since 1972 .
 In the third executive branch of gov76 BUSINESS LEADERS AND LAWYERS ernment, the crown shares power with cabinet ministers . The crown is the most powerful and most powerful of the three branches of government .
 Helga Pedersen held the post of minister of justice from 1950 to 1953 . She served in the Folketing from 1953 to 1964 . She was the first woman to hold the post in Denmark .
 Pedersen worked on behalf of prison and penal reform . Pedersen also worked on improvement in the legal status of women in prison and prison .
 Denmark’s Equal Rights Council has been to eliminate discrimination based on sex in Danish political and social life .
 During economic recessions, unemployment rate for women is usually about twice that of men . Women are generally paid less than men . Unemployment rate for men is about twice the rate of women .
 Helga Pedersen's interest in human rights grew out of her work in women’s rights . Pedersen was born in Copenhagen, Denmark, in 1961 .
 Danish ombudsman is appointed by the Folketing to investigate citizens’ complaints against actions or decisions made by the government . Human rights in Denmark are enforced by the ombudsman, who is appointed to investigate complaints .
 The idea of an ombudsman originated in Sweden in 1809 and has spread to other European countries and Japan . The ombudsman is a non-partisan body of independent citizens .
 The ombudsman generally deals with allegations regarding police actions, prosecuting attorneys, or judges . It deals with matters such as housing, taxation, welfare rights, and voting .
 The ombudsman may dismiss the case, or seek to correct it, or may recommend prosecution . The case may be dismissed, or the case is cleared .
 The proposal to appoint an Ombudsman marks a new departure in Danish law . Danish law proposes to appoint a new Ombudsman . The proposal is a first step in Danish legislation .
 Although the Bill is short and intelligible, it has to be realized that its consequences will be far-reaching, not only for those civil servants and others who are covered by the Bill, but for the rule of law in society in general .
 Pedersen's experiences in the area of women’s rights together with her legal expertise and judicial experiences, she was a natural for the appointment to the United Nations’ Commission on the Status of Women . Given Pedersen’ experiences, Pedersen is a natural choice for the
 The UN was formed in 1945 during the final phases of World War II . It was formed to “save succeeding generations from the scourge of war . . . to reaffirm faith in human rights ...” according to its charter .
 The UN Commission on Human Rights was chartered by Eleanor ROOSEVELT in 1946 . The Commission developed an informal Bill of Human Rights and a separate Commission on the Status of Women .
 Helga Pedersen has also served on numerous committees in the Danish Eolketing, including those on higher education issues and copyright infringements . Pedersen is also a member of the committee on copyright infringement and copyright infringement .
 Mary Reibey became Australia’s most successful businesswoman of the 19 th century . Mary Reiberey was the most successful female businesswoman in Australia .
 Her husband, Thomas Reibey, began a series of successful entrepreneurial adventures during the Reibeys’ marriage . The couple has been married for eight years .
 Mary Reibey proved her business acumen by improving her husband’s companies and starting a few of her own . When her husband died, Mary started her own company .
 Great Britain acquired colonies all over the world, including Australia . Great Britain, as it was known after 1707, acquired colonies around the world .
 Britain’s decision to occupy Australia was partly to compensate for her loss of the American colonies, where it had been sending convicts, after the Revolutionary War . Partly to control access to sea routes from Europe to Asia to Asia and partly to control .
 In 1786, the British government began sentencing its criminals to “transportation,” or deportation to Australia . The British government in 1786 began sentencing criminals to "transportation," or deportation, to Australia.
 Australia became a nation made up of convicts from Great Britain . It was made up from convicts . Australia's convicts were convicts of Great Britain.
 Mary Haydock was born in Bury, Lancashire, England, on May 5, 1777, and lost her parents at an early age . She was born with her parents in 1777 and died in 1783 .
 Mary chafed under her grandmother’s care and soon sought an escape . Her grandmother reared her, but Mary wanted an escape from her grandmother's care . Mary was born Mary, a baby girl with a baby sister .
 Haydock’s guardian sent her to work for another family as a servant girl . Attempting to rein in her granddaughter's wild ways, she was sent to work as a slave .
 First, though, she knew that she could not easily handle a horse while wearing a long dress .
 In 1790, she stole a horse from a nearby stable and galloped away . So, she dressed in a pair of trousers and a shirt, she took the horse from the stable .
 Her plans were foiled when the owners of the stable caught up with her soon after . Her plans to take advantage of the horses were thwarted by the owners .
 Reibey kept her true identity a secret by pretending to be a boy, James Burrow . During her detainment and subsequent imprisonment, she was imprisoned . She was imprisoned in 1944 .
 Four months later, she was sentenced to seven years “transportation,” she gave up the pretense . She gave up her pretense after she was found guilty .
 Initially, Mary Haydock found herself in much the same situation she had been in back home . Initially, she was in the middle of a difficult situation .
 A sentence of transportation meant that she would perform a service for a family in Australia . She went to work as the nursemaid for the family of Major Francis Grose, in Sydney, Australia .
 She met Thomas Reibey, a junior officer on the commercial ship Britannia . She met him when she was on board the Britannia in the 1930s .
 After his term of service ended, Mary and Thomas Reibey moved to a farm along the Hawkesbury River . After his service, they moved to an estate along the river .
 Reibey’s shipping business expanded to include an import trade company as well as a shipping company .
 He and his partner, Edward Wills, traded coal, cedar, furs, and animal skins . He and Wills traded coal and cedar .
 The two men expanded their trade network to include the Pacific Islands and, from 1809 on, Ghina and India . From 1809 onwards, they expanded their network to the Pacific and Ghina .
 Mary Reibey’s friends told her that she would have to be “tough and competitive” if she wanted to continue her husband's businesses . Mary's friends said that she had to be tough and competitive to succeed .
 Reibey has already proved herself capable of running her husband's firms . She has proved herself to be a successful businesswoman .
 She did not merely continue his business ventures; instead, she improved them . She continued to work in her hometown in New York City .
 She opened new warehouses, bought more ships, and invested in lucrative properties in Sydney . She has also invested in Sydney's Sydney Harbour .
 By 1820, Mary Reibey was the wealthiest and most successful businesswoman in Australia . She was one of the wealthiest women in the country . Her business made her the richest and wealthiest woman in Australia's history .
 By the late 1820s, she retired and began doing philanthropic work in Sydney . She died in 1831 .
 In 1845, Reibey’s colorful past cropped up when people confused her with another Australian woman, Margaret Catchpole, whose biography had just been published . People confused the two women .
 Margaret Catchpole managed to escape prison by scaling 20-foot walls and then stowing away on board a ship bound for Sydney in 1801 . Catchpole, however, escaped prison and stowed away on a ship in Sydney, Australia .
 It would be another 30 years before another British woman would graduate from an English law school and be admitted to the bar .
 Sorabji went on to practice law as it related to women and children . Like many other professional women of her time, her careers centered on children .
 She founded the Court of Wards in India where she served as a legal adviser from 1904 to 1923 . She also served as legal adviser to the British Empire .
 Sorabji’s parents brought their daughter up in a liberal, well-to-do Christian household . She was brought up in an affluent, liberal household .
 Missionary Lady Cornelia Ford converted Sorabji’s mother to Christianity from Hinduism . Missionary lady Cornelia . Ford converted her mother to Christian from Hindu .
 Persian prophet Zoroaster converted after reading the Bible in 1840 . Zoroaster on notion of humanity’s ability to choose between good and evil . He converted to Christianity in 1840.
 Sorabji’s family, consisting of her parents and eight brothers and sisters, lived in a Parsee community near Bombay, India . Her family lived in an area known as the Parsee, India, near Bombay .
 Despite animosity from her professors, Sorabji managed to climb to the head of her class . She received the highest grade on the First Year Arts Examination . Despite animosity, she managed to get the highest grades on the exam paper .
 She had to rely on the largesse of a friend to arrange a fellowship to Gujarat Gollege in Ahmadabad, north of Bombay . The all-male college is an all-female college .
 While still in her teens, she began lecturing in English language and literature at Gujarat University .
 She commented that she thought it would do Indian men good to be ruled by a woman for a change .
 Honours School of Law at Oxford was open to women at the start of her career . She changed her course of study to study law at the university . She studied English literature and English literature before studying law .
 She hoped that a degree in law would ultimately help her advance the rights of women in India . She said she hoped that she would be able to advance the women's rights .
 Jowett arranged for Sorabji to take the advanced examination to receive the bachelor of civil law at Oxford by special decree in 1893 . Sorabjji took the advanced exam to receive a bachelor of the civil law degree .
 She had to take the exam at Somerville Gollege, isolated from the other law students . She was supervised by a warden .
 When she passed the exam, she was not allowed to take the bar exam . Instead obtained an apprenticeship at the firm of Lee and Pemberton in Lincoln’s Inn in London .
 She submitted a plan to protect the legal rights of women and their children living in purdah . The practice of seclusion for women was inaugurated by Muslims and adopted by many Hindus in India .
 Purdah is a Persian word meaning curtain or curtain separating the secluded female quarters from the rest of the house . The curtain is a curtain separating women from the other parts of the home .
 Purdah also refers to the veil worn to cover the face, or the upper end of the Hindu sari that is drawn over to cover it . The veil is worn to keep women from public view .
 In some places, especially northern India, women ride in compartments in trains and buses separately from men . Women ride in different compartments of trains, buses and trains in some places .
 Even a subtle gesture, such as a woman lowering her eyes to avoid a man’s glance, is considered appropriate behavior in cultures that practice purdah .
 Evidence suggests purdah already existed in India before the Muslim invasion of India in the 1500s . Many Hindu authors contend that Purdah came to India by way of the Muslim Mogul conquest of India .
 During British rule of India in the 19th and 20th centuries, strict adherence to the practice of purdah was the norm . Purdah is still a popular name in India today .
 Muslims claim that the practice protects women from being seen as sex objects . Western feminists decry the practice as keeping women out of public life and “in their place” Muslims say it protects women .
 They assert that purdah actually liberates women, because men respect them for their inner qualities rather than their physical beauty . They say men respect women's inner qualities, not their physical appearance .
 Cornelia Sorabji was appointed legal adviser on behalf of secluded women in the districts of Bihar, Bengal, Orissa, and Assam in 1904 . She was appointed as legal adviser to women in secluded districts .
 Before British rule ended and even after independence, women had only limited legal rights and control over property they held .
 A woman could not exercise property rights in the way a man could . They could not be appointed guardian of her children if her husband’s will stipulated against it . A man could not sell property unless it was deemed a necessity .
 Sorabji’s work in the Court of Wards helped women insure that what rights they did have were not compromised in cases of divorce and property disputes . Sorabjji's work helped women not compromise their rights in divorce or property disputes.
 Sorabji passed the bar exam in 1923, the year after women were first admitted to the English bar . She became a barrister and later became a lawyer .
 Unlike most of the women who lived in nations colonized by European countries, Sorabji was not in favor of Indian independence from Great Britain, which was achieved in 1947 . Unlike most other women in India who lived with European colonized nations, she was against independence .
 She explained Indian customs to an English audience in an interview with the BBC's India correspondent .
 India Calling and India Recalled recount her experiences as a lawyer in India . India Calling is India Calling, India Recalling is a popular documentary .
 Walker became arguably the first woman millionaire in United States history . Walker became, arguably, the first female millionaire in U.S. history. Walker became a millionaire in 2007 .
 Walker’s success illustrates the color blindness, and the gender blindness, of capitalism and free enterprise . Walker's success is against the backdrop of the Jim Crow South and the continued practice of lynching African Americans .
 Walker’s products were designed to make African Americans look more like people of European descent . Walker's business contributed to the sense that to be an African American was disadvantageous, she says .
 Sarah Walker was born Sarah Breedlove on December 23, 1867, in Delta, Louisiana . She was born to Owen and Minerva Breedlove, two emancipated slaves . Walker died in 1867 at the hands of freed slaves .
 The couple worked as sharecroppers on a cotton plantation in rural Louisiana . The couple's first marriage was a sharecropper . They later married and raised their own children .
 In 1878, the cotton crop failed, and a yellow fever epidemic spread over the delta country . The epidemic was the result of a cotton crop failure that led to the spread of yellow fever .
 Sarah fled from the sickness and joined her older sister in Vicksburg, Mississippi, where she earned a living as a domestic servant . Sarah's sister died of the sickness . Sarah was one of 80 business leaders and lawyers in the world .
 Moses McWilliams proposed to Sarah McWilliams at age 14 . She accepted his proposal as an escape from her overbearing brother-in-law .
 When the girl turned two, McWilliams suddenly died, possibly the victim of a lynching . McWilliams died when she was 2, possibly a victim of lynching.
 Sarah McWilliams vowed to give her daughter an education that she herself had never received . She vowed to help her daughter with an education she never received herself . Sarah's daughter was diagnosed with cancer at the age of 13 .
 Sarah worked as a laundress and domestic servant in St. Louis, Missouri, for the next 18 years . Sarah was a domestic servant and laundress for the rest of her life .
 In 1905, Lelia McWilliams graduated from Knoxville College; her mother was barely literate . McWilliams was born in Knoxville, Tennessee .
 As a washerwoman, Sarah spent hours leaning over a steaming washtub filled with hot water and chemical cleaning agents .
 She became convinced that the hair loss she began to notice was a result of her working conditions . The hair loss was caused by working conditions, she says .
 At home, she experimented with various chemicals that she hoped would restore hair growth . At home she experimented on various chemicals she hoped to use .
 Sometime between 1900 and 1905, she formulated a new product that she planned to market to black women . Many of whom were also domestics in St. Louis, she intended to market the new product .
 She kept the formula a secret, but most people assumed that the ingredient in it was sulphur . She kept it a secret .
 In 1906, Sarah moved to Denver, Colorado, where she married Charles Walker, a newspaperman . Sarah married Charles J Walker in 1906, and he died in 1953 .
 Walker's paper began to advertise Sarah’s product, and the advertisements offered a tonic that would improve hair growth boosted sales of the paper . Walker‘s paper started to advertise the tonic .
 Sarah realized that if such a comb could be made with a stronger material, it could be used to help the kinky hair of African Americans to look straighten . Walker combined the two products and dreamed up a marketing strategy, combining the tonic with the combs .
 When her business flourished in Denver, Walker realized that in a more populated area, it could expand even more . Walker moved to Indianapolis, Indiana, in order to expand her business even further .
 She recruited what she called “agent-operators, or specially trained salespeople, to accompany her as she pitched her products to black schools, churches, and clubs . She recruited them to pitch her products at black churches, schools, clubs .
 Segregation, Walker came to find out, benefited her business because it made it easier to hit customers where they lived . Segregation helped her business, Walker says .
 Walker began combining her business with philanthropic work after her divorce from Charles Walker in 1912 . Walker died in 1918 .
 Her agent-operators formed what were called Walker Clubs . The clubs competed with one another for prizes that Walker awarded to those who did the most charitable work .
 Walker handed $50 to each agent that had supported local churches or missionary societies . Walker handed out $50 for each agent who had supported missions .
 She had been a member of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People since living in Indianapolis . She had lived in Indianapolis, Indiana .
 She purchased an opulent estate called Villa Lewaro on the banks of the Hudson River . The estate is located in New York City .
 Three years later, on May 25, 1919, she died, the black female equivalent of the rags-to-riches, pull-yourself-up-by-your-bootstraps self-made American success story . She died three years later .
 Oprah Winfrey is the first woman to produce and own her own television talk show . Winfrey made television history when her company, HARPO Productions, Incorporated, began producing The Oprah Show .
 The Oprah Winfrey Show spawned the talk show craze in the late 1980s and 1990s on American radio and television . Winfrey was voted one of the most influential people in the world in 1996 .
 In addition to her business career, Winfrey is an accomplished actress . Winfrey has been married to Oprah Winfrey for more than 20 years .
 Orpah Winfrey was born January 29, 1954, to unwed teenagers Vernita Lee and Vernon Winfrey . She was raised on her grandmother’s pig farm in Kosciusko, Mississippi . Oprah was raised by her grandmother on the farm .
 Oprah's grandmother taught Oprah to read and write . Oprah began recitations of sermons in the area’s black churches when she was just three years old . Oprah was just 3 when she began reading sermons at her grandmother's house .
 From the age of six to 13, Winfrey lived in Milwaukee with her mother, where she suffered abuse and sexual molestation from her mother’s male friends and relatives . Winfrey was molested by her mother's male friends, relatives, she says .
 At 13, Winfrey ran away from home to escape the abuse of her childhood home . Winfrey gave birth to a premature baby that died at 13, after having given birth to the child .
 Authorities arranged for Winfrey to live with her father in Nashville, Tennessee . There were no beds left in the center, authorities arranged for her to live in a hotel room .
 Discipline at the home of Vernon Winfrey and his wife Zelma helped Oprah develop her potential in school . Oprah Winfrey was disciplined at home by her father and mother .
 After graduating in 1976, she moved to Baltimore, where she first coanchored WJZ-TV’s news and then hosted a television talk show .
 The show’s ratings skyrocketed, and Winfrey knew she had found her niche . Winfrey's show's ratings soared, and she knew it was her niche.
 In less than a year, the show became that city’s most-watched local program . Chicago. Chicago .
 The station increased the program to one hour and changed the name to The Oprah Winfrey Show . The show was later renamed The Oprah Show .
 In 1986, the show went into syndication; in 1987, it won three Daytime Emmy Awards . The show won three Emmy Awards in 1987; in 1986, it was syndicated .
 For her performance of Sofia, Winfrey won an Academy Award nomination in the category of best supporting actress . Winfrey also won an Oscar nomination for her performance in Sofia .
 In 1998, Winfrey tackled Toni Morrison’s book Beloved, a difficult book to transfer to film . Winfrey also tackled the novel Beloved in 1998 .
 Richard Wright’s classic novel Native Son is a movie adaptation of the novel . The film stars Thomas Thomas in a film adaptation of Richard Wright's classic novel .
 In 1988, Winfrey organized HARPO Productions, Incorporated, which gained ownership of The Oprah Winfrey Show from ABC television . Winfrey is a multi-millionaire philanthropist .
 Besides the television show, HARPO also produced a highly rated TV miniseries, Gloria Naylor’s The Women of Brewster Place, in which Winfrey also starred .
 HARPO also owns the rights to Kaffir Boy, an autobiography by South African writer Mark Mathabane . HARPO owns rights to the autobiography of South African author Mark Mathabaane .
 She worries that the genre has become too exploitative by only featuring sensationalistic topics . Still best known for her role as talk show host on The Oprah Winfrey Show, she worries that it's too much exploitative .
 Oprah Winfrey has published six books, including The Uncommon Wisdom of Oprah, Oprah, and Make the Connection . Winfrey is best known for her work in television, radio and radio .
 In 1999 she cofounded Oxygen Media, a company dedicated to producing cable and Internet programming for women . In 1999, she branched out into yet another medium when she founded the company .
 As a victim of the crime herself, her pleas have a particular poignancy . Her plea comes from the victim of a crime herself .
 She lobbied for and drafted the National Child Protection Act of 1994 . The act was signed by President Bill Clinton, signed by Bill Clinton .
 The act established a national registry of child abusers to help employers, child-care providers, and schools by screening out abusers . The act was established in 2007 .
 She lives in Chicago, where she contributes to local schools and battered women’s shelters .
 The life of Victoria Woodhull offers historians an opportunity to look at the evolution of the women’s movement in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . Victoria Claflin was a businesswoman, publisher, and feminist activist .
 She and her sister, Tennessee Celeste Claflin, proselylytized their feminist message in their magazine, Woodhull and Claflins Weekly . She and sister wrote the magazine and weekly magazine .
 Claflin and Woodhull also became the first professional women stockbrokers . Claflins and Woodlull were the first women to become a professional stockbroker .
 Victoria Woodhull was, by any measure, one of the most talked-about women of the 19th century . She was one of Britain's most famous women in the early years of the century . Her story will be told in a new documentary on her life on BBC Radio 4
 Perhaps her biggest success was her ability to enliven the debate over feminism . She was a pioneer of feminism in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Victoria Woodhull was the seventh child of Reuben ‘Buck’ Claflin and Roxanna ‘Roxanna’s parents . She was born in Homer, Ohio, on September 23, 1838 .
 Buck Claflin, an alcoholic, operated a mill in Homer, but he and his family were run out of town . Officials suspected he had set fire to his own business for the insurance money .
 The Claflin family traveled around the south and midwest with their medicine and fortune-telling show .
 Victoria and Tennessee's performances were central to the family’s business . The two girls demonstrated their telepathic and clairvoyant abilities . The girls performed for the family .
 Audiences paid to have their fortunes told and to have the girls resurrect the spirits of their departed loved ones through a seance, or spiritualist sitting . Audiences also paid for the girls to resurrect their deceased loved ones .
 At 15 Victoria married an alcoholic physician named Canning Woodhull, by whom she had a son and a daughter . At 15 she married Canning, a physician, and had two children .
 Tennessee Claflin concocted a ‘healing elixir’ that she sold on the side of her career .
 The traveling medicine and fortune-telling show thrived on the sisters’ performances . The family began appearing in larger midwestern cities such as Cincinnati and Chicago .
 Two years later, the sisters devised a new moneymaking scheme . It was an outgrowth of their careers in quackery .
 Victoria Woodhull was the first American woman to run for president . Cornelius Vanderbilt solicited her help in the campaign . She was a millionaire businessman .
 Cornelius Vanderbilt invested in Woodhull, Claflin & Company in September 1869 . Victoria and Tennessee opened the brokerage firm in 1869.
 After investing to the extent of several thousand shares in some of our principal stocks and selling others, they departed, the observed of all observers . They left the Wall Street in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 The Herald clearly did not expect women to know anything about the stock market, or to have any of their own money to invest .
 She meant for her financial endeavors to provide the backing for her political ambition, she said . She said she meant for the financial endeavor to provide for her ambition .
 Woodhull and Andrews preached communal child rearing and “free love,” the right of men and women to have as many sexual partners as they choose . In addition to women’s rights, they preached communal re-parenting and free love .
 In late 1870s, she moved briefly to Washington, D.C., where she lobbied for woman suffrage .
 She succeeded where Susan B ANTHONY and Elizabeth Cady STANTON had failed . She succeeded . Susan BANTHONY succeeded where she succeeded .
 On January 11, 1871, Woodhull addressed the House Judiciary Committee on the subject of woman suffrage . He articulates a radical means of implementing women’s rights .
 The suffrage movement, believing that it must retain respectability in order to be successful, distanced itself from Woodhull . The suffragist movement believed that it would be successful if it was successful .
 When Cornelius Vanderbilt remarried in 1870, he withdrew his support from her, and her brokerage floundered . Vanderbilt's widow died in 1881 .
 She began turning against Wall Street financiers by publishing Karl Marx’s Communist Manifesto in her newspaper Woodhull and Claflins Weekly .
 She was financially supporting her ill parents and former husband, Canning Woodhull . She was also financially supporting herself and her former husband .
 Just when her fortunes seemed at their lowest, however, Woodhull came up with another new scheme . Just when she was at her lowest, she decided to start a new scheme to help her family .
 She resurrected Woodhull and Claflins Weekly, which had stopped publication in 1872, in order to expose the love affair between Reverend Henry Ward Beecher and his partner, Elizabeth Tilton, both married to others .
 As word of the indiscretion spread, copies of Woodhull and Claflins skyrocketed . Copy sales skyrocketed after the scandal broke out .
 She demanded his admission of the affair and condemned him for refusing to condone free love . Instead, she demanded he admit to the affair .
 Woodhull claimed to have learned of the Beecher-Tilton affair through her own lover, none other than Elizabeth Tilton’s husband, Theodore. Theodore .
 Woodhull was arrested twice during the incident for publishing indecent material . He was later arrested for publishing the material .
 In 1877 Woodhull moved to England, where she married a prosperous banker, John Biddulph Martin, in 1881 . In 1881 she moved to London and married a wealthy banker .
 The Many Lives of Victoria Woodhull was published by Bridgehampton, N.Y.: Bridge Works Publishers, 1995 . She died of a heart attack in 1994 .
 Women’s historians have traditionally focused on political issues, such as woman suffrage . Historians in general tend to view the nation's politics as a nation's story . Women's historians have focused on issues such as women's rights and women's suffrage in the past .
 Beginning in the 1970s, many women's historians shifted the focus to social changes that affected women’s lives as much as politics .
 American reformer Amelia Bloomer pioneered a costume that was scandalous for the mid-19th century, pantaloons under a knee-length skirt . Historians brought birth control, entrepreneurship, and changes in fashion to the forefront of women’s history .
 Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division Division. full social equality.
 Amelia Bloomer was neither the originator nor the most vigorous proponent of women’s trousers . Bloomer's trousers were the first to be worn by women in the UK .
 Amelia's father worked as a clothier to support his wife and their children . Amelia’s father worked for a clothing company to support the family .
 At 22, Amelia met and married Dexter Bloomer, a newspaperman and lawyer . He would later collect and publish his wife’s writings . Amelia's writings were collected and published by her husband .
 In 1849, Amelia Bloomer founded her own temperance periodical called the Lily . The Lily was a temperance magazine .
 The temperance movement began in the 19 th century and culminated with passage of the 1918 Volstead Act, which prohibited the sale of alcoholic beverages . Temperance laws were passed in 1918 .
 In the antebellum period, convention held that it was improper for women to speak in public . Convention held that women were not allowed to speak .
 Temperance, abolition, and suffrage movements helped erase this taboo from American society . The temperance movement helped erase the taboo from society .
 Amelia Bloomer considered woman suffrage to be secondary to temperance . She considered women suffrage a secondary issue for temperance and women's rights . Bloomer herself considered the issue to be more important than temperance to women .
 In 1851, Bloomer donned the radical dress that would ultimately bear her name when she lectured on temperance . Bloomer wore the dress to lecture about temperance in 1851 .
 Elizabeth Smith Miller, daughter of Elizabeth Cady Stanton’s cousin Gerrit Smith, designed the costume . It consisted of a pair of Turkish-style full-legged trousers, topped with a short skirt .
 The Lily promoted the pants as a comfortable garment that would increase women’s mobility . The Lily promotes the pants to be comfortable .
 Bloomer became a celebrity, and circulation of her journal increased eightfold . Bloomer's journal became famous and her journal became a sensation .
 Bloomer grew cautious in the face of the sensation caused by the costume, and she stopped wearing it . Bloomer, however, grew cautious and stopped wearing the costume .
 She wanted to keep the focus of the public on temperance, she stated, not on herself as a public figure . She said she wanted the public to focus on the public's focus of temperance not herself .
 She could not print nor market the periodical from what was then a frontier outpost . The periodical was published in 18th century .
 She and her husband adopted two children and settled into their new home . She and their new family moved into a new home after adopting two children .
 President of Iowa Woman Suffrage Society in 1871 . Convinced that reform would never make a difference unless women had more political power .
 Her speeches on behalf of the fight to secure passage of Iowa’s 1873 law granting married women property rights helped to win the day . Her speeches helped secure passage .
 French fashion designer Coco Chanel designed clothes that matched a new era in women's lives . Chanel's clothes were designed to match the era of women's clothing .
 During World War I civilians in Europe and the U.S. were encouraged to aid the war effort . Women in the United States and Europe were encouraged by civilians to help in WWI .
 When the war ended, many women wanted to continue to contribute to society through working outside of the home . Coco Chanel gave them clothes that matched their new lives .
 Coco Chanel made a fortune bringing women’s fashions from the Victorian era to the modern era . Chanel is known for bringing women's fashion from Victorian to modern day .
 During the Victorian era, women wore clothes that kept their bodies shrouded in heavy dresses that covered everything from neck to ankle . The Victorian era was named after the influential British Queen Victoria .
 Even as women’s figures were to be completely covered, what she wore underneath actually accentuated, or highlighted, precisely what she was supposed to keep covered . Ironically, though, even as women's figure was to be covered, it was actually accentuating, or highlighting, precisely
 The corset, worn from the hips up to the nipples, effected the feminine ideal—the 18-inch waist and voluptuous chest—known as the hourglass figure . Corset is an undergarment similar to a girdle, only worn to the hips from the
 World War I did much to change fashions, and therefore lifestyles, of women . World War One was the first time women were allowed to wear a uniform .
 Women found restricted movement interfered with their ability to perform their work well . Women joined 89 FASHION DESIGNERS AND TRENDSETERS as nurses or industrial workers .
 Gabrielle Bonheur Chanel was born in Saumur, Maine-et-Loire, in central France, on August 19, 1883 . Her mother died when she was young, and her father disappeared after he deposited his daughters at an orphanage .
 While at the orphanage, Chanel learned to sew, and she spent weekends watching her aunt Julia decorate hats . Chanel's aunt Julia taught Chanel to sew .
 During her teenage years, Chanel worked in Deauville, France, on the north coast, at a hat factory . Chanel also worked at the factory during her time at the age of 16 .
 She attracted the attention of a young officer, Etienne Balsan, and soon became his mistress . She attracted her attention to the young officer and soon was his mistress. She was married to a young French officer .
 He helped her open her own millinery (an old-fashioned term for a ladies’ hat shop) in Compiegne, France .
 In 1919, after the war, Chanel founded a couture house on the rue Cambon, again with Balsan’s backing . The house was founded with the backing of the French couturist .
 Chanel invented and borrowed what would come to be known as the classic Chanel look .
 The credit for ridding the world of the corset belongs to a rival French designer, Paul Poiret . He abolished it in 1906 and cut his models’ hair in 1908 . The corset was abolished by a rival designer in 1906 .
 Chanel made these styles popular among ordinary women, not just Paris fashion models . The styles were made popular among women not only Paris models, but also ordinary women .
 She borrowed from men's fashions to enhance the new independence women were gaining throughout the world . And she borrowed from the men’s fashion .
 It seemed that in order to gain equality in a man’s world, women were going to have to start looking like them . It seemed to be that women would have to look like men .
 During the 1920s, with Chanel’s help, women shed the hourglass figure and exchanged it for no figure at all . Chanel's help, with the help of Chanel, helped women shed hourglass figures .
 From her English nephew she borrowed the man’s blazer, adopting the cuffed shirt and cuff links as well .
 In addition to the blazer, Chanel’s other fashion items imitated military clothing . The blazer was Chanel's first attempt at fashion .
 She adopted a pair of sailors’ pants, their pea jackets, striped maillots, and sailor hats . The 90-year-old has adopted a set of sailor hats for herself .
 The actress borrowed the essence of military clothing for everyday use . She adopted the fashions for women’s wear .
 Easy-care fabrics, previously considered ‘cheap, but ideal for the military, became fashionable among working women . The fabrics are now fashionable among women in the military .
 Gone were the stuffy Victorian dresses with the prudishness they implied . Gone, then, were the dresses with a thingy Victorian dress .
 After the war, during the “Jazz Age’s 1920s, and beyond, women were enjoying themselves, and their fashions exemplified this fact . After the anxieties of the war .
 Chanel popularized the suntan during the Victorian era . Chanel used to use parasols to shield their white skin from the sun .
 Chanel’s empire expanded from one couture house on the rue Cambon to eight houses . Chanel's empire expanded to eight couture houses in Paris .
 At her peak, in the 1950s, she was dressing the world, not only from the sales from her own lines, but by virtue of imitations, of which there were many . At the height of her career, she became a global fashion icon .
 Chanel did not object; it is, as she noted, it is a visible sign of success to be copied . Chanel says it is "a visible symbol of success" for success .
 By the 1930s, hemlines dropped again, and the worldwide economic depression meant that fewer and fewer women could buy Chanel’s fashions .
 When World War II broke out in 1939, Chanel spent the war years holed up in her Paris apartment .
 People were ready to cast off the sadness of the war years, and attention turned to casual fashions . Again, people were ready .
 Julia Child embarked on an extended tour to promote her new book The Way to Cook in 1989 . The 77-year-old food expert was an energetic, spunky bundle of delight . Julia Child is a celebrity chef and author .
 Julia Child’s cookbooks, television shows, and newspaper and magazine articles form the ingredients that helped change to the recipes and menus of American cooks all over the country . Julia Child's cookbooks and television shows helped change American cooking habits .
 Child’s notoriety encouraged other female cooks to take their acts out of the house and into the public realm . Child's notoriety has encouraged other women cooks to get involved in public .
 Julia Child remains one of the preeminent chefs in American history, and, ironically, a few women professionals in the field . Julia Child is one of America's most famous chefs . Child was born in New York City, New York, New Jersey .
 In the 19th century, the Victorian ‘separate sphere’ ideology held that women presided over the domestic sphere, including the kitchen, while men shaped the public realm .
 In the 19th century, most Americans ate food at home prepared by the housewife . Commercial or professional chefs served only the very wealthiest . Restaurants as we know them today were practically unknown .
 As the nation industrialized and leisure time increased, bars, taverns, nightclubs, and restaurants increased commensurately . Bars, restaurants, bars and bars were built in the 1930s .
 Most “better” restaurants hired professional male chefs who had been schooled in the culinary arts . Yet while women continued cooking in the home, most restaurants hired male chefs .
 Julia Child was inducted into the Culinary Institute Hall of Fame in 1993 . She was the first female cook to be honored by the institute .
 In the early years following World War II, social changes affected both what Americans ate and who did the cooking . Social changes were made in the wake of the war .
 Neighborhood butcher shops and bakeries gave way to supermarkets that offered “everything under one roof” and ways to save working mothers time in the kitchen . Neighborhoods were replaced by supermarkets with supermarkets that offer ‘everything under a roof’
 About 30 percent of the female population continued to work outside the home during the 1950s . Despite the pervasiveness of the . stay-at-home mom stereotype, about 30 percent .
 Frozen and canned food and TV dinners offered quick, easy meals to the harried housewife and working counterpart . TV dinners were popular in the 1950s and '60s .
 Julia Child introduced French cuisine into the American diet . She encouraged the savoring of well-prepared dishes in her cookbooks and television shows .
 Julia McWilliams’s childhood home differed markedly from the scenario described above . McWilliams' childhood home was the scene of a scene from his childhood home .
 She was born on August 15, 1912, to a well-to-do family in Pasadena, California, surrounded by servants .
 In 1930, McWilliams went to Smith College, where she majored in history . McWilliams was six-foot, twoinch tall when she was born .
 She filed papers and reports on missions abroad, including Ceylon . She met her future husband Paul Cushing Child in Ceylon, where she met him .
 Child, an artist and cartographer, loved good food and introduced Julia to the same . Child, a friend of Julia, was a chef and designer at the time of her death .
 The couple's age difference (10 years) and height difference (she surpassed him by several inches) proved no hindrance and the two wed in 1946 .
 Paul Child accepted an assignment that sent the couple to Paris . Two years later, Paul accepted a job that sent them to Paris, France .
 Julia first studied the French language at the Berlitz School and then enrolled in the famous Cordon Bleu cooking school . Julia is now a celebrity chef at the famous French-inspired restaurant .
 When Paul Child retired in 1961, the couple moved to Cambridge, Massachusetts . The couple was married for more than 50 years .
 The 91 FASHION DESIGNERS AND TRENDSETTERS book’s success lay in its thorough and carefully written, easy to follow recipes and instruction, and its useful photographs .
 Food editors of major magazines, such as Good Housekeeping, House Beautiful, and Home and Garden, asked Child to submit articles .
 Her column appeared weekly in the Boston Globe, and she appeared on TV’s Good Morning America .
 Child’s television show The French Chef aired for 11 years and won a Peabody Award in 1965 and an Emmy in 1966 . Child also won an Emmy Award in 1966 for his television show . Child's books include cookbooks and cookbooks .
 From 1961 to 2001, Child altered her cooking as American culture evolved . Child's cooking style changed dramatically between 1961 and 2001 . Child changed her cooking style to reflect American culture .
 Make meals so delicious that you and your guests will be satisfied without shoveling in huge quantities of food . Make meals that are so delicious, she tells cooks, that you won't shovel in large quantities .
 Child continues to exhort her audiences to love food and stop fearing that it is not good for them . Child continues her audience to love eating and stop worrying that it's not good .
 In 1989 her husband suffered a stroke and had to be moved to a nursing home . In 1989 she had to move her husband into a home where she was living .
 New undertakings, such as a voice part in a children’s cartoon and a new cooking show, are planned .
 Cooking with Master Chefs, and its accompanying book, helped distract her from her sorrow . The book was published in May 2013 .
 When her husband died in 1994, Child said she had nothing left to write . Child was quoted as saying that she had no more to write when she died .
 Julia wrote In Julia's Kitchen with Master Chefs in 1995 and Baking With Julia in 1996 . She also penned In Julia’s Kitchen with Chef Julia in 1995 .
 In 1997, she celebrated her 85 th birthday by hosting a lavish dinner . Proceeds from the event went to the American Institute of Food and Wine . In 1997 the event was held in honor of the food and wine institute .
 She continues advocating sensible cooking and eating in countless interviews, magazine articles and television shows .
 Endo Hatsuko contributed to the westernization of Japan, particularly in the areas of fashion and wedding customs . Hatsuko was a fashion consultant, businesswoman and fashion consultant .
 Endo also departed from Japanese convention by becoming a businesswoman on her own, apart from either her father or her husband . Endo was born in Tokyo, Japan, in 1945 .
 She gradually commercialized the practice of purchasing bridal costumes and makeup for the wedding ceremony . She gradually became more commercialized in the 1930s .
 Endo offered makeup for Japanese women in general; next, she specialized in wedding wear and makeup . Endo is known for her work as a makeup artist .
 Brides-to-be can buy bridal apparel, booking services for the ceremony and reception, and decorations for the entire event . Finally, she began offering brides-for-be a full line of apparel and booking services .
 Endo’s bridal wear empire began during the Meiji Restoration , a period characterized as the beginning of the modern era in Japanese history . Endo founded the bridalwear empire in Japan .
 Japan began working toward instituting a modern, industrial state in 1868 . In 1868 the feudal system, controlled by the samurai warriors, was abolished . The samurai had ruled Japan since the 12th century .
 Finance Minister Masayoshi Matsukata established the Bank of Japan and took other measures to stimulate economic growth . Finance Minister established the bank of Japan in 1981 .
 Emperor Meiji died in 1912, his son Taisho, who ruled from 1912 to 1926, continued his father’s policies . When Emperor died, he ruled from 1911 to 1926 .
 In the early 1900s, she opened a beauty salon in the newly established Ginza district in Ginza .
 Ginza is the main shopping, commercial, and entertainment area of Tokyo . The Ginza area is located near the Imperial Palace . It is located in Ginza, Japan's main shopping area .
 The mint was closed by the government in 1868 . Linked to fraudulent practices, however, it was closed due to a lack of transparency .
 Ginza became the first westernized district in all of Japan after the Meiji Restoration . It features wide, tree-lined streets and imported goods from Europe and the U.S.
 Endo Hatsuko introduced Western makeup for women in her ‘grooming parlor’ as her business was called . Hatsuko's business was known as a "grooming parlor for women .
 Makeup was first brought to Japan by the Chinese and Koreans in the sixth century . Makeup is an important part of Japanese culture, first brought in by Koreans and Chinese .
 Traditionally, aristocratic women wore heavy white face makeup, red rouge on the lips, and painted their eyebrows .
 Until the 18th century, they also blackened their teeth after they married . The 18th-century blackened teeth after the marriage .
 Smiling was literally frowned upon, since a wide-mouthed grin revealed white teeth that tended to look yellowish next to the whitened skin . Smiling is frowned upon in the United States .
 By the 20th century, most Japanese women no longer wore white face makeup or kimonos every day . By the 1950s, most women were no longer wearing the same face makeup .
 Geisha are Japanese women entertainers known for their dancing and musical skills . Geisha is a Japanese woman entertainer known for her dancing and singing skills .
 First officially recognized as an occupation in the 18th century, geisha entertained men and their courtesans in ‘pleasure districts” in larger Japanese cities . Geisha entertain men and women in "pleasure areas" in larger cities .
 They were not prostitutes, although they were usually involved with their patrons . They were usually sexually involved with the patrons .
 Young girls were sometimes indentured to a geisha house, where they acted as maids and then as apprenticed geisha . Young girls acted as servants, maids or apprentices geisha.
 During the 19th century, geisha were acknowledged as trendsetters, acting as fashion weather vanes for the rest of Japanese society . Geisha were accepted as trendsettingters in Japan, and acted as trend-setters .
 They dressed in opulent kimonos and wore heavy makeup of the upper class . The upper class wore heavy make-up and wore opulent clothing .
 Today, they have become the upholders of Japanese traditions, rather than the trendsetters . They have become an upholder of traditional Japanese traditions .
 Before Endo started her business, geisha and other women made the white makeup by combining white rice bran with lead, later discovered to be toxic . Endo's business is based in Tokyo, Japan .
 Endo began offering her services as a wedding consultant in addition to her grooming parlor business . Endo is now offering her wedding consultant services for clients .
 In later years, her business developed into a full bridal service shop . Customers could shop for their wedding kimonos, purchase makeup, have their hair done, and make arrangements for the ceremony .
 Most Japanese men and women meet each other and form relationships without outside help . But during the ceremony many couples still designate a go-between, or nakodo, for the sake of tradition .
 A majority of Japanese are married in a Shinto ceremony, though Buddhist and Christian ceremonies are also common . A majority are done in Shinto ceremonies .
 At a Shinto ceremony, the bride and groom kneel before an altar as a priest purifies them, and then they drink from three cups of sake three times . The ceremony is held in Japan .
 During the reception, friends and relatives regale the participants with stories and songs . The couple changes clothes multiple times during the reception .
 Kimonos are sewn from long pieces of cloth and cinched together with an obi, or sash . The kimono is sewn together with a long piece of cloth, or a sash, and sewn in pieces of fabric .
 Women’s kimonos include a small pillow worn in the back, attached to the sash . The pillow is worn in a small part of the kimono, worn to the back .
 Traditionally, men and women wore the garment, with different social classes distinguishing themselves by the type of kimonos they wore . Different social classes distinguish themselves by wearing the garment .
 The samurai classes wore kimonos with the sleeve ends sewn tightly shut . Other classes wore the sleeves with wide openings . The samurai class wore sleeves with the end of the sleeve end .
 Women’s kimonos can be made from brightly colored fabric, whereas men's kimono are gray, black, or brown . Men's men’ simonos are gray or brown, or gray .
 Endo Hatsuko specialized in creating elaborate wedding kimonos that could cost up to $100,000 . Most Japanese now only wear kimono for special occasions, such as weddings .
 After World War 11, Endo realized that since most ordinary Japanese people cannot afford 93 FASHION DESIGNERS AND TRENDSETTERS such a price, her business would benefit from offering rented kimonos . Endo's business is based in Tokyo .
 Since Endo began her business in 1905, each succeeding company president has been obliged to change her name to Endo Hatsuko . Endo's company president must now change his name to Hatsuko, ending the company's name .
 As of 1996, Endo’s eldest son, Akira, presides over Endo Hatsuko . Endo and Hatsuko were married in 1996 .
 Currently, the Japanese Empress Michiko and her daughter-in-law Princess Masako both wear Endo Hatsuko clothing and accessories .
 American fashion designer Melinda Eng changed the essence of women’s evening wear by adopting a simple idea that came to her while shopping for a dress for herself . “I couldn’t find anything with graceful lines that actually fit well without a lot of adjusting,”
 The contradictory nature of her dresses is what makes her designs so interesting and effective . Her party-wear fabrics are cut and sewn in a relaxed, casual shape .
 Melinda Eng is the oldest of six children born to immigrants from Hong Kong . Eng was born in Hong Kong and is now the oldest daughter of a Hong Kong immigrant .
 Eng's father, Tak Gan, went to work in the family’s Chinese restaurant, while her mother, Kam Ha, worked in a garment factory . Eng's parents are also in a Chinese restaurant and garment factory in Singapore .
 Eng told Christina Cheakalos of People Weekly magazine that fashion sense ran in her family . Eng said fashion sense is a thing that runs in his family .
 Her mother had fine sewing skills, and her grandfather always dressed smartly . Her mother's sewing skills and grandfather's smart clothes, she says .
 Upon graduation from the Parsons School of Design in 1976, Eng created sweater designs for Pringle designs of Scotland and for American designers Bill Haire and Charlotte Ford .
 She designed a private label in China for distribution in Europe . Later, after she began freelancing, she designed a Chinese label for distribution .
 Her international background, and her experience working for companies from different nations, gave her insight into what women all over the world were looking for in terms of style and shape .
 By the 1980s, Melinda Eng could boast a total of 12 retail clothing accounts carrying her designs . Eng's designs were carried by more than 12 retailers across the world .
 Her designs are frequently seen on entertainment awards shows on television . Her designs have been seen on awards shows and television .
 Eng soon found herself on a movie set and then in front of the camera . Eng now designs dresses for movie stars . Eng is also a fashion designer .
 She had been asked by film director Woody Allen to critique scenes involving fashion and designers .
 Allen had been looking for an Asian fashion designer to play the part of a lingerie designer in the film . Eng pointed out to Allen’s assistant that a particular scene in the movie did not seem believable, and she won the trust of the assistant .
 The movie, called Celebrity, deconstructs and satirizes the American obsession with famous people by featuring the exploits of a fawning celebrity journalist . The movie is called Celebrity .
 To the elegant fabrics she uses in her biascut designs, she has added intricate construction and couture details .
 Although she still specializes in evening wear, she also designs bridal gowns . She still designs evening wear .
 She once designed an A-line ballerina gown made of silk organza for one bride-to-be .
 Eng has recently initiated a new, more affordable line of women’s late-day and evening wear, priced from $450 to $950 . Eng has also launched a new line of clothing priced between $450 and $950.
 Peggy Guggenheim is an American art collector and patron . She was married to artist Max Ernst in 1946 . Her second marriage ended in 1946 after the demise of her second marriage .
 The “writing” to which she referred was her autobiography Out of This Century . She described her several romantic liaisons with perhaps more candor than her readers bargained for .
 American artists such as Jackson Pollock and Mark Rothko got their first exposure through Guggenheim . Modern art found a new home in the United States.
 Guggenheim succeeded in making abstract expressionism accepted part of the American art scene in the 1940s .
 To abstract expressionists, a work of art should showcase the interaction of artist, canvas, and paints, says artist . The abstract expressionist says he wants to show the interaction between artist and canvas .
 Jackson Pollock was filmed while he splashed and dribbled paints across a gigantic canvas, thereby becoming an element in the work of art himself . Pollock, for example, was filmed splashing and dribbling paint across a giant canvas .
 Mark Rothko created large canvases filled with only one or two soothing, therapeutic colors . Rothko also created large paintings filled with soothing, soothing colors .
 Benjamin Guggenheim drowned on board the Titanic in 1912, leaving Peggy an inheritance of $450,000 . Peggy was one of his three children, who died in 1912 .
 Before her inheritance, she worked for the War Department during World War 1 and at an avant-garde bookstore called the Sunwise Turn .
 Guggenheim moved to Paris in 1919, to experience the Bohemian expatriate community there . He moved there in 1919 to experience a Bohemian community .
 She began her career as a patron in Paris, first of literary geniuses, such as Djuna Barnes . She faithfully sent monthly checks well into the 1970s .
 She met and married the American writer and sculptor Laurence Vail in 1922 . The union produced two children, Pegeen and Sinbad .
 After five stormy years together, the couple divorced . Guggenheim took up with English writer John Holms . The couple divorced after five years together .
 Four years later, Guggenheim abandoned literary circles in favor of the visual arts . Four years after he left literary circles, he moved on to the art of visual art .
 She began her patronage by opening the Guggenheim Jeune, her London gallery of modern art . She is patronising modern art in the UK .
 Guggenheim Jeune closed the museum within the year . Discouraged by the lack of support, she closed it in 2007 .
 In 1939, she traveled to Paris to buy paintings for a new museum and her own collection . She traveled to France to buy works for a museum and for her own .
 Guggenheim escaped with hundreds of works of art days before the German army invaded France in 1941 . Her ex-husband Laurence Vail, his new wife, Kay Boyle, and the children from both marriages in tow .
 Guggenheim knew that Americans, not used to so much attention paid to contemporary U.S. artists, needed coaxing and coaching . She exhibited works of well-known European artists alongside unknown American artists .
 The strategy worked, and new doors opened up for American modern artists . The strategy won't always be the same, but it was a good start .
 During the Greek Givil War the Greek pavilion at the Venice Biennale, an international art exhibition, had been empty, so officials invited Guggenheim in 1948 to show her collection .
 During the 1950s, Guggenheim began reducing her collection, giving away some of her paintings to small museums that would otherwise be unable to afford them . During the '50s, she began giving away her collection of paintings to smaller museums .
 She continued to operate her house as a salon by giving studio space to struggling artists . She gave artists space to create their own studios .
 The Tate Museum acquired the Palazzo Venier dei Leoni in 1974 . Guggenheim’s collection traveled to the Tate Museum and the Gugsgenheim Museum .
 Peggy Guggenheim donated her entire collection to the Gugsgenheim Museum, which still operates in Venice . She died in Padua, Italy, in December 1979 .
 Japanese fashion designer Kawakubo Rei’s fashions may seem distorted, misshapen, and even anarchical in their refusal to follow Western ideals of feminine beauty .
 To the Japanese eye, her clothing reflects the search for shibusa, or the ultimate beauty found in nature . Her clothing reflects a search for beauty, or beauty, in Japan .
 Kawakubo’s worn and torn clothing reflects the Japanese word sabi, the way natural objects fade with time . The worn and worn clothes reflect the Japanese term sabi .
 Sabi connotes the repose or state of decline when, for example, blossoms reach their full bloom and then begin to curl, dropping their petals . Sabi is the name of a species of flower that is declining in the wild .
 Mimicking nature, Kawakubo deconstructs fabric and then remakes it into a fashionable garment . Kawakuubo's work is inspired by nature and the process of fashion .
 Kawakubo notes that Western clothing tends to be “body conscious” in its form-hugging shape . Kawakubi notes that her aesthetic leans toward the abstract, whereas Western clothes tend to be body conscious .
 Kawakubo’s gender-blurring clothes effect a sexless image designed for independent women who are not trying to attract men .
 Kawakubo is one of Japan's top designers and received no training in design . Born in Tokyo, he was born in Tokyo and has been a prolific designer .
 Asahi Kasei, a chemical company that produced acrylic fibers, hired her to work in their advertising department when she finished college . She now works for the company that produces acrylic fibers .
 From 1967 to 1969, she worked as a freelance stylist . Describes her ideas to pattern makers and then selling them to fashion designers .
 Being a freelance stylist was a rarity in the 1960s and 1970s, when Japan had not yet become one of the fashion centers of the world .
 Kawakubo’s confidence in her ideas intensified, however, and she decided to launch a showing of her designs in 1973 . She decided to show her designs at a Tokyo exhibition in 1973, which opened in Tokyo .
 Kawakubo opened her first store in Minami Aoyama in 1975 . Her first store was located in the Minami-Aoyama area .
 These four designers helped establish Japan’s reputation as a new center of international fashion design .
 Kawakubo is considered the most avant-garde of the Japanese avantgarde . He is one of the four Japanese artists to be considered among the most influential .
 Kawakubo resents critics’ conflating the work of these four designers under the heading “Japanese’s” title . She believes this represents their refusal to see the uniqueness of each designer’�s work . Kawakubi: Critics’
 Kawakubo believes that, essentially, garments are structures that house the body, much like buildings that house people . He believes that garments, like buildings, should be garments, to be garments that house bodies .
 Early on, her clothes were all black or dark gray; currently, she adds bits of color here and there . Her clothes are now mostly black or gray .
 In the mid-1980s, she created holes placed asymmetrically at various places in sweaters, allowing wearers to put their heads and arms wherever they please . The holes were placed in the sleeves of sweaters .
 Kawakubo used fabric called “loom distressed weave,” made by weaver Hiroshi Matsushita . The cloth that was used made the sweaters look faded and worn .
 Kawakubo then offered a line of lace knitwear that incorporated holes as well as small tears in the fabric .
 She now has several stores around the world, some of which are within large department stores, and some are freestanding shops . Some of the world's largest department stores are located in department stores .
 She carefully controls the environment in her shop interiors, choosing the same black and gray colors for the walls and fixtures . The shop owner also carefully controls her environment, choosing to keep black and grey .
 Kawakubo also launched a magazine devoted to fashion, called Six, in 1988 .
 Kawakubo was the first designer to use non-professional models, including art world personalities and film celebrities, in Six, in catalogs and in fashion shows .
 Film directors at the Daiei Studio in Japan gave Kyo Machiko her first break in film when they discovered the glamorous figure she presented on stage as a dancer .
 Kyo’s best-known work has been her role as 97 FASHION DESIGNERS AND TRENDSETTERS Masago in the film about truth-telling, Rashomon . Her role in Rashomon brought her international fame .
 She also played Awaji no kami in Genji monogatari (based on Shikibu MURASAKl’s Tale ofGenji in 1951)
 Kyo represents the great explosion of Japanese cinema on the international film scene in the 1950s and 1960s . Kyo is one of Japan's most famous films .
 She attended Azuma Elementary School until age 12, when her formal schooling ended . She was also a member of the school's staff .
 Daiei Studio offered her a contract, with which she made dozens of movies . Three years later, she was offered a contract with the studio . She has appeared in dozens of Japanese films since .
 Her appearance as a dancer in Saigo ni warau otoko (‘The Last Laugh for Man’s) turned her into a film star . Her appearance in the film turned her from a dancer to a star .
 No drama began perhaps as early as the 11th century in Japan, becoming popular by the I4th century . No drama was first popular in Japan in the I3th century, becoming more popular in the 4th and 5th centuries .
 No theater features solo and choral singing, accompanied by a small orchestra . No theater feature solo and . choral . singing . accompanied by small . orchestra .
 The dramas are intended to portray much more than what the audience sees on stage . The costume, the scenery, and the dialogue communicate a deeper meaning behind what is being represented on stage, the author says .
 Kyo’s best performance of No drama was in Ugetsu monogatari , a ghost story, in which she played Lady Wakasa . Kyo's best performance for No Drama was in .
 She conveyed the chilling atmosphere typical of the ghost story genre, combining horror with eroticism. She conveyed a chilling atmosphere combining horror and eroticism .
 Kyo Machiko’s success in the film Rashomon helped to popularize her unique style .
 Rashomon tells the tale of the rape of a woman, Masago, and the murder of a man, possibly by a bandit . Rashomon is based on the story of Masago and Masago .
 The story is told in flashbacks from the differing perspectives of four narrators . The film is set to be shown in London on BBC One at 8.30pm .
 The film’s name comes from the old, crumbling gate in Kyoto, formerly the capital of Japan . The film is based on the gate in the city of Kyoto .
 Four narrators gather under the gate when they seek shelter from a downpour . The four narrators congregate under a gate .
 The four discuss the recent crime, which has shocked the region, and philosophize about what the crime tells us about the human condition . The four talk about the crime and what they say about it .
 Each narrator tells the story of the crime in a different way, remembering different details that seem important to him but not to the others . The story is told by each of the narrators .
 "In the end, the story is about the human inability ever to completely know the truth about anything," says the author of the novel .
 Kyo portrayed a temperamental Masago, whose seductive nature bewitched her male counterparts, but whose assertiveness shocked them even more . Film critics have hailed her performance as the most striking of all the remarkable performances given in Rashomon .
 Masago appears in each of the four men’s recollections, as she is the victim of the rape . Masago also appears in the recollections of the men as the rape victim .
 Her performance of the events surrounding the crime, and the crime itself, differs each time a different narrator relates the story .
 She is alternately wholesome, treacherous, sexy, sympathetic, or vicious . She is the same character as her wickedness or wickedness .
 Most of Kyo’s performances have involved alluring sexual attractiveness, but she also extended her range in a number of other films . Most of her films have involved sexual attractiveness .
 In ]igoku-mon (“The Gate of Hell,” 1953), for example, she portrayed Kesa, a tragic aristocratic wife . In Akasen chitai (‘Street of Shame,’ 1956) she played Mickie .
 The film features an army captain, played by Marlon Brando, trying to bring American culture to Okinawa . The film is set in Okinawa, Japan .
 Akira Kurosawa’s films introduced Kyo Machiko to the West and changed Western attitudes about feminine beauty . David Thomson says the films changed attitudes about women's beauty .
 Kyo's vast repertoire proves that women actors, regardless of nationality, have much more to offer than mere feminine beauty . Kyo’s vast repertoire of plays proves that .
 The contrast between the two hinted at their respective positions in Washington, D.C., the seat of social and governmental power in 19th-century America . The contrast hints at the social and political power of Washington .
 Dolley Madison, as first lady, wielded power not as an elected official but by virtue of her wedding ring and position as the nations stylish hostess . Her wedding ring was the key to her success .
 James Madison dressed in black broadcloth appropriate to a conservative politician . Madison had authority to engage the nation in battle or plunge the economy to the brink of ruin .
 Historian Catherine Allgor argues that Dolley Madison’s style betrayed the manifestation of women’�s right to rule alongside their husbands . Allgor: Her style was on display at the ‘Squeeze’ parties she threw for D.C. power elite
 Madison was born on May 20, 1768, near Guilford, North Carolina, to an unsuccessful merchant and planter, John Payne, and his wife, Mary Coles . Madison died in 1768 .
 Dolley moved with her family to her maternal family’s farmland in Virginia while she was still an infant . Dolley is one of the world's most famous women .
 In 1783, John Payne freed his slaves and moved his wife and eight children to Philadelphia, where he opened a starch business . Payne, a Quaker, freed his wife, eight children and opened the business .
 Mary Coles turned their American First Lady Dolley Madison from an original picture by Gilbert Stuart, in possession of Richard Curtis, Esq. When the enterprise failed six years later, she turned the picture into a portrait of the First Lady . The original picture was taken in the possession of
 House was turned into a boardinghouse from which derived the family’s only income . Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division .
 The couple had two children, but husband and infant son died in the yellow fever epidemic that swept through Philadelphia in 1793 . The couple died of yellow fever .
 Aaron Burr introduced the widow to a 43-year-old bachelor named James Madison, a Republican politician from Orange County, Virginia, in 1801-05 . The marriage quickly developed .
 James Madison was called the “father of the Constitution,” but he was also an Episcopalian . Dolley Madison's Quaker church disowned her when she married him . The Quaker was disowned by the church .
 During the first years of marriage, James Madison represented Virginia in the United States Senate in Philadelphia, the nation’s capital at the time .
 When his term ended in 1797, the couple returned to the Madison plantation, called Montpelier . The couple lived there for 18 years before returning to the plantation .
 Madison accepted a post in the Jefferson administration as secretary of state . However, in 1801, after the election of Thomas Jefferson as president, he accepted the post . Madison was elected president of the U.S. in 1800s .
 By then, the capital had been moved to Washington, D.C., and the Madisons took up residence in the town . The Madisons lived in a small town where a few politicians, a smattering of government officials and diplomats ruled the nation .
 Madison became Washington, D.C.’s first first lady and the nation's most important hostess . Madison was Washington's first lady . She became Washington's most famous hostess during her life .
 Madison welcomed simplicity and a degree of casualness in her guests’ manners . Though always elegantly dressed and seen in an exquisitely decorated White House, she welcomed simplicity .
 Madison helped architect Benjamin Latrobe create the new White House and all it symbolized . Madison was not a professional decorator (it would be over a century before a woman entered the field)
 Madison found the same middle ground between palatial opulence and virtuous simplicity that characterized her personal style . Madison's style was found in a middle ground .
 Madison set the tone for these soirees by lighting and arranging 1,000 candles in front of fulllength mirrors . The full length mirrors adorned the walls of the room and around which hung crimson red draperies .
 Madison opened her snuffbox in the spring of 1812, offering the United States Congressman and anti-British war hawk Henry Clay a pinch . Madison offered the Congressman a pinch in 1812 .
 In the context of Washington politics, the gesture was read as an indication that President Madison, previously lukewarm to the idea of armed conflict with Britain, was ready to wage war . The gesture was seen as a signal that Madison, who had been previously reluctant to engage in war,
 The War of 1812 arose primarily out of United States grievances over oppressive maritime practices on the part of Great Britain . The war arose out of U.S. grievances .
 The president left the city to review troops in the field, leaving Dolley Madison to defend the White House . DolleyMadison is the only woman in charge of the National Guard .
 She packed a wagon with valuables and had the items moved to the Bank of Maryland, thus saving the nation's home from utter destruction .
 Washington, D.C., has always been a dry unable to fully accept women in powerful positions, Allgor says . Washington has a history of not accepting women in power, he says .
 First Lady Hillary Clinton’s health care programs were defeated in 1994 . Witness, she explains, the defeat of those programs in 1994. Witness the defeat, she says .
 Allgor claims that in the years before President Andrew Jackson’s popular ‘common man’ politics swept the power elites away in 1830, women such as Dolley Madison held sway . Allgor: In the years prior to the 1830s, women held sway in Washington .
 When James Madison died in 1836, his wife remained at Montpelier another year but then returned to Washington, D.C. She helped define the city she helped define .
 She was forced to sell her husband's papers to ward off creditors . Her son Payne Todd's irresponsible finances forced her to sell the papers .
 When she died on July 12, 1849, in Washington, D.C., thousands of friends mourned at her state burial .
 Dolly Madison was the wife of James Madison, President of the United States . She was married to President James Madison in 1886 . Dolly wrote a memoir of her life .
 Imelda Romualdez Marcos was a beauty queen and politician . She was the Philippine leader of the 1970s Philippine state of the Philippines .
 Also known as the ‘Iron Butterfly, the eccentric millionaire millionaire Marcos built a palace entirely out of coconuts . Marcos is famous for her globe-trotting shopping sprees . She is also known for her globes and shopping trips .
 Imelda Marcos established a niche for herself in her husband’s government . She was indicted on charges of embezzlement in the United States and in her homeland . Marcos was indicted in the U.S. and in the Philippines .
 She is perhaps irrevocably linked to her collection of 1,000 pairs of designer shoes .
 Imelda Romualdez was born to a prominent family in the Central Visaya in Leyte Province, Philippines . She is the daughter of a prominent and prominent politician .
 She caught the eye of the young, ambitious politician Ferdinand Marcos during a beauty contest in her hometown . She stepped onto the social and political stage after she caught the attention of the politician .
 The couple married in 1954 and had three children, Imee Marcos-Manotoc, Ferdinand Marcos, and Irene Marcos-Araneta . The couple was married in 1953 and have three children .
 Ferdinand Marcos served for six years in the Philippine Senate before winning the presidency in 1965 . Marcos served in the Senate before becoming President of the Philippines . Marcos was elected to the Philippines in 1965 and died in 1986 .
 Marcos won the race with the help of Imelda, who proved to be an able speechwriter and campaign coordinator . Marcos was elected president of the Philippines in 1972 .
 In 1973, the Philippines adopted a constitution that gave Marcos broad powers as both president and prime minister . Marcos was president of the Philippines from 1973 to 1986 . He was ousted from office in 1986 .
 In 1975, Imelda Marcos became the governor of Metro Manila, the capital city and home to 10 percent of the nation’s population . Marcos was the first woman to be elected to the Philippines' governor in 1975 .
 As governor, Imelda Marcos spent more than $100,000,000 building luxury hotels and a cultural center in downtown Manila . Marcos spent the money to help boost tourism and appease her wealthy political friends . Marcos was governor of the Philippines for more than 30 years .
 The beautiflcation project failed in later years when the hotels began losing money .
 Marcos sent his wife on numerous diplomatic missions around the world . President Marcos sent her on numerous missions to the Philippines .
 Mindanao is a southern island of the Philippines where a secessionist movement emerged in the 1970s . Muslim and Christians fought for domination for domination . Imelda Marcos contributed to negotiations in Libya over the separation .
 In 1978, Imelda Marcos was elected to the Interim National Assembly of the Philippines . She was elected in 1978 . Marcos was the first woman elected to a national assembly in the country .
 She was also named to the cabinet as minister of human settlements, one of the highest, most prestigious government posts . She is also named as the Minister of Human settlements .
 She had virtually unlimited access to funds that she used to improve housing conditions in the country . She was able to use the funds to improve conditions in housing conditions .
 Ferdinand Marcos’s health faltered, and the assassination of Senator Benigno Aquino led to accusations of dirty politics within the administration . Ferdinand Marcos was assassinated in 1992, and his death was attributed to a political assassination .
 Imelda Marcos became the government’s primary spokesperson, leading many pundits to believe that she planned on taking over the presidency . Marcos was the leader of the Philippines during the Second World War .
 A fraudulent election in 1986 named Ferdinand Marcos as winner, but overwhelming popular support for Corazon AQUINO overrode Marcos’s attempts to remain in power . Corazon Aquino was elected to power in 1986 .
 Imelda Marcos left behind evidence of her compulsive shopping and her obsession with material wealth at the presidential palace, including the famous shoes . Marcos left her famous shoes at the Presidential Palace .
 Ferdinand Marcos and his wife were indicted by the U.S. government on charges that they embezzled money from the Philippines and used it to buy real estate in the United States . Ferdinand Marcos was the leader of the Philippines in the 1970s and '80s .
 From 1990 to 1993, Imelda Marcos defended herself against charges of theft of $200 million from the Philippine National Bank . She was eventually acquitted of graft, the only charge that stuck . Marcos was acquitted in 1993 .
 She was sentenced to 18 to 24 years in prison but was released pending appeal . She was released from prison pending appeal after being sentenced to up to 25 years . The case is the first of its kind in the U.S.
 Despite her shady links to crime and corruption, she won a seat to her nation’s house of representatives—by a large majority—in 1995 . She won by large majority in 1995 .
 Imelda Marcos still battled her government over the Marcos fortune, which People magazine estimated at $500 million dollars . The Marcos fortune had been stashed away in Swiss bank accounts .
 The extravagance of Imelda Marcos remains a legacy of the Iron Butterfly . Marcos family ruled the Philippines for 21 years . The Iron Butterfly was the leader of the Philippines during the Marcos family .
 Lady Ottoline Morrell was a British philanthropist . She was a patron of the arts and a philanthropist of the British arts .
 When Morrell moved from London’s Bloomsbury district to Oxford, the village church bells rang to welcome her . Morrell and her famous friends met to discuss aesthetic and philosophical questions .
 From the pens of the Bloomsbury Group came some of Britain’s finest modern literature . From the pen of some of the most famous modern novels, some have been published .
 Moore rejected the notion that “goodness” and “truth” were definable . Moore insisted that instead of asking whether a statement is true or false, one must instead analyze how the commentator arrived at his or her statement .
 Modernism rejected the idea that the world was inherently meaningful . Modernism, and literary works rising out of this new aesthetic and cultural sensibility, tended to reject the idea .
 Ottoline Bentinck became an aristocrat by virtue of her father’s political views . Ottoline was the daughter of Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Bent inck .
 Benjamin Disraeli, Britain’s prime minister from 1874 to 1880, asked Queen Victoria to bestow aristocratic titles on all of his children in gratitude for his political support .
 In February 1902, she married Philip Morrell, a lawyer who became M.P. for South Oxfordshire . She was married to a lawyer and later became a mother of three .
 Ottoline pushed her husband into a political career for which he was ill suited . Her marriage to her husband was stormy, in part because she pushed him into a career that he wasn't suited to . Ottoline and her husband were married at the time .
 Morrell spent most of her life patronizing artists and writers and collecting art . Morrell died at the age of 98 .
 As a philanthropist, she founded the Contemporary Art Society . Through that society, she collected and exhibited paintings .
 She invited new poets and writers to meet their older role models, so they could improve their crafts .
 Morrell kept a journal of her interactions with Bloomsbury intellectuals, providing cultural historians with evidence of the relationship between intellectuals and the people who support them . Morrell's journal provides cultural historians of the Blocomsbury era .
 Morrell came to represent the thrust of modernity that formed the basis of much of the work produced by the Bloomsbury Group’s members . Morrell, an eccentric figure with a rather unusual personality, was an eccentric .
 Lawrence's masterpiece reflects the uncertainties and anxieties of the modern world . Women in Love is considered to be Lawrence’s masterpiece . Lawrence's film is considered the world's most famous novel .
 Lawrence’s characters, the Brangwen sisters, emerge as independent women confronting an ambiguous world . A firsthand and penetrating look into early 20th century England . Lawrence's characters emerge as women confronting the world .
 In Chapter 8, the sisters visit Hermione Roddice, the character modeled after Ottoline Morrell . The sisters visited the character in Chapter 8 .
 Hermione represents fakery of upper-class British society, consumed by outward appearances and manners . Hermione represents the fakery . Hermione is a British aristocrat who is obsessed with outward appearances .
 Hermione comes out to greet the sisters Ursula and Gudrun at Hermione’s estate . After the driver drops the sisters, Ursula arrives at Hermione's estate to greet them .
 The two girls were embarrassed because she would not move into the house, but must have her little scene of welcome there on the path . The girls said they were embarrassed by the incident .
 Ursula was more physical, more womanly . Gudrun was the more beautiful and attractive, she had decided again, she decided again . Ursula is more physical .
 She stood so near to one, pressing herself near upon one, in a way that was most embarrassing and oppressive, she said . She said: 'She stood so close to one of the girls'
 The writers’ depiction of their hostess dampened Morrell’s friendship with both of them, although Lawrence later wrote admiringly of Morrell .
 At least part of the unflattering descriptions of her can be blamed on the gossipy nature of the Bloomsbury members . She was described as a 'gossipy' woman .
 Many of the gossip at Bloomsbury came in the form of letters and diaries written by the participants in the group . Many of these have been collected and published after the writers’ deaths .
 Many of the Bloomsbury participants used flowery language that may also be described as exaggeration .
 Photographs of Lady Morrell exist, and certainly no one would describe her as ordinary looking . No one would say she was ordinary looking, but she was not ordinary looking.
 She wore huge hats and high-heeled scarlet scarlet shoes to make herself appear even taller .
 Some of Morrell’s associates characterized her as a bizarre, eccentric, overdressed, and overbearing aristocrat . Morrell tried—and failed—to get into England's intellectual society, they say .
 Some people flattered her with their descriptions of her personality . On the other hand, some said she was a good person .
 Biographers have tried to answer the question of why such a seemingly generous person provoked so much hostility from others . Lady Morrell’s biographers have been trying to find out why she provoked such hostility .
 Ironically, her generosity may have been her greatest detriment . Ironically, it seems that her very generosity may be her great detriment .
 Part of the problem lay in her inability to trust the motivations of her friends, given her wealth and connections in British society . Not surprisingly, part of her problem was not trusting her friends .
 She also had a bad habit of saying the wrong thing to people she didn’t know well, she said .
 In 1937, Morrell had surgery to eliminate cancer in her jaw, which left her badly scarred . Morrell's jaw was left scarred after the operation .
 Cameron committed suicide after several of his other patients threatened to sue him . Prontosil was found to be effective only with severe infections such as scarlet fever . Cameron committed himself to suicide after his patients threatened him with lawsuits .
 Lady Morrell, upon hearing this news, decided to return to the clinic and request treatment anyway . She returned to her clinic to request treatment .
 Onassis was a career woman until her marriage to John F Kennedy . Onassis then became a fulltime mother and housewife .
 After the death of her second husband, Aristotle Onassis, Jackie Onassis went back to her writing career . She became an editor at Doubleday Publishing after her husband's death .
 Once her marriage catapulted her to celebrity, she spent the remainder of her life craving, but rarely getting, her privacy . Though she herself interviewed people during her career as a newspaper reporter .
 Jackie Bouvier was born on July 28, 1929, to a gambling, alcoholic stockbroker nicknamed “Black Jack” Bouvier and his wife, Janet Lee Bouvier . Jackie was born in 1929 .
 Janet Lee married Hugh Auchincloss, Jr., two years later . Her parents divorced in 1940, and she married a wealthy attorney . Janet Lee's mother and father were both wealthy attorneys .
 Jackie spent a privileged if unhappy childhood, spending most of her time apart from her father . Jackie spent most of that time away from her mother .
 She attended Miss Chapin's, a prestigious boarding school in Manhattan, and Miss Porter's in Farmington, Connecticut, both boarding schools .
 Bouvier attended Vassar College, earning a spot on the dean’s list . Bouvier is also a woman of keen intellect . She was a member of the dean's list .
 She spent her junior year abroad at the Sorbonne in Paris, in Paris . She valued the experience among the highest of her college career . She says she valued it among the most of her years abroad .
 Washington Times-Herald reporter accepted a job as a reporter and photographer . She turned the prize down and accepted a position as a photographer .
 The former Queen Debutante drove around the city in an old dented car, taking photographs and interviewing people on the streets . She was the Queen's first lady and the Queen was a member of the Queen .
 Bouvier met the Democrat politician John F Kennedy the year before he was elected to represent Massachusetts in the United States Senate . Bouvier was married to Kennedy's wife .
 Onassis' father was too drunk to escort his daughter down the aisle, or even attend the ceremony . The solitary disappointment of the event for Onassis was that her father was not present at the wedding .
 Despite Onassis’s shy, retiring demeanor, her experiences as a reporter enabled her to assist her husband in his political career . Despite her shy demeanor, Onassis was a reporter for her husband .
 Onassis coached John F Kennedy in his public speaking and helped him develop the poised, charismatic personal qualities that would endear him to his Massachusetts constituents . Onassis died in 1968 at the age of 65 .
 John F Kennedy used the lessons his wife taught him about public speaking during the first televised presidential debate against the Republican presidential candidate, Richard Nixon . Later, during one of the defining moments in American political history, he used his wife's lessons to prepare him for the debate .
 Onassis went into premature labor during her seventh month of pregnancy . She delivered a stillborn baby while her husband was away on vacation in August 1956 .
 At this time, rumors circulated that John F Kennedy had been involved in numerous affairs with other women . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Among the most widely circulated photographs of the Kennedys is one depicting a happy family, with Kennedy standing above his seated wife and their children Caroline and John, Jr.
 Behind the facade, the Kennedy marriage suffered under considerable strain . The Kennedy marriage was one of the world's most enduring relationships .
 John F Kennedy’s victory in the presidential election of 1960 merely added to the attention that already wore on the family . The family of the Kennedy family is now in their 60s and 70s .
 Her prerogative was to create a private residence for her family, while at the same time acknowledging the public space in which she was to function as hostess to a nation, she said .
 Like Dolley MADISON, Onassis undertook the task of redecorating the White House . Dolley Madison Madison was the mistress of the late Jacqueline Onassis .
 She formed the White House Historical Association . She hired a curator to help her choose historical paintings to adorn the walls .
 A Historical Guide, conducted a televised tour of the home with its 19th-century furnishings, paintings, and other art objects . The tour included a tour of 19th century furnishings and paintings .
 President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in November . The president was killed by a single bullet bullet in November 1963 . Kennedy's widow, Michelle Kennedy, was a first lady of her own .
 Onassis witnessed the horrifying effects of the assassin’s bullet as it killed her husband sitting next to her in the roofless automobile carrying them through the crowded downtown Dallas streets . The assassin's bullet struck Onassis as she sat in the car with her husband .
 John F Kennedy, Jr. guided by his mother, saluted his father’s casket as it was being lowered into the ground at Arlington National Cemetery . Once again, the nation's eyes focused on her with her children .
 Her husband’s funeral was followed five years later with the assassination of presidential candidate Robert F Kennedy in June 1968 . Her funeral was the first five years after her husband's funeral .
 Onassis married the wealthy Aristotle Onassis, 23 years her senior, in the fall of 1968; he left her a widow in 1975 . Onassis died in 1975; she was a widow .
 Madame de Pompadour was mistress, confidant, and adviser to Louis XV . Louis XV was king of France from 1715 until 1774 . She was mistress and patron of the arts .
 A woman of keen wit and sharp mind, she was unable to ignite similar intellectual pursuits in the king . Her intellectual circle included Voltaire and Voltaire .
 With her brother the Marquis de Merigny she oversaw building developments, including the Place de la Concorde, the Petit Trianon, and the Chateau de Bellevue . She also oversaw construction developments in Paris, Paris and Paris .
 She supported artisans of all kinds and encouraged the new royal porcelain factory at Sevres . She also encouraged the creation of a new royal ceramic factory in Sevres.
 As the king’s mistress, Madame de Pompadour had her portrait painted several times . The most famous of which was done by Francois Boucher in 1759 .
 She is looking off to the side, and in her lap is an open book . One hand rests on the pages of the book; one hand rests .
 The portrait gives the impression that the painter had snuck up on Madame de Pompadour and caught her by surprise, in order to capture her loveliness with his palette .
 The picture exudes charm and a respect for the printed page . All in all, the picture exude charm .
 "Here lies a maid for twenty years, a whore for fifteen and a procuress for seven," says the author of the novel .
 Madame de Pompadour was born Jean Antoinette Poisson on December 29, 1721 . She was born in 1721 in Paris .
 Her father, Francois Poisson, had been caught stealing money and quickly left France . Her father was a financial speculator, who left France in 2010 .
 Jean Antoinette and her mother, Madeleine de la Motte Poisson, were taken in by a wealthy friend, Le Normant de Tournehem . The couple were taken into care of a friend of the rich and famous .
 Jean Antoinette grew into an intelligent, witty, and cultured young woman . Her education helped her grow into a smart, witty young woman, she says .
 At 19 she married the nephew of her benefactor, Charles Guillaume Le Normant d’Etioles . She married him at 19 and he died at the age of 92 .
 Jean Antoinette quickly tired of family life and became an active socialite . She became a socialite and became a prominent socialite in the French Revolution .
 The year King Louis XV’s mistress, the young Duchesse de Chateauroux, died in 1744, she met Louis XV at a masquerade ball held in honor of his son's wedding . Louis XV met her at the ball in 1743 .
 The king disguised as a tree danced with Madame d’Etioles, disguised as the goddess Diana . The king and the goddess were dancing in the garden of Paris .
 Jean Antoinette separated legally from her husband and came to live with the king at his palace at Versailles . She spent most of the rest of her life at the palace where she lived .
 Louis XV bestowed noble rank upon her, naming her marquise, or Madame de Pompadour . Louis XV also gave her a marquise or marquise .
 Madame de Pompadour shared the king’s passion for building, landscape, and the decorative arts .
 No one influenced French taste in the first half of the 18th century more than Madame de Pompadour . Her work was published in 18th Century .
 Pompadour built the ‘Petit Trianon’ in the gardens of Versailles . She did not live to see it completed . The palace is the most fitting monument to the friendship between the two .
 Pompadour did not discourage his forays in the Deer Park; instead, she encouraged him . She encouraged him to explore the park .
 By this time, the former favorite mistress had become more a partner to Louis XV than a lover . She seems to have delighted as much in her new role as she did in her previous role .
 She became the King’s confidant and adviser, suggesting such appointments as that of the due de Choiseul . She also suggested the appointment of the Prince of Wales .
 Choiseul, and other ministers, encouraged Louis to pursue a costly alliance between France and Austria . The alliance ultimately brought about the disastrous Seven Years War . Louis was the prime minister of France's second century .
 The war, fought between 1756 and 1763, cost France its North American colonies . The war ended in 1763 .
 French blamed the hike on Madame de Pompadour’s extravagances . Taxes were increased in order to finance the war, but the French blamed it on her extravagance .
 In light of the values and prejudices of the time in which she lived, clearly, Madame was an opportunist, taking advantage of her ability to charm the king in order to gain stature and influence .
 In the eyes of the French, Pompadour had the complete attention of the most powerful man in France, an accomplishment few could match . The French were fascinated by the French .
 She paid a hefty price for her relationship with the king in the form of ridicule and as the brunt of cruel jokes . But she stepped over the line of propriety by indulging too much .
 Madame de Pampadour died in 1764 of congestion of the lungs, according to her physician . Her physician said she died of congestion in the lungs .
 Post’s reputation for dictating correct behavior came not from her own sense of propriety, but from her literary agent . Post's reputation for her behavior came from her agent .
 When Richard Duffy broached the idea of Post authoring a book on the subject, she demurred . She said she hated the stuffiness of proper manners and despised people who took such things seriously .
 Most sectors of the U.S. economy were booming in the 1920s, with the exception of agriculture . Everyone, from garbage collectors to Wall Street financiers, invested in the stock market in hopes of striking it rich .
 Since one ought to be rich, one would naturally need to know how to behave when one reached high society . Since one should be rich one would need to be able to behave in high society, he says .
 Post herself was born into the society that ‘ordinary’ Americans yearned to attain . Post was born in a society that "ordinary" Americans yearn to attain.
 Emily was educated by a German governess but spent many days with her father at his building sites . Emily's father was a building contractor and she was often with him when she was younger .
 In 1892, she married banker Edwin M Post, and they had two sons, Edwin and Bruce . She had two daughters, Bruce and Edwin .
 In 1901, the elder Edwin Post lost most of his fortune, and Emily’s father died, leaving little inheritance . Emily's father died in 1901, leaving her with little money .
 Emily Post’s friends encouraged her to try novel writing, since they knew her to be a bright conversationalist and superb correspondent . Emily Post's friends urged her to write novels .
 Post wrote The Flight of the Moth, serialized in Ainslee’s Magazine and then reissued in book form in 1904 . Post wrote the novel, which was published in 1904, and it was serialized and re-issued in 1903 .
 The story featured a naive but beautiful widow and a sophisticated and worldly Russian nobleman . The story was based on the story of a naive and beautiful widow .
 By 1905, Post, tired of her husband’s numerous extramarital affairs and outrageous spending habits, sought and won a divorce at a time when divorce still carried with it a stigma, especially for women .
 Price Post had not asked for alimony and used both her maiden and married names . Price Post used her own childhood experiences in her father’s office to build model papier-mache houses .
 People were charmed, but Post soon realized that writing had been more lucrative . Post later decided to focus on writing .
 She began working on a series of light, entertaining novels . The novels often play with the theme of cultural rivalry between the U.S. and Europe .
 Woven in the Tapestry was Post’s only fantasy novel . It was set in an imaginary country called Ateria . Post's fantasy novel was published in 1996 .
 In The Title Market, Post explored the relationships of a shady European man who feigns aristocracy to win the hand of an American heiress . Heiress then smuggles priceless artwork out of Italy . Post: The title market is the best way to get the title market .
 In 1916, Munseys Magazine commissioned By Motor to the Golden Gate, a travelogue of her cross-country trip with her son Edwin . Munseys magazine commissioned the travelogue in 1916 .
 Post expressed surprise when her agent suggested the etiquette book . The author has achieved some fame, mostly for her fiction, most for fiction .
 He convinced her that much of her fiction dealt with the topic, albeit indirectly, and persuaded her to try writing on a few topics relating to the social graces .
 The word blue in this context may be a subtle allusion to blue blood, or aristocratic, or blue book, a detailed account of the lives of politicians . Blue blood may be an allusion of aristocratic or blue blood .
 Etiquette dispensed tips on proper behavior during conversation, travel, formal and informal entertaining, and on special occasions such as weddings and funerals . Etiquette is a form of etiquette for people in the U.S.
 Advice on treating one’s spouse, children, and servants was followed by ideas on decorating and dressing . Advice also included ideas on how to dress and decorate your family .
 Post read radio endorsements and wrote pamphlets on proper usage of such products as table linens and silverware . Post also wrote a book on etiquette .
 From 1929 to 1932, Post produced her own daily radio program, and from 1932 to 1960, she wrote a question and answer column syndicated in newspapers everywhere .
 Post employed a immense cadre of secretaries and clerks to help her handle the demand . Post employed an enormous cadre to help with the huge amount of work .
 Finnish designer and businesswoman Armi Ratia based her design empire on the notion that a nation’s landscape and cultural heritage could be recreated on a bolt of fabric .
 Ratias focus on Finland was due, in part, to the history of her homeland Karelia, an area of contention between Finland and the Soviet Union . Ratias' focus was due to her homeland's history with the Soviet-Finland border .
 She started her design firm, Marimekko, after World War II when Scandinavian design and architecture gained worldwide fame . Her modernist, entrepreneurial creativity seemed to mock its communist neighbor to the east .
 Finnish-born Eero Saarinen and Alvar Aalto created and popularized a Finnish design aesthetic . Together, architects and designers like Alvar and Eero were influential architects .
 Karelia is a rural, sparsely populated farming republic located in northwestern Russia . It is bordered by Finland to the west, Russia to the east, the White Sea to the north, and Lake Ladoga to the south .
 Eastern Karelia became part of Russia in 1323; Russian Czar Peter the Great wrested it from Sweden in 1721 . Peter the Czar of Russia wrested Western Karelia from Sweden in 1721; Eastern Kelaiya was part
 Peace agreement granted Soviet Union control of Eastern Karelia to Finland in 1920 . Finland controlled Western Karelia, while the Soviet Union controlled Eastern Kelmaria .
 Following the Russo-Finnish war of 1939-40, Western Karelia again passed into Soviet hands . However, following the Soviet victory in the Russo-finnish war, Western Karelia was taken back into Russian hands .
 Four million Finnish refugees fled the Soviet Union in 1947 . Armi Ratia and her husband, Viljo Ratia, were among the refugees .
 She attended the prestigious Art Industry Central School in Karelia in 1935 . She left to study in Germany, including an internship in Tubingen, where she worked .
 Printex Oy, a manufacturer of oilcloth fabric in a Helsinki suburb, was founded in Karelia . Soon after, she and her husband moved to Helsinki and purchased Printex . Printex is a Finnish oilcloth manufacturer .
 The couple remade the Arm in 1951 by reintroducing the technique of hand silk-screening on cotton sheets . The Arm was created by the couple in 1951 .
 Printex used harmonized with the image of Scandinavia as a rustic, nature-lover’s paradise . Printex soon replaced the hand silk-screening process with machines .
 To promote her hand-printed patterns, Ratia decided to use the fabrics to make dresses created by a Printex designer .
 Mari is a Finnish girl’s name, and mekko is a Finnian word meaning country woman's dress . Mari is also a Finnish word for a country woman’�s dress .
 Despite slow sales at first, Ratia was convinced that the fabrics would ultimately take hold .
 Like Giuliana BENETTON, Ratia chose bold colors to lift people’s spirits after the drab grayness of the war .
 Jacqueline Kennedy ONASSIS bought several of the hand-printed dresses in Cape Cod in 1960 . The company, now called Marimekko, was founded by Ratia Ratia in 1960 and is based in Finland .
 Ratia treated her staff like one big family, letting those employees who were willing to act as models for her advertisements . Ratia was one of the world's most famous models .
 She made plans to create a ‘Marimekko Village’ in the Helsinki suburb of Porvoo that would provide housing and schools for all employees . Though the village never materialized, Ratia continued to reward her employees by giving them hugs .
 When Ratia retired from the company in 1974, Marimekko faltered from the loss of its founder and inspiration . The Finnish company was founded by Ratia Ratia in 1969 .
 Kirsti Paakanen is a Finnish businesswoman who founded Marimekko . A wall-size portrait of her company's founder watches over her shoulder . She works diligently at her desk while a wall-sized portrait of the founder watches .
 The first American woman professional interior decorator, de Wolfe, encouraged millions of American home owners to junk their overstuffed, heavy Victorian furniture and impractical knickknacks .
 De Wolfe linked her new, airy interiors to the emancipated female, making interior design an acceptable profession for independent-minded career women .
 As a teenager, de Wolfe learned how to socialize with the upper crust . Her customers would later form her primary customers .
 In 1890, after her father’s death left her with little money, de Wolfe began acting professionally . De Wolfe died in 1890 .
 Her stage career lasted 14 years . She won modest acclaim for her efforts . Critics tended to celebrate her lavish costumes more frequently than her acting abilities .
 De Wolfe established a lifelong romantic relationship with Elisabeth Marbury, a literary and theatrical agent . De Wolfe and Marbury were married in 1940s and '60s .
 Victorian frippery and frumpery soon made its way to the antique stores . The antique stores are now filled with Victorian finks and frumpery .
 Under de Wolfe’s hand, windows lost their heavy draperies, allowing light and air to illuminate and revitalize rooms . The windows were designed to allow air and light to illuminate rooms .
 Even while she used modFASHION DESIGNERS AND TRENDSETTERS ern, breezy colors and lighter-weight fabrics, however, she also reached farther back into history to resurrect classical and colonial styles .
 Her favorite antique, for example, was her Madame de POMPADOUR footstool . "Madame de PompadOUR" was her favorite antique .
 Her tastes, therefore, were eclectic; her 18th-century antiques and light, flowery fabrics became her signature look .
 Architect and designer Ogden Codman influenced her style, and the two collaborated on several homes . Codman also worked with her to create homes .
 De Wolfe’s contribution lay in her ability to popularize the look through her elite society connections, and through her 1913 book .
 Unlike Codman, de Wolfe understood that younger, emancipated women were ready to control every aspect of the home . The artistically inclined women were eager to enter the profession of interior design and decoration .
 In 1905, she decorated the Colony Club building, an exclusive women’s club building designed by Stanford White . Her first big break occurred in 1905, when she decorated a building designed for women's club .
 Following the success of that assignment, bigger and better jobs came her way . She was given a new job at the center of the story .
 The marriage of capitalism with industrialization in the U.S. had created numerous fabulously wealthy families at the end of the 19th century . De Wolfe became acquainted with nearly all of them .
 Henry Clay Frick (director of Andrew Carnegie’s U.S. Steel Corporation), Mrs. Morgan, Anne Vanderbilt, Mrs. Vanderbilt, Henry. Frick, Henry . Frick . Morgan . Vanderbilt .
 Weyerhaeuser of Minnesota all provided de Wolfe an outlet for her talents . De Wolfe is a member of the Minnesota Symphony Orchestra .
 De Wolfe grabbed front-page headlines in a variety of ways during the first few decades of the 20th century .
 In 1908, she accompanied Wilbur Wright on some of the test flights of his new airplane . She accompanied him on some test flights .
 During World War I, she lived in Paris and tended to wounded soldiers, for which she was awarded the French medal of honor, the Croix de Guerre . For her service, she received a French Croix of honor .
 She introduced the fashion of dying women’s gray hair with a bluish tint . Toward the end of her life, in an eccentric move, she introduced the trend .
 Zhang influenced the Chinese film industry both through her acting career and through the fine arts organizations to which she belonged . Zhang influenced her career as a member of a fine arts organization .
 Her career and activism was deeply affected by the upheavals that occurred in Chinese politics, especially related to the arts . Her career was also affected by upheavations in China's political upheaval .
 Zhang spent two years in jail at the height of her popularity in China . Zhang was the victim of a government purge, and spent the time in jail . Zhang spent the most of her time in prison during her popularity .
 Zhang Ruifang created several roles that earned her a reputation as one of China’s most illustrious leading women . She was one of the leading women in China .
 radicals accused many top party and government officials of failing to follow Communist principles and consequently purged them from their positions . The Communist Party purged many of its top officials from positions .
 Students and other young people took to the streets in a semi-military organization called the Red Guards . The Red Guards were formed by students and young people in the 1980s .
 Jiang Qing became one of the most powerful political figures during the Cultural Revolution . Chairman Mao’s wife and a former unsuccessful actress, Jiang Qing, is one of China's most powerful women .
 Jiang used her powerful position in government to take revenge on the filmmakers who had ignored her in Shanghai in the 1930s . She resuscitated the Beijing opera houses, but insisted that they instill Communist themes in their productions . Jiang also insisted that the productions had Communist themes .
 She replaced many works of art with revolutionary Maoist works . Appointed deputy director of the Cultural Revolution in 1966 .
 Jiang Qing, Zhang Chunqiao , Wang Hongwen , and Yao Wenyuan formed the Gang of Four . The group was responsible for purging of anti-Maoist expressions throughout Chinese culture, including film .
 Jiang Qing was arrested and sentenced to death with a two-year reprieve in 1981 . When Mao Zedong died in 1976, Jiang Qing died in China . Jiang Qing is still serving a life sentence in prison .
 After the Communist victory in 1949, filmmaking was brought under the control of the Ministry of Culture . Hollywood films were replaced by local movies and films made in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe .
 Chinese-made films were expected to support the Communist government and its policies . The films are expected to show support for the government's policies .
 Many of the movies made in the 1950s and 1960s tended to be highly stylized, overly sentimental, dramatic, and stiff due to requirements imposed by the government . The movies were often stylized and overly sentimental and dramatic .
 Zhang Ruifang began her acting career while she was a student in Beijing in 1937 . The year that Japan invaded mainland China was the year she began acting .
 Zhang joined a student drama troupe, performing in Beijing and surrounding areas . Zhang is now a member of a Chinese university drama group .
 Chinese Communists viewed most films shown before the Communist victory in 1949 as encouraging Western, ‘bourgeois’ values . Chinese Communists view most films as encouraging western, “bourgeoise” values . Most films shown in China were shown before Communist victory .
 Communists infiltrated a film studio in Changchun (northern China) to prevent anti-Communist films from being made . Zhang and other Communists who were also actors infiltrated the studio . Zhang was also a Communist Party member .
 We prevented them from making anti-communist films, refusing scripts that were reactionary . We refused to make anti-Communist films and refused scripts that would be reactionary .
 It was very difficult to make Along the Songhua River as conditions and equipment were bad .
 After it was made it premiered at a Shanghai cinema that had never shown Chinese films before . The film was made in China and premiered in Shanghai in 2011 .
 Shanghai was cut off from Northeast provinces since 1931 . The people in Shanghai were curious about the Northeast provinces, because they’d been cut off .
 In 1962, Zhang starred in her best-known film, Li Shuangshuang, the story of a model commune member, with some faults, and her husband . Zhang starred as a member of a commune commune who is irritated by his wife's activism .
 The film delighted audiences with its comic dialogue between husband and wife . The film is based on the real-life story of the couple .
 In 1967, the Gang of Four blacklisted Zhang and she was imprisoned for two years . Zhang was imprisoned in 1967, and was blacklisted by the gang of four .
 She gradually made her way back into politics and the silver screen, how she made it back into fashion design .
 In 1980, she became the head of the Shanghai Drama Troupe . She headed a delegation to the First Manila International Film Festival .
 In 1983, she was a delegate to the New Youth International Film Festival in India . She was also a delegate at the New YIMF in 1983 .
 Nellie Bly, born Elizabeth Cochran, added an ‘e’ to the end of her last name to make herself appear more aristocratic . She was born into a wealthy family on her mother’s side . She added an 'e' to her last
 This young lady would one day descend into the hovels inhabited by the lowest of the lower classes to report on the abusive conditions in Pittsburgh’s filthiest factories and most dilapidated tenement houses . Ironically, this young lady so concerned with her social status would one
 Her investigative journalism led to reforms of United States mental asylums, jails, and sweatshops . Her investigations led her to reforms in the U.S. Mental Asylums .
 Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division. deplorable working conditions suffered by the poor .
 Bly imitated Jules Verne’s fictional journey described in Around the World in Eighty Days . Only Bly made it in 72 days .
 Bly was born probably on May 5, 1864, in Cochran Mills, Pennsylvania, to Michael and Mary Jane Cochran . Bly died of a gunshot wound to the head in 1864 .
 Her father was a self-made industrialist and judge, and her mother had come from a wealthy Pittsburgh family . Her mother was also wealthy .
 Bly spent her childhood seeking to catch up with and outwit her older brothers . Both partners had had previous marriages, and Bly's older brothers had also been married .
 Bly was educated at home by her father until his death in 1870 . Bly later attended Indiana Normal School in Pennsylvania for teacher training .
 When funding to attend the school petered out after only one year, Bly and the rest of her family relocated to Pittsburgh to be closer to Mary Jane Cochran's family .
 At age 16, Bly was determined to become self-sufficient . She soon discovered that single women could expect little support in any other career but domestic service or teaching .
 Never a great student, Bly had nevertheless developed an early and engaging penchant for writing .
 Bly’s career in journalism began when she responded to an editorial in the Pittsburgh Dispatch . Bly's career began with a response to a Pittsburgh Dispatch editorial . She is now a national radio personality .
 The letter complained that there were too many women working in factories and businesses . The letter was sent to the U.S. Congress in 2008 .
 Bly’s reply to the piece suggested that men could expect women to enter the workplace in droves out of economic necessity . Incensed, Bly responded to the article by saying that men should expect women in the workplace to enter out of necessity .
 Bly’s letter, written anonymously, so impressed the editor, George Madden, that he asked the writer to make herself known . Bly wrote anonymously to the paper's editor .
 She wrote reports under the name “Nellie Bly,” a misspelling of the popular Stephen Foster song Nelly Bly . She was also known as Nellie, a mispelling of Stephen Foster’s popular song .
 Bly initially offered critical coverage of the city’s working class, but when local businesses threatened to yank their advertisements from the paper, editors reassigned Bly to cover the society section .
 Her stories appeared in October 1887 after a 10-day sojourn in the Women’s Lunatic Asylum . She uncovered vermin-infested food, physical and mental abuse of patients .
 The expose launched both Ely’s career as a detective reporter and, more significantly, the sub-profession of investigative journalism . Ely: "The expose" launched his career as an investigative reporter and launched his own career . Ely says he is proud of his work in investigative journalism
 Ely’s willingness and success in performing this journalistic stunt encouraged other women to join the profession of journalism . Ely's willingness to perform this stunt encouraged others to join journalism, Ely said .
 Many readers were shocked to find that within the borders of their country, the most highly respected and self-righteous democracy in the world, existed the most heinous corruption imaginable .
 In November 1889, Ely embarked on a feat that catapulted her to national celebrity . Ely became a national celebrity in November 1889 . Ely was the first woman to become famous in the U.S.
 Jules Verne had written a popular adventure novel, Around the World in Eighty Days, about an imaginary balloon flight .
 The World promoted the tour by holding a contest to see which of its readers could most accurately guess how many days it would take Miss Ely to finish her journey .
 She tried her hand at fiction writing but was disappointed with the results . She was disappointed in the results of her fiction writing attempt .
 Her business acumen, however, left something to be desired, and the manufactory declared bankruptcy . The manufactory was later declared bankrupt by its owner .
 Reporter Arthur Erisbane of the Evening Journal remarked on her death from pneumonia that the nation had lost its finest reporter .
 EourkeWhite's long, exciting career as a photojournalist for Life Magazine and Eortune took her to all corners of the world . She retained an interest in American architecture and industry .
 Her photograph of Montana’s Fort Peck Dam made the cover of the premiere issue of Life in 1936 . Her photo of the dam was published in Life magazine's Life .
 DIARISTS, AND HISTORANANS work reflected a new care and concern for the people that she photographed . Her photographs reflect a new look at the people she photographed.
 Photojournalism is the reportage of a news event primarily through photographs, rather than through the written word . Photojournalists report on events primarily through photos, not written word, in order to capture them .
 Mathew Brady and his team of photographers to document the Civil War were among the first attempts to record news with images . In the United States, photos taken by Brady were the first attempt to record the news .
 Like journalism, photojournalism was considered too dangerous an occupation for women . Photojournalism is considered to be an occupational hazard .
 Margaret Bourke-White, like reporter Oriana FALLACI in Italy, broke open the field for younger women . She broke up the field in a bid to get younger women in the media .
 She began taking pictures as a means of paying for her college education . She is now taking pictures to raise money for her education .
 In 1924, she had married an engineering student, Everett Chapman, but the couple separated in 1927 . In 1927, she was married to another engineering student .
 Margaret moved in with her mother, who was living in Cleveland at the time, and when she obtained her divorce, she incorporated her mother’s maiden name by changing her name to Margaret Bourke-White . Margaret moved into her mother's Cleveland home after her divorce .
 In Cleveland, Cleveland, she began working as a commercial photographer, specializing in industrial photography .
 Bourke-White had accompanied her father on trips to factories, where he supervised the installation of rotary presses . She had accompanied him on visits to factories where he worked .
 Industrial photography captivated Bourke-White, who saw beauty in machinery . Industrial photography was a big part of his career .
 Like many Americans in the 1920s, she obsessed over new machines, and the technology that went in to building them . She was fascinated by machines and technology .
 Bourke-White went on to develop what biographer Theodore M Brown called the Machine Aesthetic, a new way of portraying machines as objects of art .
 Her work caught the eye of publisher Henry Luce, who invited her to join his new business magazine, Fortune .
 Her images of the Soviet Union led to the publication of her first book, Eyes on Russia . She focused her thoughts and her camera on Russia’s growing industries .
 From 1936 to 1957, she produced thousands of images in the pages of Life Magazine . She worked with Alfred Eisenstaedt, Thomas D McAvoy, and Peter Stackpole .
 As a photographer with Life, Bourke-White documented people and places all over the world, photographing international newsmakers . Bourke White was photographed with Life magazine Life .
 White and Caldwell married in 1939 but divorced three years later . Margaret Bourke was the first lady of the couple to marry White .
 During World War II Bourke-White was the first woman photographer accredited with the U.S. Air Force . She was also the only photojournalist in Moscow during the German bombing of the city .
 She took perhaps her best-known photographs of the liberation of the Nazi concentration camp Buchenwald in 1945 . She was one of the most famous photographers of the day .
 After the war, Bourke-White used her camera to imprint the image of India’s liberator Mahatma Gandhi hours before he was assassinated, as well as the labor strife in the diamond mines of South Africa .
 In 1952, as a United Nations correspondent during the Korean War, she photographed the conflict from the Korean citizens’ perspective, rather than the American soldier .
 Bourke-White experienced her share of reproach during her adventurous career . Bourke White was one of the world's most famous female celebrities .
 She and Caldwell defended themselves against the charge that they made up the captions to their photos of sharecroppers in You Have Seen Their Faces . Caldwell: "You have seen their faces"
 The FBI believed Bourke-White to be a Communist sympathizer during the 'red' scare of the 1950s . The FBI monitored her activities and searched her luggage during the ‘red’ scare .
 As Bourke-White battled Parkinson’s disease for the last 19 years of her life, she had her colleague Alfred Eisenstaedt photograph her experimental brain surgery and recovery .
 The 1989 film Double Exposure recounts her experiences with the disease . The film was released in 1989 and was made into Double Exposure .
 Byzantine princess and historian Anna Comnena wrote a history of her father Alexius I Comnenus and his Byzantine Empire called the Alexiad . She was a princess with lofty but thwarted ambitions .
 Comnena’s high position at court allowed her to access key information that would otherwise have gone unnoticed, court officials said . Comnene’�s position allowed her access to key information, the court said .
 The princess masterfully synthesized vast amounts of complex detail in a lively and engaging narrative history . The film is set in New York City, New York .
 Throughout the Alexiad, readers are treated to the glories and shortcomings of the Byzantine Empire and its culture . The book is published in New York, New York and London .
 The Byzantine Empire was the eastern half of the Roman Empire . It included eastern Europe, parts of southern Europe, northern Africa, and the Middle East . It was also known as the Byzantine Empire .
 Rome's eastern realm differed from Rome in its Grecian and Middle Eastern influences . The eastern realm was ruled by Rome in the early Roman times .
 Constantinople was more commercialized and claimed a greater degree of wealth . Constantinople was the Byzantine counterpart to Rome, the Byzantine equivalent to Rome .
 Byzantine emperors considered themselves the rightful heirs of Rome . They harbored dreams of subduing the “barbarian” populations to the west and creating a Byzantine lake .
 Byzantine Empire faced threats from its northern and eastern enemies, including the Normans and the Seljuk Turks . Their ambitions went unrealized, however, as the Byzantine empire faced threats .
 Comnena’s father, Alexius I, vowed to conquer the Seljuk Turks of Asia Minor who had defeated the Empire in 1071 and gained control of Jerusalem . The Empire was defeated by the Turks in the 1071-1072 .
 Urban II gathered a Christian army in 1095 and over the next two years the soldiers drilled in Constantinople and its envirals to prepare for the march across Asia Minor . The soldiers drilled for the two years in the city and envirations of the city to prepare .
 First Crusaders slaughtered the Muslim and Jewish inhabitants of Jerusalem in 1099 . They descended into Jerusalem on July 15, 1099, where they slaughtered the Muslims and Jews . The Crusaders massacred the Muslim, Jewish inhabitants .
 Anna Comnena, heir to the throne as the daughter of Alexius I and Irene Ducas, received a thorough education in the Bible and in the Roman and Greek classics .
 She also wrote a treatise on gout, a painful disease of the joints . She also studied medicine and later wrote a book about gout .
 At the age of 14, Constantine Ducas, son of Michael VII and cousin in her mother’s family, asked her to be his bride . Her mother died in 2011 at age of 92 .
 When Ducas died unexpectedly later that year, she married Nicephorus Bryennius, a soldier who had participated in the First Crusade . She was later married to a soldier from the First Crusades .
 Comnena’s parents had given birth to a son, John, who, as the only male heir of Alexius I, was favored to ascend the throne . In 1088, John was the only son favored to be the heir to Alexius II .
 Comnena never got over this cruel turn of fate, and she ruthlessly conspired with her mother to thwart her younger brother’s fortune . The pair conspired to thwart their younger brother's fortune .
 Nicephorus Bryennius’s unwillingness to be party to her scheme secured its failure and uncovered the attempt . Nicephius Bryennus was not part of the scheme .
 Comnena appeared prostrate before her brother, whose clemency spared her life . John II forced her to rescind her inheritance, though John II made her rescind the inheritance .
 The humble preface to the work tells readers that her purpose in writing was to save the past from oblivion, and that it is “God above” who has given her the ability to write her tome .
 Fifteen books cover the period 1067 to 1118, including the 12 years prior to her father’s reign . Fifteen of the books are published by the Queen of England .
 Comnena plundered the state archives to uncover diplomatic correspondences and imperial decrees to write her history . The queen's history was revealed in a series of letters and letters to the Spanish queen .
 The Alexiad modeled its heroes on such Greek figures as the mythological warrior Achilles and the fighter Heracles . Comnena’s copious references to the Greek poet Homer and the philosophers Plato and Aristode reflect her classical education . The playwright Euripides all reflect
 She betrays the Greek love and admiration of physical beauty and her prejudices against all non-Greeks, or barbarians, she considered to be uneducated and unrefined . She also betrays her love for physical beauty, and her hatred of non-Greek barbarians .
 The Alexiad also reveals the shortcomings of Byzantine culture, including its violent tendencies and selfdestructive attitudes toward religious heretics . It also reveals its self-destructive attitude toward heretics and violent tendencies .
 Comnena’s admiration for her father supplants any objectivity toward her subject, and there are chronological contradictions . Comnna’t admiration for the father supplanted any . objectivity . The film is based on the work of Comnene's father .
 Arabella Jenkinson was born in Hoxton, a district of London, to Richard and Eleanor Deane Jenkinson . The diarist died in 1947 at the age of 31 .
 Arabella Jenkinson struggled to live a pious, or devoted and conscientiously religious, life . Following her ninth year, Arabella struggled with her religious beliefs .
 What was considered ‘lively’ in 18th-century England was quite different from today’s interpretation today. What was “lively,’ was very different from our interpretation today .
 Activities that we might consider entertaining and fun today were considered to be of little value to the religious then . Since earthly life was seen as a preparation for eternal life, activities that we consider today were seen as little value .
 She loved to read novels, a new type of literature in the 18th century . She enjoyed satires; neither of which would be religious in nature .
 Happy endings usually resulted when the knight saved the heroine by sweeping her away into a safe marriage . Happy endings were usually happy endings when the heroine was saved by a knight .
 Satires, such as the play Rape of the Lock Ytmten by Alexander Pope a few decades prior to Arabella’s birth, poked fun at human vice or folly by using wit and irony . Satires such as Alexander Pope used wit to poke fun at vice by using
 Most satires were not meant to reflect religious or spiritual morals . Like novels, most satires are not intended to reflect moral morals .
 Arabella Jenkinson loved to dress up in fine clothes, and walk about the streets of London, displaying her finery .
 This was considered to be an earthly activity that took time away from religious contemplation . This, too, was considered a time off religious contemplation.
 At the age of 21, Arabella Jenkinson married Edward Davies, a widower with four children . The couple had four children together . Arabella married Davies at 21 .
 Edward helped his wife’s efforts to pursue a more religious life, as he was a preacher . Edward was also a preacher, helping his wife's efforts to become more religious .
 Arabella was constantly either pregnant or nursing her children, and caring for her stepchildren . Arabella became pregnant and nursed her children for the rest of her life .
 Before cures for childhood illnesses became available in the early 20th century, many parents knew the heart-wrenching experience of helplessly watching their own children die .
 Most parents now do not assume that having a child will result in losing the mother’s life . Although dying from childbirth is not a completely unheard-of experience in our own time, most parents now don’t assume it will happen .
 For women of the 18th century, death at childbirth was a real fear . For women, it was not easy to deal with death at birth .
 Complications at childbirth, such as loss of blood, could not be rectified, as midwives had no knowledge or means of blood transfusions .
 Conditions under which women birthed babies were not sterile, and infections frequently killed mothers . Conditions under conditions under which babies were born were often not sterile . Infections were frequently killed by infections .
 There was little birth control available and what was available was considered taboo or sinful . At the same time, if a woman married, childbirth was virtually inevitable . Birth control was virtually impossible, as there was little .
 Birth control devices, such as condoms, were linked with prostitution and, therefore, with immorality and sin . Condoms were linked to prostitution and therefore, as a form of sin .
 Arabella Jenkinson knew that her life was in danger when she married . Arabella's life was literally in danger after she got married to Arabella .
 As women were economically dependent upon men, most felt that they had little choice but to marry . And yet, as women felt economically dependent on men, they felt that there was no choice . Most women felt they were forced to marry in order to survive .
 Infant mortality was part of the everyday life of parents of young children born before the 20th century . Infants were part of daily life for parents of children born around the world before the first century .
 It is fair to say, however, that death in general was much more part of everyday life then than it is now . It was also more common in the 1930s and '50s than in the '60s, but it's not now as common as now .
 In the 20th century, modern medicine began to prolong the lives of people, and to make long life generally healthier . Modern medicine has made long life longer and generally healthier for people .
 Arabella Davies experienced life quite differently from the way that most people live today . The 18th-century women lived with the fear of childbirth, and in living with death, lived with death .
 Egeria was a traveler and diarist who wrote sometime in the fifth century . She may not have expected what she recorded in her diary would be useful someday .
 In 1884, an Italian archaeologist found Egeria’s journal in the library of the Brotherhood of Mary, a Catholic monastery, in Italy .
 He believed that what he found in the diary would be important to scholars of history, so he had the diary translated into other languages .
 Most of the content of her diary related information about the lands through which she traveled and about the religious ceremonies and rituals performed by the Christian church .
 She also wrote about the status of women and the roles that women played within the different churches she visited .
 Given its age (the diary is approximately 1,500 years old), Egeria’s work is in remarkably good shape . The diary is estimated to be in remarkably excellent condition .
 The end of the end of it has not been found, and even part of the middle is lost .
 The parts of the diary that we do have do not give us very much information about the woman who wrote it . It is not known who the diary was written by .
 Scholars are unsure exactly when Egeria lived and when she wrote her diary . Scholars are even uncertain exactly when she lived, and when her diary began .
 Historians who have studied Egerias diary have made several assumptions about the author based upon the content of her work . Historians have made assumptions about Egeria's work based on her diary .
 This process of conjecture is not foolproof, but it is the best that historians can do until more information may come to light . More information may be revealed in the future .
 Travel in the fifth century was only possible for those who had money . From other sources, such as ecclesiastical documents and histories, we know that travel in the . fifth century . We know that . travel .
 Egeria came from a wealthy family, which in turn meant that her family had high social status . It is likely, then, that she was likely to have come from a rich family . Her family is likely to be wealthy, which means that she had a high status .
 Egeria described the deference with which she was received, and she did not question it . Historians also make this conjecture based upon the diary .
 We can assume that Egeria was well educated for a woman of her time . Obviously she was literate and well versed in the scriptures of the Christian church, particularly the Bible .
 Egeria seems to have written her diary to other women of the Christian church, who lived together as a community within the church and according to church rules . Such women were known as canonesses, known as Canonesses .
 These women oversaw sacraments such as baptisms and funerals . These women took care of the rituals of the church .
 Historians of the Christian church know that as early as the 5 th century, Christians were in the practice of reading the Hebrew Bible, or Old Testament, as part of the New Testament . Because of Egerias diary, historians know that early as 5th century Christians were reading the
 Many Christians view the Hebrew Bible as simply part of the Christian Bible . This is unusual, because Hebrews do not use the word saint in the Bible .
 The length of the church services and the rigors practiced are excessive compared to more recent times, the church says . The length and rigoriness of church services are excessive, the priest says .
 Diaries and other writings of early Christians enabled the church to become familiar with, and therefore more united within, their religious faith community, regardless of the distances separating them . Early Christians were familiar with each other, and were united within their faith community .
 There is no record of the circumstances under which Egerias died, or even whether she ever returned from her journey .
 The Christian church offered women an ‘out’ if they did not wish to marry and have children . Thanks to Egerias diary, we know that early Christian women were encouraged to read and write .
 In a time in which pregnancy was fairly dangerous and threatened women’s lives, becoming a canoness may have seemed attractive alternative to many .
 Oriana Fallaci’s achievements as a news reporter, investigative journalist, and interviewer have earned her many awards . Fallaci's achievements have also opened up the field of journalism for other women .
 Fallaci chose a career in journalism while still a teenager, despite the fact that no Italian publication had ever hired a female reporter . Fallaci is the first woman to be hired by an Italian publication to do so .
 St. Vincent Prize for Journalism twice, based upon her ability to arrange interviews with previously inaccessible political figures, such as the Ayatollah Khomeini .
 Born on June 29, 1930, in Florence, Fallaci grew up during heart-wrenching times in Italy, and indeed, throughout Europe . Fallaci was born in Florence in 1930 .
 Under a fascist regime, a dictatorial ruler often restricts people’s freedoms, including freedom of press, speech, and mobility . Under a dictator's rule, people can be restricted to freedom of speech, freedom of movement and freedom of the press .
 Oriana Fallaci’s father, Edoardo Fallaci, a cabinetmaker, raised his daughter to share his obsession with freedom from fascist rule . Oriana's father was an Italian cabinetmaker who was obsessed with freedom .
 When Great Britain and France declared war against Germany in 1941, Italy quickly entered the war in defense of its fellow fascist nation, Germany . Italy entered the conflict in support of its fascist nation .
 Mussolini’s party deposed him in 1943, after Italy had lost its North African Empire . Mussolini was deposed in 1943 after the loss of his North African empire .
 German paratroopers rescued him and established a puppet government in northern Italy . His government was overthrown by the Nazis in 1945 .
 Oriana Fallaci says she carried messages, weapons, and copies of the underground newspaper of the Resistance, Non Mollare . Under the name “Emilia,” Fallaci carried messages and weapons on her bicycle .
 When she was discharged from the Freedom Volunteer Gorps after the war, she received 14,570 lire in pay .
 Oriana’s mother, Tosca, had received only an elementary school education, but she read and educated herself as much as she could . Tosca's daughter, Oriana, was born into a family of four children .
 Tosca became convinced that women’s lives would not change much under democracy . After listening to her husband's views on democracy, Tosca decided not to change her views . Tosca's husband Edoardo became convinced women's lives wouldn't change much .
 Women would, she claimed, still be slaves to the family and society . Women would be slaves, she said, to society and family .
 She raised her daughters to do well in school and pursue careers . Thus she raised her four daughters to be successful in their careers .
 Her mother, trying to dissuade her from following that career track, had her read an American novel by Jack London called Martin Eden . Her mother read the novel, which Jack London's Martin Eden, to encourage her to follow her career path .
 The hero of the book works as a writer but nearly starves in the process, unable to find work . The book is set to be released in September .
 Oriana's uncle, Bruno, told her she must first experience life before she could become a writer . Oriana is a journalist, who cautiously encouraged his niece in her career choice . Her uncle said she must experience life first before becoming a writer before she became famous .
 Oriana's role in the Resistance fulfilled that requirement, and when World War II ended in 1945, Oriana was on her way . Oriana died in 1945 .
 At age 16, she took a job at the local Florentine Christian Democrat daily newspaper called II Mattino deiritalia Centrale . She is now a national celebrity in Italy .
 She liked to interview celebrities, in order to discover how fame and fortune affected their personalities .
 She interviewed world leaders, including Golda MEIR and Henry Kissinger, as well as entertainers and filmmakers . She also interviewed world .
 Fallaci took advantage of technology to create successful interviews, especially with the tape recorder . Fallaci used the recorder to create a successful interview .
 Once, she declared that no one knew more about tape recorders than she did, except perhaps Richard Nixon . Nixon resigned when damaging evidence was found on his tape recorder .
 The difference between taking notes by hand during an interview and using a tape recorder may seem slight, but the impact of the new method cannot be overstated . While the difference between recording and recording is slight, it is important to take notes during interviews .
 Taping an interview enabled Fallaci to establish and hold eye contact with her subject . The interview is more personal and intimate because Fallaci doesn't have to look down at her notepad .
 Her writing began to improve with the use of tape recorders, historians say .
 She began to perceive writing as speaking, and she crafted the written stories that were based on interviews much more like actual person-to-person conversations than sterile reports .
 Most journalists try to write their news stories, or conduct interviews with newsmakers, in an objective manner . Most journalists write their stories in a manner that they are objective .
 Interviewees try not to let their own personalities, or personal biases, sway the report or interview . By this, they mean they try to not let their personalities sway the interview .
 Fallaci thought that objectivity was meaningless, because it was impossible to keep one's personality out of one’s work . Fallaci: "Objectivity is meaningless because it is impossible to . keep one of those personalities out of work"
 To get at the truth about the person she interviewed, Fallaci could be extremely aggressive . Fallaci is known for her aggressive approach to interviewing people .
 Oriana Fallaci became a model for the increasing number of women who entered the journalism profession in the 1970s and beyond . Fallaci was one of the first female journalists to enter the journalism field .
 Once seen as a tough job that only men were capable of performing, women journalists such as Oriana Fallaci changed that perception . Fallaci was one of the first women journalists to take on a tough role in journalism .
 Anne Frank knew and felt the power of her written words that would render her immortal after her death at age 15 in a Nazi concentration camp . Anne Frank's diarist died in a concentration camp aged 15 .
 Anne Frank’s diary, translated into 30 languages and adapted for screen and stage, catapulted its writer to worldwide fame when it was first published in 1947 . Anne Frank's diary has been translated in 30 languages, adapted for film and stage adaptations .
 The diary records the emotional and intellectual life of an adolescent girl living in peril and victimized by the horrific events of the times in which she lived . The diary was written by a teenage girl who was victimized by horrific events .
 Frank’s diary bears witness to the circumstances surrounding the Jewish people who tried to escape the terrors of a Nazi-controlled Europe . The diary chronicles the lives of Frank and his family members .
 Frank’s diary, like so much else in history that is of grave importance, is controversial . Frank's diary is controversial, but it's important to know what happened to him .
 The diary has been interpreted as a symbol of a little girl's supreme faith in humankind’s goodness, even in the face of contrary evidence . The diary was found in a museum in New York, New York .
 Commentators have often taken Anne’s statement, “I still believe, in spite of everything, that people are truly good at heart,” out of context . Commentators on the diary have frequently taken Anne's statement, "I still . believe, despite everything,
 Literary critic Cynthia Ozick argues that those who make too much of Anne’s optimistic spirit mask the hard-edged reality that Anne herself saw and understood to be true . Ozick: Those who make much of the optimistic spirit of Anne see and understand the truth .
 She perceived more clearly than most what was going on around her, and more importantly, why . She perceived most clearly what was happening around her .
 Anne Frank was born on June 12, 1929, to Otto and Edith Hollander Frank, upper-middle-class German Jews living in Frankfurt, Germany . Anne Frank is the daughter of Otto Frank, a German Jew living in Germany .
 Otto Frank’s family had lost their fortune in the poor economy of the 1920s . But he managed to establish himself in Frankfurt's business world as a banker . Otto Frank was a banker in the 1930s .
 When Adolf Hitler became chancellor of Germany in 1933, Nazi intentions soon became clear . Hitler's plans for the Nazi state of Germany were soon to be overtaken .
 The Civil Service Law mandated the retirement or dismissal of all non-Aryan civil servants . Civil Service law also mandated the dismissal of non-Jews .
 The Franks could not escape Nazism, however, when the German army invaded the Netherlands in 1940 .
 Anti-Jewish policies in Holland quickly repeated what Otto Frank had tried to evade in Germany . Anti-Semitism in Holland was a major problem in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Anne Frank had to leave the Montessori school and attend a Jewish school instead . Anne Frank was forced to move to a Jewish home instead of a school in the Jewish community .
 Deportation of Jews to concentration camps, especially Auschwitz, began in 1942 . Auschwitz was one of the most notorious concentration camps in Nazi Germany .
 Otto and Edith Frank had prepared their two daughters for this eventuality by securing a hiding place in the warehouse where he worked . Otto Frank had been working at the time of his death . Edith and Otto Frank's two daughters had secured their hiding place .
 During the persecution of Catholics in 16th-century Holland, several such hiding places had been built so that Catholics could worship without interference .
 Albert Dussel joined the families; now eight people shared the hiding place . Albert DUSsel joined Albert DUssel joined by Albert and his wife . Albert joined Albert's family in hiding place.
 Frank’s diary reveals that life for the outcasts began in the evenings, after the workday ended below . Frank's diary reveals how life in the warehouse ended when the warehouse opened the following day .
 During business hours, it was forbidden to flush the single toilet in the hidden apartments . The hidden apartments were hidden during business hours .
 Several friends of the Franks provided food and other necessities for the family . The Franks were taken into care of by friends and neighbors .
 In July 1944, the Franks and Van Daans listened to radio reports that Allied forces who had landed in Normandy, France, in June were reaching the Netherlands .
 All hope vanished as the Gestapo stormed the hidden apartments and arrested all eight inhabitants . All eight inhabitants were arrested by Gestapo during the raid .
 Those who had supplied the families with food and had kept their secret were also arrested . Some were sentenced to hard labor .
 The Franks were put on trains to the Dutch transition camp Westerbork and then to Auschwitz . Anne’s mother died in 1944 at the concentration camp in Poland . Anne's mother died there in 1944 .
 Anne and her sister Margot died in March 1945, a month before the camp was liberated by the British . Anne and Margot were moved to BergenBelsen, a concentration camp near Celle, Germany, where they caught typhus .
 Of the eight who lived at Prinsengracht, only Otto Frank—sick and emaciated—survived when Russian troops liberated Auschwitz in 1945 .
 Otto Frank returned to Prinsengracht after recovering in a German hospital . After recovering in hospital, Otto Frank has returned to his native Germany .
 Two friends Elli Vossen and Miep Gies gave him a diary that they had found on the floor of the hidden apartments . The diary was found on floor of hidden apartments in the secret apartments .
 Otto Erank had the diary published as Het Achterhuis (the house behind) in 1947 . Erank expurgated hateful passages that Anne had written about her mother, and others about her awakening sexuality .
 Anne Frank’s final diary entry communicates her increasing restlessness and hopelessness . Anne Frank's last diary entry: ‘I’m going to die. I’ll never be able to write again,’ she wrote .
 Anne Frank is an insightful, intelligent, and complicated girl whose life was cut short by human atrocity . Anne Frank resists all attempts at easy pigeonholing, and her life is cut short .
 However readers interpret her diary, it remains a testimony to the power of writing . Her diary was published in the early 1900s and is now published in France .
 Martha Gellhorn, American journalist, reported on 20th-century wars from Spain in the 1930s to Panama in the 1980s . Martha reported on wars in Spain, Spain, Panama, Panama and Spain .
 Kennedy's writing style attracted six decades of intellectually oriented American readers in magazines such as The New Statesman and The Atlantic Monthly .
 In 1989, at the age of 81, Gellhorn again found her way to another war front, when the U.S. invaded Panama . The war veteran was in Panama when the United States invaded Panama in 1989 .
 She had been invited to report on the 1992 war in Bosnia, but decided to stay home . Concerned that she was no longer as nimble as she used to be, she stayed home .
 To professional journalists, Gellhorn’s combination of objective reporting and personal writing style may seem inappropriate . But as a war correspondent she blends the two forms of writing to adequately represent the suffering of ordinary people on one hand and scrutinize the political upheavals that cause the wars
 The author is able to examine the horrors of combat, analyze the political background, and denounce the injustices inherent in all wars, in a personal manner .
 As a fiction writer, Gellhorn drops all objectivity and creates characters that grapple with the same issues she uncovered as a reporter .
 Gellhorn was born in a St. Louis, Missouri, family steeped in a tradition of service and reform . She believed her own contribution to improving society lay in her pen . She was born into a family of reformers .
 Her maternal grandmother spoke out in favor of the eight-hour day for servants . She organized a school for training domestics using scientific methodology . The school was set up by her grandmother .
 Her mother, Edna Fischel, advocated woman suffrage and organized a local League of Women Voters chapter . George Gellhorn, her father, was a medical doctor, and her mother was a suffragist .
 In 1937, during the Spanish Givil War, Gellhorn began her career as a journalist by covering the conflict for Colliers Weekly . She arrived in Madrid carrying only a backpack and fifty dollars in cash .
 She quickly met two other American reporters, Robert Capa and Ernest Hemingway . Her lifelong friend and lifelong friend is Robert Capo . She met Capa in New York City .
 The two seasoned men taught the young cub reporter the tricks of wartime journalism . They taught him how to distinguish between various kinds of gunfire, how to know when danger is imminent .
 Gellhorn’s articles on the Spanish Civil War inaugurated a long relationship between the magazine and its reporter . Colliers' coverage of the war in Spain began in the 1930s .
 When the war ended, Gellhorn continued traveling through Europe, covering the advancement of fascism in Germany and Italy . He continued to travel until the end of the war .
 She was the first correspondent to arrive in Finland after the Russians invaded the nation without formally declaring war in 1939 in 1939 .
 In 1939, she created her first work of fiction based on her experiences as a reporter . Her first novel was published in 1939 .
 A Stricken Field is set in Prague, Prague, on the eve of Hitler’s control of Sudetenland . The film was set in the Czech capital, Prague . It is based on the story of World War II in the early 1930s .
 Gellhorn’s novels during the early 1940s, including The Heart of Another {\9A\) and Liana, received only polite nods by critics . Her journalism won high praise .
 In 1948, Gellhorn applied the best of her talents as a journalist and combined that with well-developed fictional characters . The Wine of Astonishment was published in 1948 and sold for £16.99 .
 The battle took place between December 1944 and January 1945 as an unsuccessful attempt on the part of the German army to drive a wedge into the Allied forces’ defensive line .
 Both characters confront their most basic fears during several combat scenes in the film .
 At the end of the novel, the character Jacob Levy, a JewishAmerican soldier, stumbles upon Dachau, where he witnesses the horrors of the concentration camp . The character is JewishAmerican .
 The experience drives him to ram his army jeep through a crowd of German civilians . The incident is the first time he has driven a jeep into a crowd in Germany .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, Gellhorn continued reporting on armed conflicts throughout the world . During the 1960s and 1950s, he continued reporting .
 In 1959, a series of her wartime articles appeared in a collection called The Face of War, an anthology that forces readers to grapple with the realities of war . The face of War was published in 1959 in an anthology .
 In “Eichmann and the Private Gonscience”, Gellhorn raises the question of the nature of morality and the human conscience . Gellorn raises the questions of morality, morality and conscience .
 Gellhorn has reported on events in Europe, Vietnam, Israel, El Salvador, and Nicaragua for such publications as Colliers, The Guardian, and The New Statesman . She made her home wherever she worked .
 Divorced from Hemingway in 1945, she married Thomas Matthews in 1954, a union that ended in divorce 10 years later . She had a second marriage to Thomas Matthews, who died in 1954 .
 U.S. immigration officials refused to allow mother and son to enter the country . Mother and son lived in Cuernavaca, Mexico, for a time in the United States .
 She lived most recently in London, England, where she penned her latest books, Travels with Myself and Another {197 .
 Her collection of short stories, The Smell of Lilies, won the O Henry Award First Prize in 1958 . Her short story collection, published in 1958, won first prize in 1958.
 Her life and career was deeply affected by her background as a “colored” or mixed-race person, living in a nation that strictly divided its citizens according to race . Her career and career were deeply affected .
 Her book The Collection of Treasures and Other Botswanan Tales was nominated for the Jock Campbell Award for literature in 1978 . Her book was nominated in 1978 for a literature award .
 Bessie Amelia Emery was born in Pietermaritzburg, South Africa, July 6, 1937 . She was born to an upperclass white Scottish mother and a black African father . She is one of the world's most famous women .
 When Bessie Emery was seven months pregnant and could no longer hide her affair with a black man, her family had incarcerated her . Emery's affair with the black man led to her being incarcerated .
 Zulu man worked in the family stables in Zulu . He was a Zulu worker in his family's stables .
 Bessie Emery’s family rejected their granddaughter, sending her to be raised by a mixed-race woman, Nellie Heathcote, and her husband George . Emery's family rejected her and she was sent to live with Heathcotes and George .
 When she was 13, the Heathcotes sent her to a missionary orphanage and school for colored girls in Durban . She was 13 when she was sent to an orphanage . She is now a successful lawyer and lawyer .
 School officials said her mother had been in the mental hospital because she was insane, not because of racial prejudices . School officials told her that her mother was in the hospital because of a mental illness .
 The orphanage allowed Bessie to read her mother's files, where she discovered her mother’s affection for her and the fact that she had left money for her education . Later, she discovered that her mother had left her money to pay for education .
 She completed her teaching certificate in 1957 and took a job teaching primary school at Clairwood Coloured School in Clairwood .
 Through an influential friend, Margaret Cadmore, she had had a short story published in a children's literature anthology in 1951 .
 In 1958, she began her career as a journalist, working for the Golden City Post, a Cape Town, South Africa, weekly tabloid with a black readership . She is best known for her work in Cape Town .
 The paper carefully avoided major issues of racial unrest that would offend the government . But on minor issues it cried out against racism and enforced segregation .
 In Cape Town, Bessie lived in District Six, an integrated neighborhood that the government of Pieter Willem Botha bulldozed out of existence in 1966 to make way for an all-white residence . District Six was the site of the first white residence in Cape Town . District
 She wrote for a literary and political magazine called Drum and later The New African . Soon after, she moved to Johannesburg, where she wrote for the magazine Drum . She later moved to the city to write for a monthly journal .
 The editors and writers of both publications, including Head, were nationalists who supported the African National Congress . Head was a member of the organization devoted to ridding the nation of white supremacists .
 The ANC had been banned in South Africa in 1960, following the state of emergency declared in response to the ANC’s national campaign against the South African government . The ANC was banned in the country in 1960 .
 The security police confiscated two issues of The New African, charging it under the Obscene Publications Act . Security police confiscated the two issues under Obscene Publication Act .
 She returned to Cape Town in 1960, where she started her own political broadsheet . She returned in 1960 to start a political newspaper .
 Great Britain rejected South African participation in the British Commonwealth (due to its apartheid policies) and the nation became a republic in 1961 .
 Now, the former European colony was on its own, but its racial policies of segregation and discrimination became more onerous . Now, it is now a nation of African Americans .
 Bessie met and married journalist Harold Head that year . The two began writing for The New African and a Ugandan publication Transition .
 Bessie also left South Africa with a one-way visa to take a teaching job at Tshekedi Memorial School in Serowe, Bechuanaland .
 Bechuanaland was a British protectorate at the time; however, it too gained independence from Great Britain in 1966 and was renamed Botswana . Botswana gained independence in 1966 .
 Eking out a sparse existence, Head lived in a house that lacked electricity, and she typed by candlelight . Head was forced to live in a home that had no electricity . Head typed by candles and used a typewriter .
 She and other political refugees formed a farm cooperative, through which she marketed her homegrown fruits and vegetables . She and others form a farm co-opetition to sell their produce .
 During this period, she began the second phase of her career, writing and publishing novels and short stories .
 She also suffered from mental depression, made worse by the prospect that the government of Botswana might be persuaded to deport her back to South Africa .
 She was admitted to a psychiatric institution on a couple of occasions in the late 1960s and early 1970s . Eventually, she was admitted in a psychiatric hospital .
 In Botswana, she met people full of greed and ambition . In South Africa, where blacks were oppressed, she saw no such traits . Head wrote to the editor of The New African, Randolph Vigne, in a letter .
 As a colored person living in South Africa, she had been rejected by her white relatives but often persecuted by blacks for not being black enough . Head herself had lacked a sense of belonging; as a colored .
 "It was a microcosm where she encountered an entire spectrum of humanity," she says . "It's a moral microcosmic" where she encounters an array of humanity .
 She found people in Serowe to be brutal and harsh, and much of her literary effort portrayed the people with whom she lived after 1964 . Much of her work was published in the 1990s .
 When Rain Clouds Gather is an international success . It is a vivid account of village life in Botswana involving the relationship between an Englishman and a black South African who together try to change the farming methods of the community .
 Her masterpiece, A Question of Power, is a semiautobiographical account of a woman’s mental illness and breakdown . Her masterpiece is A Question Of Power . Her work is published in New York, New York .
 Noni Jabavu grew up in a mixed culture of Xhosa (pronounced “Kussa”) tribal traditions and English Christian colonialism .
 Jabavu became the first black person and first woman editor of The New Strand, a British journal, in the 1950s . She was editor of the journal in the 1960s and became a British journalist .
 Noni Jabavu's grandfather was the first black African to own and edit a Xhosa-English newspaper . He was one of the few black politicians to be associated with white leaders in South Africa’s Parliament, before apartheid was introduced .
 Noni Jabavu was born in Cape Province in 1919 or 1921 . She left South Africa as a teenager to obtain an education at a Quaker school in England .
 She studied violin at the Royal Academy of Music until WWII interrupted her studies . World War II interrupted her violin studies .
 Jabavu was a welder in a machine factory during the Second World War . She worked in war-era factories in England and Wales . She was the first woman to work in the war .
 She married a pilot in the Royal Air Force, but he died in combat soon after . She married another pilot, who was killed in combat in Afghanistan .
 Jabavu raised their daughter alone, studied journalism, and worked her way up into the position of editor at The New Strand . She raised her daughter alone and studied journalism at the university .
 Under apartheid, marriage between people of different races was not allowed in South Africa . She married a British film director, Michael Cadbury Crosfield, but the mixed-race couple could not return to South Africa.
 Jabavu began writing her memoirs because of her interracial and international background . It is largely due to her international background that she began writing the memoir .
 An English friend encouraged her to stop reminiscing about her African heritage and to start writing it down .
 As Jabavu reached the middle years of her life, important changes occurred in South Africa that affected her writing .
 In 1961, the country gained independence from Great Britain, as European colonial holdings were separating from their European colonizers all over the African continent .
 South Africa withdrew from the British Commonwealth because of Britain’s criticisms of its racial policies . South Africa withdraws from the Commonwealth due to criticism of its policies .
 The African National Congress was banned by the government in 1960 . It was formed to fight for black rights (blacks form the majority of the population)
 ANC and other groups formed guerrilla campaigns against the South African government . In response to the government's crackdown, the ANC and others have formed guerrilla groups .
 Mandela became president of South Africa in 1994 . Three decades later, apartheid was abolished and Mandela was president of the country . Mandela was elected to power in 1994 and became South African president .
 Jabavu’s memoirs are less about her own life and more about the life and culture of the Xhosa people . In some ways, she's less about herself than about her life and her culture . The memoirs will be published in the UK and Australia .
 She begins with her journey back home for her brother’s funeral in 1955 . As a way of introducing her audience, both books were published in London .
 Gangsters in Johannesburg, South Africa, had murdered her brother, Tengo Jabavu . Gangsters had murdered him in South Africa's capital, Johannesburg .
 Tengo Jabavu describes the funeral service as spontaneous outbursts of grief, dismay at the circumstances under which he was murdered, and prayers . One mourner blamed his death on slum conditions in black townships for his death .
 Noni Jabavu describes the funeral as a mixture of Christian and pagan ritual . The funeral was held in the same way as a pagan ceremony . Noni says the funeral was a mixture between Christian and Christian beliefs .
 After the Christian service, the family adhered to the traditional Xhosa practice of killing and eating an ox, a cleansing ritual, and remaining secluded from others for a period of time . Jabavu accepted her brother’s death .
 Nowhere in her memoirs does Jabavu heighten or even focus on racial tensions . Her memoirs do not mention racial tensions in them .
 Jabavu’s tone toward the mixture of races is one of gratitude, not hostility . While conflict does exist, there is no conflict between the two sides . The tone of the character's tone is that of gratitude and not hostility.
 She fondly describes cordial interactions between her family and white families . She views the policy of apartheid as simply a transitory phase that South Africans have to live through .
 Jabavu also memorializes her Xhosa family . In addition to introducing readers to South African culture, she also memorials her family . The book is published in South Africa and South Africa .
 With Tengo Jabavu’s death, there were no more descendants of Noni Jabavus’ family in South Africa . The Jabavutu line died out; there are no more than a few descendants .
 Children in traditional and Christian Xhosa communities teach children to humble themselves for the sake of collective sharing within the family and community .
 According to Xhosa culture, individuals are not thought of as individuals but rather as representatives of the family . An individual’s aspirations are subordinate to family goals, according to the culture .
 The book recounts her life as a slave; the seven years she spent hidden away from her master in an attic . It recounts her escape to the North and her odyssey as a fugitive slave . The book also details her incredible escape from the North .
 Incidents offered a dual critique of the institution of slavery and the restrictions facing 19thcentury women . Incidents set a new precedent for women’s writing and set new precedent .
 Jacobs broke taboos against women discussing their sexual lives and engaging in illicit sexual relations . Jacobs redefined the word freedom in feminist terms, as a single woman and a mother . Jacobs was a single mother and single mother .
 At the end of Incidents, she tells us, “Reader, my story ends with freedom; not in the usual way, with marriage.” She tells us that her story ended with freedom .
 Jacobs begins her story with her childhood in Edenton, North Carolina, spent in slavery . Jacobs tells the story of her life in slavery in the state of North Carolina .
 Her first owner, Margaret Horniblow, who taught her to read and sew when she was little, died willed her to her baby niece, Mary Matilda Norcom .
 James Norcom began sexually pursuing Jacobs as soon as she reached puberty . Norcom, Norcom says Jacobs was sexually pursued by Norcom . Jacobs says Norcom started sexually pursuing her when she was at puberty .
 If she refused to become his concubine, Norcom threatened to send her to his plantation to work as a field hand . She refused to work for Norcom and was sent to work on his plantation . Norcom sent her to the plantation to be a field worker .
 In her teens, Jacobs began having an affair with Samuel Tredwell Sawyer, an attorney, legislator, and neighbor of Norcom’s . Norcom was Norcom's neighbor, Jacobs' neighbor, Norcom said .
 Norcom sent Jacobs to his plantation and threatened to send her children there as well . When she gave birth to two children, Louisa and Joseph, she was sent to the plantation . Norcom also threatened her with sending her children to the plantations .
 Jacobs then took a gamble, hoping to save her children from a life of hard labor . Jacobs then decided to take a gamble and take her children to live a better life . Jacobs: "I want to save my children from hard labor. I want to keep them alive"
 She resolved that if she went into hiding, Norcom would soon tire of the children and sell them to Sawyer, who promised to free them . She resolved to go into hiding; Sawyer promised her the children .
 Her grandmother Molly Horniblow, a free woman once owned by Margaret, worked as a baker . Margaret's grandmother Molly was a baker and worked for free women in the 1800s .
 Her house had a tiny crawl space above a storeroom, where Jacobs remained in hiding for seven years . Jacobs spent her time reading the Bible, sewing and reading Bible .
 Sawyer did indeed buy the children, allowing them to live with their greatgrandmother . Sawyer bought the children and they now live in the care of their grandmother .
 Joseph escaped and joined Jacobs’s brother William on the abolitionist speakers’ circuit . Later he took Louisa to a free state, but he never freed them .
 Jacobs fled north on a vessel that sailed to Philadelphia in 1842 . Jacobs fled on the same vessel to Philadelphia, Philadelphia . Jacobs died in 1841 .
 In 1850, the nature of slavery and abolitionism changed with the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act . The act was the first act of the abolition of slavery in America .
 Thenceforth, northerners were required to aid in the capture of fugitive slaves . Northerners faced punishment if they assisted escaped slaves .
 Previously, northerners could ignore slavery as a southern “peculiar institution,” they were now required to participate in it . Northerners were required to take part in slavery .
 For Jacobs, the law meant that her former captors could once again pursue her . Jacobs, who was held captive for more than a decade, says she is safe now .
 Jacobs was purchased by Cornelia Grinnell Willis and Nathaniel Parker Willis for three hundred dollars in 1852 . Her employers arranged for the American Colonization Society (an organization dedicated to relocating freed slaves far from United States territory)
 Jacobs felt disappointment at having to act as a commodity one last time . Thrilled to be finally free, Jacobs said he was disappointed at being a commodity again . Jacobs: "I'm happy to be free, but I'm disappointed at not being able to be a commodity"
 Slave narratives had already been used as weapons in the fight against slavery in the U.S. when Jacobs began writing hers . Jacobs' slave narratives were used as a weapon against slavery .
 Douglass’s Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave, established the significance of the genre within the abolitionist movement . The book was published in the early 1900s . Douglass was a leader of the American Slavery Movement .
 Douglass depicted the horrors of slavery, the immorality of the institution . He relied upon the respectability lent to the narrative by Douglass’s editors, white abolitionists, to make his arguments .
 Jacobs, too, worked with the abolitionist editor Lydia Maria Child in producing her work . Jacobs and Child were abolitionists and abolitionists .
 Harriet Beecher Stowe refused to write Uncle Tom’s Cabin . She wanted to retain her authorial voice .
 Jacobs’s story revealed the double burden of slavery on women, who like men, were in captivity, but who were also subject to sexual harassment by their masters . Douglass's story helped persuade northerners to join the cause against the immorality of slavery .
 During the Civil War, she helped raise money to aid black refugees crowding into Washington, D.C., in search of food, shelter, and employment . She raised money to help the black refugees in Washington .
 In 1863, with the help of the New England Freedmen's Aid Society, she and Louisa opened the Jacobs Free School for African Americans .
 Women’s efforts in the Union fight against the South during the Civil War were recognized by historians and historians .
 Jacobs sailed to London in 1868 to raise money for an orphanage and old people’s home . Jacobs raised money for a London orphanage . Jacobs sailed from London to London to raise funds for orphanage, old people's home .
 Harriet Jacobs and her book Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl languished as part of a forgotten past until the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s, and the women's liberation movement .
 20th-century historians recovered the true identities of Jacobs’s characters, dispelling myths that it was fictional and its author white . Scholars resurrected the book as the most important literary work by an African-American woman in the antebellum period .
 Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, written by Herself, is published by Jean Fagan Yellin . The book is written by herself .
 Catharine Sawbridge Macaulay broke every rule in the book of how women should conduct themselves in society . The independent scholar, historian, and political pamphleteer, was a British historian and pamphletier .
 Despite the sometimes piercing criticism her work provoked, she became a respected and revered writer . Her work was often met with criticism .
 A female band despising nature’s law. Survey with me, what never our fathers saw, what we fathers saw . A female rocker despises nature's law. A female singer despising law.
 Other male writers, such as Delariviere Manley, argued that for a woman to be engaged in intellectual pursuits indicated that she was sterile .
 Catharine Sawbridge was born on April 2, 1731, in Kent, England, to John Sawbridge, a wealthy landowner, and Elizabeth Wanley Sawbridge .
 Catharine's mother died during childbirth when she was two, and her father gave Catharine and her brother full use of his extensive library . Catharine died in childbirth during childbirth at the age of two . Her father gave her and her older brother use his library .
 John Sawbridge had many books on the ancient Romans, and the Romans’ libertarian and republican ideals inspired Catharine . Catharine's mother Catharine was inspired by the Romans' libertarian ideals .
 In 1760, she married a Scottish physician, George Macaulay, who encouraged her literary talents . She died of her injuries in 1760 .
 Macaulay died in 1776, leaving Catharine with a healthy inheritance and their young daughter . Catharine was left with a young daughter by her husband .
 In other words, Catharine Macaulay wrote with passion because she felt strongly about her subject . That passion would keep her going, no matter what the cost .
 Macaulay wrote History of England under her own name . Unlike other women writers, she thought her work would more likely achieve acclaim if she wrote it without her feminine first name .
 Macaulay’s History of England praises the republican form of government in England . The Long Parliament was championed by the Long Parliament during the mid-1600s .
 Parliament is the governmental body that represents English citizens and balances the power of the monarch . In England, the Parliament is a governmental body representing English citizens . Parliament is in charge of the government and the government of England .
 Macaulay condemns monarchical government as corrupt and ant-ibertarian . The monarch is a dangerous view to hold in England, he says .
 Her male counterpart, philosopher David Hume, wrote his History of England in 1754 . His book defends the monarchy and argues that the crown would best sustain English principles of freedom and liberty .
 Macaulay’s History of England sold well and was translated into French, though it never received the acclaim that Hume’�s history did . The history of England was published in 17th century .
 After finishing the last of the eight-volume history, published in 1783, Macaulay began working on a series of pamphlets, which were designed to persuade readers to her political views .
 Many of them were responses to pamphlets written by other political thinkers . Many of the pamphlets were written in response to other political ideas .
 She wrote a pamphlet on copyright law in 1774; on the American crisis in 1775; and on the French Revolution, in response to Edmund Burke’s views .
 Perhaps her most influential piece, “Letters on Education,” written in 1790, advocates the same sports and studies for girls and boys . She also advocates for the same studies and sports for both genders .
 This too was controversial, as most people thought that the only education girls needed was in keeping house and raising children . Most people still believed that girls needed to learn to keep house and raise children . This was controversial .
 Macaulay, who was educated in the same way as her brother, believed that women’s secondclass status in society arose from the notion that their only value lay in pleasing men .
 Both the American and French revolutions excited Macaulay a great deal . She saw in these nations the possibility of real political and social freedom taking root .
 She visited America in 1784, as the guest of George Washington at his Mount Vernon home in Mount Vernon . She died in 1881, but her husband died in 1918 .
 Very little is known about the life of Elizabeth Mallet . She was a publisher and journalist .
 We know that she lived in England around the turn of the 18th century . We know she published newspapers and sold books . We also know she sold newspapers .
 Historians believe that she established the first English daily newspaper in 1702, The Daily Courant . Historians say she established The Courant in the 17th century .
 Women who worked in traditionally male occupations often tried to obscure their sex so as not to incur ridicule, or even the censorship, of their male counterparts . Women often tried not to offend the ridicule of male colleagues .
 Many writers thought that no one would read a newspaper if they thought that a woman had written it . Like most writers, they simply wanted to be read, and many thought that they would not be read .
 In the late 17th century, newspaper writers such as Elizabeth Mallet got started in the business by printing broadsides and distributing them on city streets . Broadsides were distributed in the city streets of New York .
 Broadsides were large sheets of paper with news stories printed on them . Broadside was large sheets with news articles printed in them . News stories were printed on news sheets .
 Journalists found news items on the streets of the cities where the papers were sold . Journalists found their news items in the streets .
 Bedminster in Dorsetshire burnt to the ground the market-house and an hundred and ten houses more, to the great terror of the inhabitants and the loss of five or six thousand pound .
 A Full and true relation of a most barbarous and dreadful murder committed on the body of Mrs. Mrs. Boulden . A most barbarious murder was committed on Mrs. Crippen's body .
 The king wanted newspapers to read, yet feared to touch London newspapers, which might be infected . The king feared that London newspapers might also be infected with disease .
 Fie ordered Leonard Litchfeld, the university printer, to bring out a local paper daily . Fie also ordered the printer to print a local newspaper daily .
 On Tuesday, November 14, 1665, the first number of The Oxford Gazette appeared . The Gazette was published only on Thursdays and Mondays .
 Unlike her earlier broadsides, the first issue of The Daily Gourant did not contain any local news .
 Its two columns resembled the design of the by now prominent London Gazette . The two columns were designed to resemble the London Gazette.
 He will not take it upon himself to give any Comments or Conjectures of his own, but will relate only Matter of Fact . He supposes other People to have Sense enough to make Reflections for themselves .
 This “Advertisement” sets forth a journalistic ethical code that still exists today . This ‘Advertisement’ sets forth an ethical code . This "Advertisement" sets forth journalistic ethical standards that still exist today .
 Mallet’s role in establishing the first English daily newspaper, however, was short-lived . Mallet was the founder of the first daily newspaper in England . He died of a heart attack in the early 1900s .
 ITistorian James Sutherland writes, “It seems unlikely that Elizabeth Mallet was ever the proprietor of the paper she sold, and much more likely that it was owned from the start by Buckley,” Sutherland writes .
 Buckley may have been a member of a group of booksellers, one of whom may be Buckley . Buckley was likely to have been Buckley's friend .
 Given her background as a journalist, it is likely that Mallet did more than simply sell the paper, but she chose not to reveal herself as such . Sutherland offers no evidence of his suppositions .
 It may also be possible that Mallet died in 1702, and that Buckley bought the paper from her estate . Buckley may also have bought the papers from Mallet's estate .
 Elizabeth Mallet also published and sold The Petticoat Government, The New Quevedo, The Secret Mercury, and The History of Living Men by John Dunton in 1702 .
 William Freke, Andrew Marvell, Edward Ward and John Tutchin also wrote books that Mallet published .
 Journalist Flora Shaw led the way in publicizing favorable attitudes about British imperialism in South Africa in the 19th and early 20th centuries . Shaw was a British journalist in the late 19th century .
 Her stories about conditions in South Africa went beyond informing readers to persuading them of the righteousness of British foreign policy . Her stories went beyond that of informing readers of South Africa .
 Shaw made a career in journalism at a time when few women discussed—let alone shaped—public policy . Shaw made her career as a journalist and public policy reporter . Shaw says she is proud of her work in journalism .
 She did not marry until after she had established a name for herself, which allowed her to work without regard to the duties that were obligatory for white, middle-class, 19th-century women .
 Shaw married at the age of 50, past childbearing years; she clearly felt that traditional roles for women were fundamental . On the other hand, she once commented that any woman who had not borne a child was a failure and her life not worth recording .
 Of primary importance in understanding Shaw is the historical context in which she lived, Shaw says . Shaw's life is in the context of her life in the 1930s and '60s .
 Several European women in this volume were affected by the race among European powers to establish colonies overseas . This volume includes three European women who were affected .
 Mata Hari, Markham, and David-Neel did nothing to publicly support British imperialism, Shaw did . Shaw did. Shaw did not. Shaw. Shaw .
 Shaw’s contemporaries, Mary Kingsley and Annie Besant, used their pens to condemn British imperialism . Two of Shaw's contemporaries used their pen to condemn imperialism .
 Even after she retired from her career, Shaw continued to support imperialism . Shaw continued her support for imperialism .
 As a governor's wife she supported the imperialist cause by promoting her husband’s career . She also worked for philanthropic organizations, such as the Royal Society of Arts .
 Her work with refugees during World War I earned her the title Dame of the British Empire . She was awarded the title for her work in the field of refugees .
 Shaw had an intense sense of individualism . Shaw carefully guarded her own work and her independence and ability to establish a career for herself . Shaw did not extend her own experiences to others, however, .
 Though proud of her own autonomy, she did not believe that other women ought to act independently of their fathers or husbands .
 She refused to support woman suffrage, or the right of women to vote, for that reason . She refused the right to vote for women .
 Her mother’s father was the governor of Mauritius, a French colonial island in the Indian Ocean . Her mother was born in Mauritius and her father was governor of the island .
 Her mother, chronically ill, had borne 14 children and died in her early forties . Her mother had been chronically ill and died from her illness .
 Flora Shaw took over her mother’s household duties until her father remarried . She was taken in by her father until her mother died in 2006 .
 In 1877, with Ruskin's guidance, she published her first children’s story, Castle Blair . She published Castle Blair in 1877 .
 She embarked on charity work in the slums of London’s dock area . She then moved to London, where she worked in the docks area .
 Though she found charity work to be a “satisfaction to the heart,” she did not see it as a remedy to the intense poverty she saw . She said charity work is not a remedy for poverty she witnessed .
 The real solution, as Shaw saw it, lay in the colonization of distant lands, which she believed would bring employment for London’s poor . Shaw saw the real solution to the problem was to colonize distant lands .
 Stead, an imperialist, believed in the power of the press to shape political policy, and so did Shaw . Stead was an imperialist who believed in press power to influence political policy . Shaw believed in using the press as a tool to influence policy .
 For the next 15 years, she worked as a highly regarded political journalist and foreign correspondent for the Pall Mall Gazette, the Manchester Guardian and the London Times .
 Had she been a man, she was told by the Times, she would have been made their colonial editor . She would have had been made the colonial editor of the Times .
 Flora Shaw identified with the aspirations of the ‘empire-builders’ of her day, and her admiration was reflected in her reports . Shaw's admiration for the "empire builders" reflected in the reports .
 Like many white women of her day, Shaw viewed African people as uncivilized, and therefore inferior to Europeans . Shaw viewed Africans as unccivilized and inferior to the Europeans .
 Africans served an important role as servants and workers in advancing the Europeans’ economic goals, she said . She believed that Africans served as servants to advance the European's economic goals .
 Exposing Africans to civilization during the colonizing process, she thought, could only benefit them . She said it would only benefit the African people .
 Sontag won two Rockefeller Fellowships in 1965 and 1974, and two Guggenheim Fellowship in 1966 and 1975 .
 Susan Sontag writes essays that probe beneath the surface of American culture to uncover a truth . Like a modern-day Socrates, she probes beneath surface of U.S. culture .
 She revealed disturbing similarities between Nazi Germany in the 1930s and American culture in the 1960s .
 Sontag unravels the ideological underpinnings of American society and examines them . She shifts her focus to marginalized subgroups within society, such as women, such a woman .
 Historian explores the way society forces gender roles on men and women . Then probes the meaning of the 1960s and 1970s women’s liberation movement .
 Many of her writings are autobiographical and deal with constructions of identity . Her writings are often autobiographical .
 Sontag often forms the basis of her thoughts by examining her own life . She is critical of contemporary politics and ideologies, including feminism . Her work is often critical of current political ideologies and ideologies .
 She is primarily a critic of art forms, including literature, film, and photography . She is also a practitioner of those same forms .
 She had married sociologist Philip Rieff in 1950 and gave birth to their son in 1952 . She had a son with Philip in 1953 .
 Sontag continued her education at Harvard, where she earned an M.A. in English and another in philosophy . She continued her studies at Harvard .
 She also edited Commentary and wrote a novel, The Benefactor, in which the male protagonist's dreams invade his waking life .
 In 1966, she wrote an influential article on art criticism included in her book Against Interpretation . She rejected the notion that art should be interpretedxciA instead advocated the exploration of how art functions .
 By the 1970s, Sontag had delved into the adjacent fields of film and photography .
 Photographic images represent an imagined past that, unlike fleeting reality, is forever arrested in time . She theorizes that photographic images represent a imagined past .
 Photographs offer us the possibility to create an image of ourselves that we want to project on the world . Especially in a capitalistic economy, photographs, like other commodities, offer us a chance to create our own image .
 Her works dealing more directly with political issues include Trip to Hanoi and Styles of Radical Will .
 Styles of Radical Will discusses the value of pornography as a form of literature . Styles of Radical Will will also discuss the importance of pornography in the form of pornography .
 Sontag provoked feminists when she once described the movement as a bit simpleminded . She once said that American feminists had divorced mind from feeling .
 The play explores relationships within the family of the 19th-century American writer Henry James . James’s younger sister, Alice James, is the sister of the writer . The play is possibly drawn from her 1978 essay “Illness as Metaphor” about her own
 French writer and intellectual Author Madame de Stael used her ideas, and her pen, to persuade audiences that the individual deserved more power and freedom .
 She used two different forms of writing to express her ideas . First, she wrote novels that had underlying messages about human freedom .
 She wrote nonfiction books in which she communicated her ideas about the role individuals played in politics and society . She also wrote non-fiction books about individuals' role in society .
 Her corpus of work includes novels, plays, memoirs, criticism and criticism . Her works include works of historical and sociological observations .
 Madame de Stael also influenced French intellectual life through her salon . Her salon was a French salon .
 In France, it was common for upper-class women to operate salons, or public rooms where intellectuals met to discuss politics and philosophy . The salon was a public room for intellectuals to meet in France .
 On the surface, these women appeared to be hostesses, serving drinks and food for their customers . The women were also known as hostesses at the time .
 In reality, they participated as much in the intellectual life of their salons as did their male patrons . But in reality, the men were involved in their own salons, says the author .
 Madame de Stael is perhaps best known as a forerunner of the Romantic movement in Europe . She is best known for her trenchant comparative analyses of European culture . Her trenchant analysis of the world's cultural differences is often overlooked .
 Romanticism flourished in Europe between the 18th and mid-19th centuries . Romanticism is an attitude or intellectual orientation that privileged emotion over rational thinking .
 In Germany, a culture de Stael admired, Romanticism was marked by a preoccupation with the mystical, the subconscious, and the supernatural . De Stael's work is based in Germany, where he was inspired by the culture he admired .
 Positivism is the notion that only experience forms the basis of knowledge . Positivist is the idea that only experiences are the basis for knowledge .
 Anne Louise de Stael was born into a political climate that was rife with political change . It is hard to imagine a time or place in which the ideas that were discussed in the salon would have had more significance . For Stael, the ideas would have been more significant if the salon
 The 1789 French Revolution spelled the end of the French monarchy and, at least for a short time, the beginning of a republic in which ordinary citizens, instead of aristocrats, took power .
 In this hot climate of revolutionary change, Anne Louise de Stael publicized her ideas . De Stael's ideas were published in the 1930s .
 Born on April 22, 1766, in Paris, de Stael’s family encouraged her intellectual development . De Stael was born in Paris in 1766 .
 Her father, Jacques Necker, was a man of modest origins who had risen to become King Louis XVI’s finance minister . Her father was the former finance minister of Louis XVI .
 Had de Stael been born a man, it is likely she would have followed in her father’s footsteps, as she, too, displayed a knack for managing money .
 Anne Louise Germaine spent her childhood in her mother Suzanne’s salon, absorbing ideas . She was inspired by her mother's work in the salon .
 Jacques Necker adored his daughter, and she him, which became a source of jealousy for Suzanne Necker . Suzanne became jealous of her father's love for his daughter .
 When Anne Louise was 20, she succumbed to an arranged marriage to the Swedish Ambassador to France, Baron Erik Magnus de Stael-Holstein . Anne Louise died at the age of 20 .
 Although he professed to love her, she did not return his feelings, and the two only rarely lived together . He professed his love for her, but she never returned him .
 Anne Louise had many lovers and returned home to her husband only when the father of the child she was carrying was in question . Anne Louise returned home only when she was pregnant with a child .
 Anne Louise de Stael recognized the benefits of her marriage to the ambassador, however . Anne Louise and Anne Louise were married at the beginning of the century .
 During the revolutionary period, her salon became the meeting place for those who agreed that France should still be ruled by a king . She argued that ordinary citizens should be allowed to participate in the government .
 After the French Revolution ended, the legendary Napoleon Bonaparte arrived in Paris . He promised to save France from its political turmoil . After the revolution ended, he promised to help France .
 Napoleon disagreed with Madame de Stael’s political views . Napoleon banished her books, and he even prohibited her from living in France . Napoleon disagreed .
 Napoleon objected primarily to her novels, Delphine, and De rAllemagne, written in 1810 . Napoleon objected to her work, which was published in 1802 .
 Madame de Stael examined and praised what she understood to be the German national character . Here, she praised the emotional, sentimental, and enthusiastic character of the Germans .
 She encouraged French people to view the Germans as model citizens . She even encouraged people in France to view Germans as models .
 Napoleon banished de Stael from Paris for writing Delphine, she moved to Germany . Napoleon banished her from Paris after she wrote De lAllemagne . De Stael was banished from Paris by Napoleon himself .
 Madame de Stael's other works include The Influence of the Passions upon the Happiness of Individual’s and of Nations, written in 1796 . The influence of the passions on the happiness of individuals and nations .
 In this book, de Stael expresses her belief in a political system that promotes the individual to make moral decisions without guidance from authority figures in government .
 Madame de Stael advocated greater rights for citizens in general . She also demanded rights for specific groups of people . Madame Stael also advocated for women's rights .
 In 1814, for example, she appealed to the Congress of Vienna, a meeting of Europe’s heads of state, to abolish slavery . She appealed for the abolition of slavery in Europe .
 Scholars consider Madame de Stael a feminist for her advocacy of women’s rights . Scholars also consider her advocate for women's rights in her life .
 Her novels conveyed sympathy with the plight of women in a patriarchal society . Her novels, especially Delphine znA Corinne, conveys sympathy with women's plight .
 In 1811, at the age of 45, de Stael married a 24-year-old Italian army lieutenant .
 Cristina Trivulzio was an Italian publisher and journalist . Her life was consumed by the unification of several Italian city-states under one flag .
 She established newspapers as propaganda vehicles abroad to help drive home the fight for unification in Italy . Her newspapers were used to drive the fight home the unification fight .
 In the 19th century, newspapers and politics were traditionally the venue of men, not women . Women were not allowed to be involved in newspapers or politics, but women were allowed to speak .
 Born in Milan, Cristina descended from Gian Giacomo Trivulzio, governor of Milan under Louis XII of France . Cristina's father was an official at the court of Napoleon’s governor .
 With Napoleon’s defeat at Waterloo in 1815, Milan returned to Austrian rule . Milan was one of the most important cities in the world .
 Gerolamo Trivulzio’s widow, Vittoria Gherardini, remarried after two years . Vittori Gherarini remarries after 2 years .
 Her new husband, Alessandro Visconti d’Aragona, had built the first steamboat to navigate the Po River .
 His political sentiments favored the removal of Austrian rule over Lombardy from Lombardy .
 His arrest and imprisonment when Gristina was only 13 solidified the animosity she felt toward imperial rule . She was arrested when she was just 13 and imprisoned .
 She took up the scientific interests of her stepfather and the musical skills of her mother . She also took up her musical interests and took up scientific interests .
 Prince Emilio Barbiano di Belgiojoso d’Este hailed from a family even older than the Trivulzio clan . His predecessors were princes of the Holy Roman Empire . He was the son of a prince who was born in Italy .
 Cristina discovered the prince’s infidelities when she found out about his infidelity . Cristina's marriage turned sour when Cristina found out the prince's affair . The prince's infidelity was discovered by Cristina .
 Cristina became embroiled in politics after her marriage ended . Cristina has been married for more than 20 years .
 Politics in Italy during the 19th century involved questions of Italian unity . Italian unity was a key issue in Italian politics .
 Previous to the 1860s, the Italian nation did not exist; instead, small kingdoms ruled regions, united by common languages and cultures . The Italian nation was ruled by small kingdoms .
 The call for uniting these kingdoms under one government began, ironically, when many of the kingdoms were controlled first by France and then by Austria . Many of these kingdoms were first controlled by France .
 Napoleon's Code Napoleon was a set of laws designed to unify his empire . During Napoleon’s empire, administrative and judicial reforms extended from France to Italy .
 Demand for more democratic institutions led to insurrections against French rule in various Italian cities . The demand for democratic institutions in Italy led to the rise of the French rule .
 patriotic nationalist groups in Venice and Milan revolted again . When control was transferred from Napoleon to Austria, they revolted .
 Gristina participated in a failed revolt against Austria in 1831 . She was brought up from birth in an Italian nationalist family . She fought for Italy against Austria .
 She went to Paris to work as a propagandist, writing articles and pamphlets campaigning for political justice and a constitutional, monarchical government for Italy . Seeing firsthand that propaganda, distributed internationally, could make the difference in liberating Italy, she went to work .
 Cristina was one of many women, such as Madame de STAEL, who ran salons in Paris . From 1835 to 1843, Cristina ran a salon in Paris from 1835 .
 She reveled in the attention her ideas received among French intellectuals . But, ever conscious of how she could help the cause of Italian unity, she determined to create a wider network of idea exchanges .
 It appeared from February to December 1845 as a triweekly, and then, under the name Rivista Italiana, as a monthly . It ceased publication in 1848 .
 Trivulzio also contributed articles written in French to the Constitutionnel and the Revue des deux mondes .
 Between 1842 and 1846 she published a fourvolume study, Essai sur la formation du dogme Catholique .
 The Italian princess had long been interested in the early Catholic church fathers . This massive, if rambling, study focuses on the life and thought of St. St. Francis Francis .
 “one feels the deep indignation of a defender of the Catholic Church,” writes Brombert, “and primarily of its crucial doctrine of God’s infinite mercy.”
 patriotic sentiments again engulfed Italy, especially in Cristina’s native Milan . Meanwhile, patriotic sentiments also engulfed Italy .
 The king of Sardinia, Carlo Alberto, supported the uprisings against Austria with the help of volunteers from various parts of Italy . Cristina organized and financed a legion of volunteers in Naples, which she led to Milan .
 In Tuscany, Sicily, and Venice, republics had been established in the place of kingdoms . The republics were established in place of the former kingdoms .
 Austrian and French troops intervened to restore royalty and destroy the republican governments . But this time, both Austria and France troops intervened .
 Cristina fled to Paris after the revolutions of 1848 ended in defeat for the nationalists . Cristina was born in 1848 .
 She realized, long before other Italians, that the press could be used as a tool of propaganda . She realized long before others, that she was aware of the press's power .
 She returned to Milan in 1855, after receiving word that her lands had been restored to her .
 French-language newspaper, L’ltalie, in 1859, modeled after English and French papers, that would promote the righteousness of Italian unity abroad . In 1859 the newspaper promoted Italian unity .
 In 1871, Cristina died, a proud citizen of the united Italy she had helped to create . Cristina was a proud Italian citizen .
 Christina Belgiojoso was a revolutionary princess . She was a member of the Trivulzio family .
 Barbara Tuchman chose an alternate route to pursue her passion for writing about history .
 Tuchman’s lively narrative style, heightened by her flair for the dramatic, achieved what many academic historians can only dream about . Nevertheless, her lively . style . .
 Social history looked at the lives of ‘ordinary’ people, rather than the ‘movers and shakers’ who formed the basis of traditional history . Social history looks at people’s lives rather than those of the “movers” and “
 She stuck to traditional, narrative forms of historical writing, and, for the most part, she wrote about the great lives of men and women whose decisions affected the ordinary .
 Her uncle, Henry Morgenthau, Jr., was the United States ambassador to Turkey in the early 20th century . Her uncle became secretary of the treasury during President Franklin D Roosevelt’s administration .
 Jewish people were not allowed to join fraternities and sororities at Swarthmore College in Pennsylvania . She quickly transferred to Radcliffe, where she earned a degree in history and literature .
 Her first job after graduation was a voluntary position with the American Council of the Institute of Pacific Relations . She says her first job was voluntary .
 She began writing articles for Institute publications, such as Far Eastern Survey and Pacific Ajfairs .
 When she returned to the U.S. she accepted a position with The Nation, a liberal, progressive magazine . Her father saved The Nation from bankruptcy in 1935 .
 In 1937, the journal sent its editorial assistant to Spain to cover the Spanish Civil War . The conflict pitted General Francisco Franco’s Fascists against Republicans . Republicans wanted to retain a republican form of government .
 Tuchman’s reportage emphasized the struggles faced by ordinary citizens during the bloody conflict . Martha GELLHORN .
 The larger political ramifications soon caught Tuchman’s attention . She shifted her focus to the ideological conflicts—Fascism and anti-fascism—underpinning the war .
 Tuchman wrote weekly bulletins for the Spanish government, while also working on her first book . Settling briefly in London, she moved to Spain to write a weekly news bulletins .
 The book argued that Great Britain should work actively to keep the German Nazi leader Adolf Hitler out of Spain . The book was published in 1939 .
 When Franco’s forces triumphed, the experience felt like the scales had dropped from her eyes . Tuchman: "It was like a weight drop from my eyes"
 The young writer believed in the conquest of the forces of good over evil, she began to understand and accept the facts of realpolitik .
 She unleashed her fury with conservative U.S. politicians and the press in a piece called “We Saw Democracy Fail” in which she blamed Western democracies for abandoning the Spanish Loyalists .
 Her sense of the need for activist governments informed her later work, she says . She says she was inspired by her desire to see more activist governments .
 Tuchman returned to the U.S. in 1940 and married physician Lester R Tuchm in 1940 . In the meantime, however, he returned to Europe and married Lester R .
 She found raising children restricted her working time, but acknowledged that, were the Tuchmans unable to afford domestic services, she would not have been able to write .
 England and Palestine from the Bronze Age to Balfour is a work from her personal interest in the creation of the state of Israel .
 Her next two books won Pulitzer Prizes, bringing Tuchman into the public eye . Her next book won Pulitzer prizes .
 The Guns of August explored events leading up to World War I . Stilwell and the American Experience in China, 1941—1945, reflected Tuchman’s continuing interest in Asian politics .
 A Portrait of the World Before the War, 1890—1914 and A Distant Mirror: The Calamitous Fourteenth Century feature Tuchman’s sense of the dramatic rise of the forces of good, the transformation of good to evil, and the subsequent decline of
 The First Salute, about the American Revolution, in 1988, was about a year before she died of a heart condition at her home in Gonnecticut on February 6, 1989 .
 La Argentinita developed regional Spanish folk dances as a concert form of dance during her nearly 50-year career as Spain’s premier dancer . She has also been a choreographer for nearly 50 years .
 Most of her dances imitated the Gypsy dancers who taught her their folk dances while she was a young girl . Most of the dances imitates the dances she learned from her Gypsy dance teacher .
 Argentinita demonstrated the rich diversity of all Spanish dance forms, including classical, flamenco, and regional styles . The show also showcased a variety of regional and classical styles .
 She specialized in the bosquejo , a blend of mime, comedy, singing, and dance . She was a master of mimes and mimes .
 La Argentinita made Spanish folk dancing an art form . Dance critic Margaret Lloyd noted that at a time when the Italians, Russians, and French seemed more interested in Spanish dance than the Spaniards .
 Encarnacion Lopez Julvez was born to Castilian-Spanish parents in Buenos Aires, Argentina . Her parents returned to Spain where, as a little girl, she was raised up in the mountains .
 La Argentinita acquired the nickname that would later become her stage name . The Argentinian singer is known for her work in the film and television series .
 She studied regional Spanish dances and began performing at the age of six . She began performing when she was just six .
 She never studied dance formally but took all her lessons from the Gypsies, whose folk styles she made her own . Her dance style was her own, and she never studied formally formally .
 Gypsies are a migratory, Romany-speaking dark Gaucasian people . They originated in northern India but now living all over the world, especially in Europe . Gypsie is a dark G Caucasian people .
 During the 1920s and 1930s, La Argentinita and several artists and poets, such as the writer Jose Ortega y Gasset and composer Manuel de Falla, formed an intellectual circle interested in gathering and celebrating Spain’s cultural heritage .
 Argentinita worked with dancer and dramatist Martinez Sierra’s theater group and then formed her own dance company . She has a dance company now .
 She revived long-forgotten Spanish plays, infusing them with a fresh sense of style and humor .
 Argentinita formed another dance company devoted solely to Gypsy dances in 1927 . In 1927, Argentinaita formed a dance company dedicated to the Gypsy dance .
 The company toured all over Europe and Latin America, picking up and incorporating American interpretations of Latin dances along the way . The company is based in New York City .
 She rebounded later with a series of short concerts favorably reviewed by dance critics . She had a successful year in the music industry .
 Argentinita and her partner, Federico Garcia Lorca, formed the Madrid Ballet in 1932 . They formed the dance company in hopes of further popularizing and preserving Spanish dances .
 Argentinita Lopez’s younger sister, Pilar Lopez, joined the company the following year . Argentina Lopez is the CEO of the company, which has been in operation since 2007 .
 The Spanish Civil War interrupted Madrid Ballet’s performance schedules and touring plans . The Spanish civil war interrupted the Ballet's performance schedules . The Ballet is currently touring in Spain .
 The Spanish military launched a revolt against the Republican government of Spain, supported by conservative elements within the country . The revolt was a revolt supported by conservatives in Spain .
 The rebel Nationalists received aid from Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy . The rebels received help from Italy and Nazi Germany .
 Federico Garcia Lorca left Madrid and returned to his home in Granada in 1936 . He was taken into custody by Nationalist forces controlling the town because of his sympathy with Republican cause .
 The circumstances surrounding his execution in August 1936 remain a mystery . The complete circumstances surrounding the execution of the execution are still unknown .
 She then returned to the United States with her sister Pilar Lopez, dancer Antonio de Triana, and guitarist Carlos Montoya .
 The critical and public praise she won during her second United States tour assured her return every year until her death . She toured the U.S. for three years until she died in 1994 .
 Her most popular repertoire included El Huayno, a Peruvian dance; a comic Mazurka of 1890; LEspagnolade, a satire of Spanish dances; and her own choreographed performance of Bolero, featuring Maurice Ravel’s music .
 Later, she included her dances from Carmen, which she had choreographed for the Mexican National Opera in 1942 . She also choreographed Carmen for the National Opera .
 Argentinita turned to choreographing full time when she stopped performing in 1945 .
 She created Piaure of Goya, based on the Spanish artist Francisco Goya . Cafe de Chinitas is a satire of the rivalry between two flamenco dancers .
 When Argentinita died of cancer, she bequeathed a repertory of choreographed Spanish dances and ballet companies in Spain to rival any other European city . She was also known for her choreography .
 Argentinita returned to Spain after her sister’s death and founded Ballet Espanol in 1946 . Her sister continued her legacy by returning to Spain and founding ballet company .
 Anna Magdalena Bach gave up a bright future in music to forward her husband's career . Johann Sebastian Bach's wife was a loyal and industrious collaborator to her husband .
 Anna Magdalena Bach cared for Bach’s four children by his first marriage, as well as the 13 children she had during her marriage . In addition, she also cared for the four children Bach had by his second marriage .
 She provided the court of Prince Leopold of Anhalt-Kothen with songs sung in her breathtaking soprano voice .
 Anna Magdalena Bach is best known for her work on music . She was the recipient of two volumes of the Anna Magdalena Notebook, dated 1722 and 1725 .
 The notebooks are compilations of keyboard pieces and songs, many of which were composed by Johann Sebastian Bach . Many of the keyboard pieces are composed by the composer .
 Anna Magdalena was born on September 22, 1701 . She was the youngest daughter of Johann Caspar Wulken, a court trumpeter, and Margaretha Elisabeth Liebe .
 Liebe, was a trumpeter and organist at two churches at Zeitz from 1694 to 1742 . Liebe was the organist and trumpeter of two churches in Zeitz between 1694 and 1742.
 Anna Magdalena married Johann Sebastian Bach in 1720; she was his second wife . She was the second wife of Bach's first wife .
 After her wedding, Bach continued working for Prince Leopold, alongside her new husband, who at the time was Kothen’s court conductor and musical director . Bach continued to work for the Prince of Kothen, alongside his wife .
 Bach, who had been married to his cousin Maria Barbara Bach, brought four children to the marriage . Bach had four children with his cousin . Bach was married to Barbara Bach and had four daughters with her .
 Bach gave his wife a book of keyboard music called the Clavierbiichlein, better known as the Anna Magdalena Notebook, in 1722 . Music historians surmise that Johann Sebastian Bach gave the book to his wife .
 Twentyfive leaves of the book, or about one-third of the original manuscript, survives today . About one third of the manuscript survives today, according to the author .
 Leopold married Princess Frederike Henriette of Anhalt-Bernburg . She was described by Bach as not caring for music or art .
 The princess may have been jealous of the close relationship between Leopold and Bach . She drew her husband’s attention away from music and toward her own interests . Bach felt less and less useful at court .
 Bach found out that he was being considered as a replacement for St. Thomas church in Leipzig, Germany, when he found out he would be a replacement . Bach was a member of the Bach family when he died .
 While he had enjoyed his time at the secular court of Leopold, he missed the church surroundings that influenced his music . He had enjoyed the secular surroundings of his home .
 Bach wanted to bring up his children in a Lutheran atmosphere . Leopold was a Calvinist, and Bach wanted his children to live with him . Bach wanted the children to be brought up in an atmosphere of a Lutheran environment .
 At Kothen, she could sing opera music, her real love; in Leipzig, she couldn't sing publicly at all . Women were not allowed to perform in churches in the city, for women weren't allowed to .
 Anna Magdalena gave birth to 13 children over 28 years . She tidied the Bach household, practiced playing a keyboard and singing, and copied music .
 Some of Bach's biographers have surmised that she may have influenced her children’s careers, because her youngest son, Johann Christian Bach composed operas during his career .
 Anna Magdalena’s last years with her husband, and those she spent as a widow, were filled with sorrow and heartache . The last years of her husband's life was filled with heartache and sorrow, she says .
 The year before he died, Bach became totally blind, leaning on his wife for security . Bach became blind in the year before his death . Bach died at the age of 92 .
 When Bach died in 1750, she was there, as Bach himself had written years before, to close his eyes . Bach's widow was there to close her eyes when he died, Bach had written .
 Anna Magdalena announced her intention not to marry again, despite her dire financial situation .
 Bach had left no will; by law, one-third of his paltry estate went to his widow . Bach had no will, but by law his widow received a third of his estate .
 She also received half of his salary every year, but she had creditors to pay off and three children remaining in her care . She also had three children .
 Josephine Baker found a climate much more accepting of African-American music and dance in Paris . Baker was an American/French dancer, social activist .
 She left the United States because of racial discrimination she witnessed, and because she knew she could not reach her potential as a star within its borders . She said she left the U.S. because she left because of the racial discrimination that she witnessed .
 Baker helped popularize African-American culture in France during the 1920s . Baker invented her own style of erotic dance in France . Baker's erotic dance style was popularized in France by African-Americans .
 During World War II, Baker worked as a spy for the French Resistance . Baker won the Croix de Guerre and the Legion d’Honneur awards for her efforts .
 Freda McDonald was born Freda J McDonald on June 3, 1906, in Female Hospital (formerly the St. Francis Hospital) She was born in 1906 . McDonald was a married mother of three .
 St. Louis Social Evil Hospital is a treatment center for prostitutes with venereal disease . The hospital is located in the city of East St.Louis . It was founded as a treatment facility for prostitutes in the 1970s .
 Eddie Carson, a jazz drummer, may have been Baker's father . Baker herself names Moreno as her father . Eddie Moreno is Baker's sister .
 Some biographers describe her father as attentive and loving; others say he was distant and cold . Some biographies describe him as attentive but cold .
 Josephine began working at the age of eight as a domestic, sleeping in her employer’s coal cellar . Josephine, as she preferred to be called, slept in the coal cellar of her employer's home .
 As a young girl, she wanted to become a dancer, but first and foremost she sought a way out of St. Louis, Missouri . She wanted to be a dancer but first, she sought to escape the city .
 39 blacks and nine whites were killed in a race riot over scarce housing and jobs in St. Louis, Missouri . 39 blacks, nine whites died in the race riot in which 39 were killed .
 By 1922, Baker left Illinois for the East Coast to establish herself as an entertainer . Baker left the state to establish her career as a performer .
 She started dancing in vaudeville shows in Philadelphia, where her grandmother lived . Her grandmother also danced in the city .
 Harlem in the late 1910s and 1920s was a mecca for African-American artists, writers, musicians, and entertainers . Harlem was Harlem's mecca of African-Americans .
 Cabarets such as the Cotton Club hired black waiters, cooks, and entertainers but did not serve black customers . However, as a sign of continuing discrimination even in Harlem, cabarets hired black entertainers .
 During World War I, many African Americans, especially those who served in the armed forces such as James Reese and Noble S. S. Reese never returned home .
 Others caught wind of the different racial climate in France and decided to take their talents abroad . Others, such as Josephine Baker, caught wind . Others decided to move to France to perform abroad .
 Wearing only a string of bananas around her waist and a perpetual grin on her face . She wore only a pair of bananas .
 Josephine Baker banana dolls were popular in the 1930s and '50s . The dolls are now sold in the U.S. market .
 After obtaining French citizenship in 1937, she opened her own nightclub, Chez Josephine . After obtaining her own French citizenship, she became a nightclub owner .
 With the rise of fascism in Europe, she became a symbol for the uncensored arts . She became an icon for the unfensored art in the 1930s .
 When Germany invaded France, she joined the French Resistance against Nazism . She worked as an underground courier and traveled to Spain, Portugal, and England .
 She won her greatest coup when she delivered the original Italian-German code book to the French Resistance . Her greatest coup was to deliver the original .
 On her way to Gasablanca in 1940, she contracted peritonitis and underwent one of several abortions . She was forced to have an abortion in 1940 .
 After recovering, she entertained troops in North Africa and the Middle East . After recovering from her injuries, she performed for troops .
 General Charles de Gaulle presented her with the Croix de Guerre and the Legion d’Honneur when she returned to France . She was presented with a Croix of Guerre, the Legion of Honor, and the French Croix d'Honor .
 The couple separated after one month, but Baker was determined to have a family of her own . Baker and her husband split up after a month .
 Baker had returned now and again to the United States, usually to appear in the Ziegfeld Follies as a chorus girl . Baker had also returned to the U.S. in the 1950s .
 When they finally ordered, they were repeatedly told that the food they wanted was not available . The food they ordered was not always available .
 Baker was furious, and threatened to sue the restaurant for discrimination . Baker was angry at the restaurant's decision to serve him . Baker threatened to file a lawsuit .
 Baker told a reporter in Buenos Aires, “The United States is not a free country.” Baker says the U.S. is not free .
 The African-American community of Harlem honored her by declaring May 21, 1951 to be Josephine Baker Day . Baker was a member of the Harlem-based Harlem community .
 Baker remained an entertainer until she died in Paris on April 12, 1975 . Baker remained in Paris until her death .
 In 2001, her adopted city of Paris dedicated a city square, the “Place Josephine Baker,” as a lasting tribute . The "Josephine Baker’s" death was a national tragedy .
 Her range, depth of emotion, and personal charisma on stage helped shape the modern theater . Her range and depth of emotional depth helped shape modern theater, she says .
 The fact that she was a woman also brought the acting profession into the modern era, by making female stars more visible, and by opening up the profession for younger actresses .
 Bernhardt’s fiery, frizzy red hair, alluring voice, and boyish physique made her a memorable figure on stage and, briefly, on screen as well . Bernhardt's fiery red hair made her an alluring figure at a time when hourglass figures were the
 Rosine Bernhard was born in Paris on October 22, 1844 . She was the illegitimate daughter of a courtesan . Rosine was born to a family of courtesan in Paris .
 She grew up in a convent and attended the Paris Conservatoire drama school . Her acting talents were discovered when she attended the school .
 Sarah Bernhardt made her theatrical debut at the Theatre Fran^ais in 1862 . In 1862, she changed her name to Sarah Bernhardt . Bernhardt died at the age of 92 .
 She started her career rather poorly; few of the critics who reviewed her first performance registered much interest . Her first performance in the musical theatre was a disappointing one .
 She left the Theatre Fran^ais after quarreling with managers . Soon after, she left the theatre .
 Sarah Bernhardt appeared in a production of Francois Coppee’s play Le Passant zs the wandering minstrel Zanetto . Bernhardt persevered in acting and, finally, in 1869, appeared in the play .
 Her reputation as an upand-coming actor was reaffirmed three years later when she played the queen in Victor Hugo’s Ruy Bias .
 Theatre Fran^ais had changed management personnel and was renamed Comedie-Franq;aise . In the meantime, the Theatre Fran*ais changed management .
 Bernhardt’s acting career came into its bloom with modern theater in Europe in Europe . Bernhardt's acting career blossomed in the early 1930s with the success of modern theater .
 The acclaim of female actors was certainly part of this modernizing process . The acclaim for female actors is part of the modernizing of Hollywood .
 Modern playwrights began to explore a greater depth of emotion in their actors, as well as techniques that enhanced individual roles . In addition to the use of new techniques, modern playwright's plays have also been adapted to reflect the modern era .
 Modern theater mirrors, and influenced, modern life, by focusing more and more on how individuals shape cultures and societies and the rights of individuals within those societies . The modern theater has been influenced by the rise of individual individuals in society .
 Sarah Bernhardt brought the elements of individual personality and emotion alive on stage . Bernhardt had the skills that brought the element of individual personalities alive .
 Bernhardt struck out on her own in 1880 . Bernhardt starred in a series of films for the first time .
 ISO PERFORMERS had steady work and reliable incomes . Working under contract with a theater meant that actors had steady employment .
 As an independent, Bernhardt had to promote herself to obtain work at a variety of theaters . Bernhardt was an independent actress .
 She left for the United States and began the first of six tours, each wildly successful . She toured the U.S. and toured the world for six years .
 Bernhardt played Shakespeare’s young Hamlet, Prince of Denmark . Bernhardt was a middle-aged actress in the 1920s and '50s . She played Hamlet under the lights .
 Audiences did not seem to notice that Bernhardt was a woman, or middle-aged . The play was a success, but audiences did not notice Bernhardt as a woman .
 When not acting, Bernhardt wrote plays and memoirs, she also painted and sculpted . Bernhardt also wrote plays, memoirs and paintings .
 Her personal life was as tempestuous as the lives she played on screen . She reportedly kept an open coffin by her bedroom window in which she lay to practice her parts .
 She gave birth to an illegitimate son, Maurice, by the Belgian Prince de Ligne in 1864 . She had love affairs with artists Gustave Dore and Georges Glarin and many others .
 Bernhardt suffered an injury to her right leg while performing in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil . Bernhardt died aged 61 at the age of 61 . She suffered a leg injury while performing .
 She walked with an artificial leg after doctors amputated the limb in 1915 . Doctors amputated her leg in 1915 and she walked with a prosthetic leg .
 During World War I she performed for soldiers at training camps, and appeared in several silent Aims . She also appeared in a series of silent films .
 She gave her final performance in 1922, a year before her death in Paris on March 26, 1923 .
 French music teacher Nadia Boulanger dedicated her life to music . Some of the world’s greatest musicians, such as Leonard Bernstein, have been her pupils .
 Later in life, she also began conducting orchestras . Traveled to the United States later in life .
 Looking solely at Boulanger’s lifestyle, one might be tempted to say she never left the Victorian period .
 Boulanger was born September 18, 1887 in Paris . She was the daughter of a music composer and teacher, and a singer .
 Marie-Julie Hallinger thrilled Parisiennes with her opera singing . Her grandmother, Marie Julie Hallinger, thrilled Parisians with her singing . Parisian opera singer's grandmother was born in France .
 Her father, Ernest Henri Alexandre Boulanger, won the Prix de Rome prize in music composing . Her father also won the prestigious Prix for Rome prize .
 Ernest Boulanger was 43 years older than his wife, Nadia, and he died when Nadia was still young . Nadia's father died when she was still growing up . Ernest and Nadia were married in 1945 .
 By the age of 13, Boulanger performed on piano and organ; at 17, she began teaching her younger sister, Lili, to play and compose for piano . She also taught her sister Lili to play piano and compose .
 After her fathers death, she and her mother and sister were left to earn money for the family . More important, after her fathers died, she was left to work for her family . Her father died in 2008 .
 Nadia became responsible for making a living for the three women . Lili’s frequent illnesses precluded her from working, so Nadia took over . Nadia is now responsible for the lives of Lili, Nadia and Nadia's other daughters .
 In fact, she taught all day and into the night, taking on as many students as she could, so that she could earn as much as male teachers were getting . Even though they worked only half as much, she worked long hours a day and night .
 Philip Glass, Yehudi Menuhin, Virgil Thomson and Quincy Jones are among them . Quincy Jones is one of the world's most famous musicians .
 Nadia Boulanger’s conducting won her kudos, as well . Nadia is a world-renowned teacher and conductor at the Opera House in Paris .
 She wore black mourning clothes until the day she died on October 22, 1979, at the age of 92 .
 Nothing is better than music, when it takes us out of time, it has done more for us than we have a right to hope for . Nothing is more than music when it's taken time out of the world, it's a good thing .
 It has broadened the limits of our sorrowful life, it has lit up the sweetness of our hours of happiness by effacing the pettinesses that dominate us . It has brought us back pure and new to what was, what will be .
 She harbored a lifelong love and admiration of Igor Stravinsky . The composer stunned Paris audiences in 1913 with his ‘Rite of Spring,” a symphony which almost caused a riot .
 Boulanger premiered Stravinsky’s concerto for wind instruments, “Dumbarton Oaks,” in Washington, D.C., in 1938 .
 Nadia Boulanger’s dual-era qualities make her all the more interesting, and worthy of study, today . Nadia has been married for more than 20 years .
 Venezuelan pianist and composer Teresa Garreno . Known as a breathtaking performer of classical music . Carreho was born in Venezuela .
 Students of the piano appreciated her talents as the eclectic composer of more than 30 pieces . Students appreciated her talent as an eclectic composer . Pieces range from piano solos, waltzes and hymns to compositions for string quartets .
 Carreno’s relationship with her homeland of Venezuela, and with her four husbands, dictated many of the twists and turns her 50-year career took . The Venezuelan singer's relationship with Venezuela and four husbands influenced her career .
 Venezuela’s volatile political situation pushed the Garreno family to relocate in the U.S. in 1862 . The Garrenos lived in the United States for more than 150 years . Venezuela's political situation in the 1860s was a source of instability .
 Garreno returned 23 years later, but her circumstances caused her aristocratic audiences to shun her talents . She returned to the stage in 18th century .
 After her death in 1917, amends were made between her countrymen and the memory of her disposition . Carreno’s remains were interred with honor at the National Pantheon in Caracas, Venezuela .
 Her mother, Clorinda Garda de Sena y Toro, belonged to an ancient aristocratic family of Spanish descent . She was born into a family of aristocratic Spanish descent.
 Carreno was the grandniece of “The Liberator’s” Simon Bolivar . Simon Bolvar led revolutions against Spanish rule in Venezuela, Ecuador, and Peru . He led revolutions in Venezuela and Ecuador .
 Bolivar and his army defeated the Spanish in 1821 . Venezuela became the independent Republic of Venezuela in 1830 .
 From 1859 to 1863, Venezuela fought a civil war over the question of whether the nation should be ruled by a strong central government, or whether states should have more power . The war lasted between 1859 and 1863, ending in 1863 .
 Venezuela’s natural resources and trade within the country and with other nations . Intertwined in the question lay the fate of Venezuela's natural resources . Venezuela is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Louis Moreau Gottschalk was the best-known pianist in the country . He took Carreno as his student at the age of 18 .
 In 1866, the Carreno family traveled to Europe, in order to introduce Teresa to the most stellar composers of the music world . Teresa's family was introduced to the world's most famous composers .
 In Paris, she met Franz Liszt and Gioachini Antonio Rossini . She met the famous opera composer in Paris .
 Manuel Carreno could not remain in Europe longer, and he was not willing to leave his daughter behind . Liszt offered to take Teresa as his student, but he was unable to leave her behind .
 From that moment on, Carreno began infusing her recitals with a combination of lyrical feeling and passionate power . She began her recital career with the help of a young composer .
 Carreno also developed her singing voice and appeared in an opera, Les Huguenots, in Edinburgh, Scotland .
 Before she turned 20, Carreno embarked on a series of marriages that nearly destroyed her career . She had a string of successful marriages before turning 20, but some of them were disastrous .
 In 1872, Carreno married the violinist Emile Sauret, who influenced her to compose a piece for string quartet . In 1871, she composed the piece for the first time .
 Sauret abandoned his family after she had given birth to two children . After she had had two children, she abandoned her family .
 In 1875, she married baritone Giovanni Tagliapetra . She turned more of her attention to the opera .
 Teresa Carreno returned to her homeland after a 23year absence in 1885 . At the invitation of the Venezuelan president, she returned to Venezuela at the age of 23 .
 Her husband had scheduled several performances with his opera company in Venezuela, but ticket sales were poor and the company went into debt . The opera company was in debt .
 The conductor stormed out of a rehearsal and disappeared, leaving the stage . The conductor then stormed out and disappeared from the scene .
 Carreno conducted the final three weeks of performances for the company . She took up the baton to save the company and conducted the last three weeks .
 Venezuelan audiences were outraged at the sight of a woman performing in public . tabloids began publishing hurtful articles chiding the musician for being a divorced woman and for having married a ‘vulgar” Italian .
 Carreno’s friends advised her to leave her husband and go to Germany, where her music would be appreciated . Back in the United States, friends advised that she should move to Germany . She says her music will be appreciated in Germany .
 She performed at the Berlin Sing Akademie to swooning audiences and critics .
 In 1891, she married Eugen d’Albert a Scottishborn German pianist and composer . She died in 1891 .
 In 1977, the Venezuelan government ordered her remains to be interred in the National Pantheon .
 Her Weber piano, built especially for her, is on display at the Teresa Carreno Museum in Caracas, Venezuela .
 The Norton/Grove Dictionary of Women Composers, Julie Anne Sadie Sadie and Rhian Samuel, eds. eds .
 Aretha Franklin has won 17 Grammy awards and earned 24 gold records . Michigan state legislature declared her voice among its most cherished natural resources .
 Aretha Franklin defined and popularized soul music for millions of American fans of popular music . Franklin died Thursday at age 76 at the age of 76 .
 Aretha Franklin broke the racial barrier that had prevented white audiences from buying and listening to black music . Franklin broke that barrier in the late 1960s, toward the end of the Civil Rights movement .
 Franklins rendition of Otis Redding’s song ‘Respect’ became the new national anthem of the African-American community . Franklin's rendition of 'Respect' became the national anthem for African-Americans .
 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. awarded Franklin a citation for her performance of the song . Dr. King, Jr. was awarded the award .
 In an interview with Time magazine in 1969, Franklin defined soul music as experiential . Franklin said soul music was an experience . Franklin's soul music defined as 'experiential'
 Aretha Franklin’s father, preacher Clarence La Vaughn Franklin, and her mother, Barbara Siggers Franklin, were both talented musicians . Franklin was born in Detroit, Michigan, in 1944 .
 Franklin’s mother left the family when Aretha was six; she died four years later . Franklin's mother left her family when she was just six . Franklin was born in a loving home in Detroit, Michigan .
 Aretha sang her first solo at her father’s church, the New Bethel Baptist Church, in 1944 . The family had relocated in Detroit in 1944, where she sang first solo . Aretha's father moved her to Detroit in 1945 .
 Aretha and her father would take their gospel singing on tour through the midwest and south . Occasionally, Aretha would take her father on tour .
 Franklin dropped out of high school to give birth and take care of her child . Franklin became pregnant at the age of 15, and dropped out from high school . She dropped out to care for her child and drop out of school to take care for him .
 Her relationship with executives and musicians at Columbia did not last long, however . The relationship between her and the music label ended in 2009 .
 For years, white performers such as Elvis Presley had been “covering’s songs written and/or performed by African Americans . White performers have been covering African American songs in the past .
 Presley’s “Hound Dog,” a tune first performed and recorded by Big Mama Thornton, sold over a million records for Presley . Presley's ‘Hound . Dog’ was first performed by Big . Mama Thornton . Thornton .
 In the 1940s and 1950s, many whites wanted to hear soul music but, due to racist attitudes, not as performed by African-American musicians . In the 1950s and '60s, white people were not interested in soul music, but in the '50s .
 Bell realized that by the mid-1960s, younger white audiences were beginning to listen to black artists . He knew that Franklin had the poten154 PERFORMERS tial to make those numbers grow .
 Franklin recorded “I Never Loved a Man the Way that I Love You’s” in 1967, and it became a top-40 hit . Franklin recorded the song in 1967 .
 In 1972 she returned to her gospel roots, recording a live gospel concert called Amazing Grace . In 1972, she recorded a live performance of Amazing Grace.
 In 1971, Franklin recorded a rendition of the song “Bridge Over Troubled Waters . Franklin offered perhaps the best contrast between the “soft” rock sound, also popular at the time, and soul music .
 Art Garfunkel and Paul Simon had recorded the immensely popular “Bridge over Troubled Water” in 1970 . The song was a collaboration between the two artists .
 Franklin (in a kind of “reverse cover” of the song) took the song to a different place in her recording . Franklin’s "reverse cover" was a different take on the song .
 Franklin’s version strays wildly off the melody in a kind of “jazz riff” style . The duo's more harmonic approach to popular music contrasts sharply with their harmonic approach . Franklin's version of the song is more like a jazz riff .
 Franklin has made more than 30 albums in the course of her career . Young Gifted and Black features autobiographical songs of her own composition . Franklin has also made over 30 albums, including one that is autobiographical .
 In 1984, the “Queen of Soul” won the American Music Award, and in 1992 the Rhythm and Blues Lifetime Achievement Award . In 1992, she was awarded the Rhythm & Blues lifetime achievement award .
 Martha Graham is to modern dance as Pablo Picasso is to the modern art school of cubism . Martha Graham has been married to Martha Graham for more than 20 years . She is a modern dance teacher and choreographer who has been credited with modern dance .
 Martha Graham is synonymous with modern dance . Martha Graham has been married to Martha Graham for more than 30 years .
 She developed innovations in structure, style, technique, costuming, and training of choreographers and dancers that defined the movement .
 She rejected the traditional view of women dancers as beautiful, lithe, and graceful . Instead, she viewed female dancers as powerful and intense .
 Her colleagues have described her long career as an American archetype, because with only a few exceptions, only Graham herself—or her company—ever performed her compositions . Graham was one of the most individualistic dance artists of the 20th century .
 Born on May 11,1894, in Allegheny, Pennsylvania, and raised in Santa Barbara, California . Graham began her formal training at Denishawn School of Dance, a Los Angeles dance academy .
 Graham’s varied and evolving career can be divided into four overlapping phases . Graham's varied career has been divided into a series of overlapping phases of his career . Graham: "I’m not going to give up on me. I’ve got a lot of respect
 Graham choreographed short solos and group works for all-women companies . In the first stage, which began after her debut, began after she made her debut . Graham is choreographer for an all-female company .
 Most of these compositions were based on historical figures and styles of art . Most of the compositions were made of historical figures .
 Her debut, for example, included two pieces called From a XII Century Century Tapestry and Maid with the Flaxen Hair .
 Lamentation featured a tube-shaped piece of cloth that encased Graham from her neck to her feet . Graham was encased in the cloth from neck to feet . The tube-like cloth was used to cover Graham's neck and feet .
 She remained seated throughout the dance, in which she struggled to rid herself of the tube .
 Critics have compared the dance to Kathe KOLLWITZ s drawings of grieving women . Critics say the dance is a form of art form .
 The second phase of Graham’s career coincided with her growing interest in the theater, with the drama of American history, and with the formation of her own dance company . Graham's dance company is based in New York City .
 Two male dancers, Erick Hawkins and Merce Cunningham, joined her troupe in the 1930s . She also choreographed for men .
 During the Great Depression in the United States, some of President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal programs focused on the arts in American culture . President Roosevelt's New Deal program focused on American culture during the Depression .
 Graham did not participate directly, her dances from this period reflected the focus on American history as worthy of artistic recording and celebrating .
 Her Appalachian Spring, for example, depicted the pioneer experience in American history . She also depicted the Appalachian Spring .
 Most of the characters she focused on were women . Often, her dances had a feminist twist .
 Graham portrays female character Jocaste, in Sophocles’ play Oedipus, as the victim, rather than the victim . Graham portrays the female character in Night Journey . Graham also portrays the character in the play Night Journey as a victim, not a victim .
 In the fourth and final phase of Graham’s career, she returned to the abstract themes of her earlier period . In the last phase of her career, Graham returned to her earlier themes .
 These dances are not attached to any particular historical figure or to a plot . These dances do not attach to historical figures or to plots .
 The spiral movements were movements in which Graham tended to view the human body as “collapsible,” and the stage on which she performed as part of the dance, not a surface merely there to be danced upon . The spiral movement were movements .
 Unlike traditional choreography, her spiral movements involved fall sequences in which she emphasized the recovery from the fall, not the descent to the ground . The choreographer's spiral movements involve fall sequences .
 The stage often seemed as though it was a taut drum off of which Graham and her dancers would bounce . The stage, then, often seemed like it was an off-the-stage drum .
 Graham choreographed dances in which she used her corps onstage as though they were architecture . Furthermore, Graham used her dancers as if they were architects .
 She would use a row of dancers, rather than a stage setting, to build a wall that moved when the scene changed . For example, she would use dancers rather than stage settings to build the wall .
 Martha Graham gave birth to modern dance, in the sense that she changed people’s minds about what dancers could do . Martha Graham changed people's minds, especially women, about what they could do, she says .
 Graham de-sentimentalized the female body by emphasizing its power, intensity, and, in her fall sequences, its recovery from defeat .
 Before July 29, 1981, not many people outside the South Pacific islands knew the word Maori . New Zealander vocalist was vocalist of the Maori band .
 Kiri Te Kanawa, a New Zealander of Maori descent, sang George Handel’s ‘Fet the bright seraphim’ Prince Gharles of Wales and his bride Lady Diana Spencer signed the wedding registry .
 Kiri Te Kanawa transformed St. Mary's Cathedral in New Zealand . Six hundred million viewers tuned in to see the transformation .
 St Paul’s Gathedral was transformed into a musical heaven . A few hundred thousand Londoners heard the performance from Govent Garden . The performance was held in St Paul's Gathedral in London .
 Nell Sullivan Te Kanawa named her daughter Kiri, a Maori word meaning ‘bell, a fitting name for a soon-to-be-starring star .
 Maori people are natives of the Pacific islands in the Southern Hemisphere . They migrated to New Zealand around the ninth century . Maori are native to the Pacific island of New Zealand .
 In 1840 the Maori ceded sovereignty to the British in return for legal protection and rights to perpetual ownership of Maori lands . In 1840, the British gave Maori land rights in return to protect them .
 Only the British crown could buy land from the Maori; an individual setder could not . The British crown was only able to buy land for individual setters .
 During the 1860s the Maori fought the British over land that the British Crown claimed to have purchased . By 1852, the British instituted a government; by 1852 the government was established .
 By the end of the 19th century, the Maori population accounted for only about 7 percent of New Zealand’s population, owning less than 20 percent of the land . Maori people accounted for less than 7% of the population in New Zealand .
 While outwardly New Zealand is racially harmonious, tensions continue to erupt over land rights for the Maori . Maori Maori are still at large in New Zealand .
 Kiri Te Kanawa spent the first 12 years of her life in Gisborne, New Zealand, where she was born . She was born in New Zealand and spent most of her early life in Australia .
 Nell, a musically talented woman, began giving her daughter music lessons . Nell's daughter is now a professional musician .
 Kiri's husband convinced her to relocate to Auckland, New Zealand . She convinced her husband that the family should move to Auckland .
 Sister Mary Leo began tutoring Kanawa in music and training her voice . Sister Leo, a nun at the center of Kanawa's musical tutoring, has been tutoring her for years .
 Kiri Te Kanawa heard an operatic voice and a pop music star . Sister Mary Leo heard an opera voice in her first interview with Kiri .
 Cabaret, a form of musical entertainment popular in the 1950s, combined singing and dancing in night clubs . Cabaret was popular in 1950s and '60s when it was first known to be popular .
 Sister Mary Leo discouraged her protegee from pursuing this type of entertainment . Sister Mary said she was discouraged from pursuing such a career as a singer .
 She began to view her voice as an instrument in need of training in order to realize its full potential . But soon she began to realize her voice needed to be trained to achieve its potential .
 At age 22, she arrived at the London Opera Centre ready to train her voice for the opera stage . She trained at the centre in order to prepare for the stage .
 In 1967, Kiri Te Kanawa married Desmond Park, a mining engineer who stopped working in order to support Kiri’s career . Desmond Park stopped working to support his wife's career by managing her business affairs .
 Park supported her career wholeheartedly, but he did not listen to her performances . He did not care for opera . Park did not like opera .
 The couple adopted two children, Antonia Aroha (a Maori word meaning “happiness) and Thomas . The Maori couple adopted Antonia and Thomas, a Maori name meaning "happiness" Thomas.
 She was cast in the role of the Countess in a new production of the Mozart opera The Marriage of Figaro . The opera is set to be staged in London and New York .
 Teresa Stratas, a soprano cast in the role of Desdemona in Shakespeare’s play Othello, became ill . Her next break came when she was cast in Shakespeare's play, and she won the title of Othelo .
 Her hard work paid off as rave reviews hit the newsstands the following day .
 Most opera aficionados consider Kiri Te Kanawa to be the ‘owner’ of the roles of the Countess in The Marriage of Figaro, Desdemona in Othello, and Arabella in Richard Strauss’s opera by the same name .
 Opera for Lovers is designed to introduce the world of opera to the unschooled listener . Opera for lovers is a free online tour of operas from the UK .
 The painting includes various musicians at a keyboard and stringed instruments, peering confusedly over each other .
 Italian opera singer Margherita de L’Epine was the first Italian singer to establish a reputation in London just as Italian operas were being introduced to English audiences . Ricci painted Tofts standing at the harpsichord, poised and ready to deliver an aria,
 She appeared in numerous English operas and masques in addition to Italian language operas . She was also known for her roles in operas in Italy .
 L'Epine's celebrity during her life derived from her musical popularity and from her romantic liaisons, which were widely lampooned in the London press . L’Epine’s celebrity was based on her musical success and her liaisons .
 She sang in Venice from 1698 to 1700 . She was also known as the virtuoso of the court at Mantua, in northern Italy .
 She came from Tuscany to London with her lover, the German composer Jakob Greber, in 1702 . She and her sister, singer Maria Gallia, lived in London with Greber's sister and her lover .
 Her first appearance on a London stage took place on May 27, 1703, at Lincoln’s Inn Fields in a play called The Fickle Shepherdess . Her first performance on the stage was in 1703 at Lincoln's Inn Fields .
 She and Greber appeared together at the same theater, singing songs of his composition . Greber's composition was a collaboration between Greber and the late singer .
 In 1703, Daniel Finch, Earl of Nottingham courted L'Epine, and she moved in with him at his home in Burley, England . L’Epine died in 1703 .
 From 1704 to 1708, L’Epine relocated to London, where she sang and danced regularly at London’s Drury Lane Theatre, and then at Queen's Theatre . L'Epine remained in London until 1714 and sang regularly at Drury's Dr
 It was in this period that the competition with Gatherine Tofts began in earnest . The competition with Tofts started in earnest at the age of 16 .
 Whigs, the party advocating limited constitutional monarchy, cheered on L’Epine, the Tories . The rivalry had a political edge, with the Whigs cheering on L'Epine .
 In 1704, a former maid of Tofts created a melee when she hissed and threw oranges on stage during a L’Epine performance . The maid was a member of the Tofts family .
 By 1704, L’Epine had gone back to Jakob Greber, with whom she lived in Suffolk Street in London, but he returned to continental Europe in 1705 without his mistress .
 From 1705 until her retirement in 1719, L’Epine stuck to a rigorous performance schedule at various London opera venues .
 She appeared in Carlo Cesarini, Giovanni del Violone, and Francesco Gasparini's opera Love’s Triumph . She played the beguiling sorceress Calypso and Telemachus .
 She created the parts of Eurilla in Handel’s II pasto fido in 1712 and Agilea in Teseo in 1713 .
 L’Epine performed the masque Venus and Adonis in 1715 and Apollo and Daphne in 1716 . She performed Pepusch’s compositions for rest of her professional life .
 She continued to sing in revivals of Calypso and Telemachtts, Camilla, and Thomyris, Queen of Scythia, until 1718 . She continued singing until her death .
 She retired from the stage in 1719, and began teaching music privately . She retired and became a teacher .
 She came out of retirement briefly in 1720 to replace Ann Turner Robinson in Domenico Scarlatti's Narciso and Handel’s Radamisto .
 The popular singer, dancer, and accomplished harpsichordist died in London in 1746 .
 Swedish/British opera singer Jenny Lind was born Johanna Maria Lind on October 6, 1820, in Stockholm . She spent about half of her life in London, spending about half her life there .
 Lind was one of the nation’s first modern musical celebrities to become a household word . Lind became one of America's first musical celebrities in the 1850s . She toured the U.S. during her tour of the United States .
 Jenny Lind, or ‘the Swedish Nightingale’ as she was called, made her first stage appearance at age 10 . Jenny Lind was illegitimate daughter of Anne-Marie Fellborg and Niclas Jonas Lind .
 She made her opera debut at 18 as Agathe in Karl von Weber’s Der Freischiltz . She is best known for her role in the role of Agathe .
 Three years later, though, her voice had already been strained to the point of exhaustion . Three years after, she still has a voice to spare .
 On advice of Giovanni Belletti, an Italian baritone with whom she had been singing, she went to Paris to consult with a respected vocal teacher, Manuel Garcia .
 Garcia took Jenny Lind on as his pupil after she recovered from her vocal cords . Garcia took her on as a vocal coach .
 When Lind returned to the stage in 1842, her rejuvenated voice sounded better . Lind had gained control of her voice and improved her technique . Lind's voice was rejuvenated and she had improved technique .
 Encouraged by her success, she embarked on a tour of Germany in the early 1840s and England later in the decade .
 Her most celebrated roles were Marie in Donizetti's The Daughters of the Regiment, Amelia in Verdi's / masnadieri, and Alice in Giacomo Meyerbeer’s opera .
 The queen’s comments remind us that opera singers really exhibit three related skills: singing, acting and singing skills .
 Singer's voice must be highly trained to sustain hours of singing, which puts enormous strain on vocal cords . Singing is a huge strain on singers' vocal cords, so they have to be trained .
 "Only trained singers know how to treat their voices so that they are able to perform night after night" Only trained singers can be trusted to treat singers' voices, experts say . The singer's voice is a vital part of the world's musical landscape .
 No matter how beautiful and trained performers might be, they must make their roles believable . Performers must make the roles believable to highly discriminating audiences . The roles must be believable to very discriminating audiences.
 Lind’s appearances in operas, and her solo recitals, had long been popular throughout Europe . Lind toured the United States in the 1850s .
 A livery stable set up chairs near the Boston Goncert Hall, offering them for $.50 to concertgoers who were unable to buy tickets . Lind was scheduled to perform .
 The stable owner hoped for a favorable wind that would waft Lind’s melodious voice toward the stable, which, he assumed, would be charming enough to mask the barnyard smell . Lind's voice can be heard at the stable .
 Chambermaid stuffed pockets of her apron with hair from Lind’s hairbrush and sold locks of it to adoring fans . Chambermaid who cleaned the hotel room stuffed the pockets with hair .
 Not surprisingly, entrepreneurs began marketing Jenny Lind gloves, bonnets, riding hats, and shawls . The gloves and bonnets are now available for sale .
 As far away as Alaska, salespeople were making money off Lind’s celebrity . Lind: "As far as Alaska ... salespeople are making money from Lind .
 There, during gold rush days, peddlers hung out shingles offering Jenny Lind pancakes for sale . Jenny Lind pancakes were sold in the area .
 When she met a vocal performer in Boston who had purchased a ticket to her concert for $625 (the equivalent of $12,481 in today’s money) she commented that he was a fool .
 The vocalist later promoted his own concert with a poster showing his meeting with Jenny Lind . He later promoted the concert with an image of the meeting .
 Lind’s presence in the U.S. helped to negate the entrepreneurial spirit, one fan said . Lind was born in the United States in 1996 . Lind is currently a member of the American Hockey League .
 She melted the souls of thousands of thousands, and purged the craft of money getting . "She melted the soul of thousands," she said .
 Lind married her accompanist, Otto Goldschmidt, and retired in England for the remainder of her life . Lind died in 1852 .
 She continued to perform for charity events and became a professor of voice at the Royal College of Music in London .
 Jenny Lind, who died on November 2, 1887, was the hrst woman to be buried at Westminster Abbey's Poet’s Corner . Other famous artists, including the writers Thomas Hardy and Charles Dickens, were buried there .
 This form of Japanese art and entertainment arose in the period of imperialism, when European nations began their earliest explorations and excursions overseas, mostly for trading purposes . The art form of entertainment arose during the period when European countries began exploring overseas .
 Japan turned its back on most European nations, determined to modernize and escape exploitation by foreign powers . Unlike many of the places that initially welcomed the European explorers, Japan turned back on them .
 Kabuki entertainment differed from Western forms of theater, helping cultural historians better understand the contrasts between Eastern and Western cultures . The art form of theater in Kabuki theater is similar to that of Western theater .
 It was the first significant theater in Japan established for popular audiences . It was also the first major theater in the country established for audiences .
 Just prior to her birth, Japan had experienced a period called the warring states, when daimyo, or territorial governors, fought among themselves .
 One daimyo, Tokugawa leyasu, achieved military hegemony in Japan . After a long period of consolidation, one daimyasas achieved military dominance .
 He became the shogun, or military ruler, to whom all other daimyo pledged allegiance . He was the head of Japan's shogun . He is now Japan's most powerful ruler .
 During this Tokugawa period the shoguns resisted ‘westernization’ of Japanese society by forbidding the practice of Christianity and expelling all foreigners, except the Dutch and Chinese .
 The Japanese people were forbidden to travel overseas . In addition, the Japanese people themselves were forbidden from traveling overseas .
 The purposes of this policy of isolation were to prevent economic exploitation of Japan by the Europeans, to enhance and unify Japanese culture and to modernize and develop Japan’s economy .
 Buddhist shrines had made a practice of soliciting contributions by sending young women to cities to perform Buddhist sacred dances and songs .
 Okuni, beautiful and talented, began to attract wide audiences to her performances . Okuni was born in Nairobi, Kenya .
 When Izumo Grand Shrine called her back, she refused . Instead, she set up her own theater on the banks of the Shijo River in Kyoto, Japan .
 The banks of the Shijo drew large crowds of rootless, young Japanese people, displaced by changing economic times and alienated from society . Young people were displaced from society and alienated .
 Kabuki theater, like the kabukimono who popularized it, defied polite Japanese society . The theater defied polite society in Japan .
 Okuni parodied—poked fun at—Buddhist prayers by imitating them in order to mock them . Okuni had been sent to cities to perform Buddhist dances and songs .
 Okuni assembled a group of female prostitutes and dancers . Okuni dressed them in gaudy, colorful costumes and choreographed sensuous movements .
 Okuni’s lover, Sanzaburo Ujisato, helped create the dances . The dances included short plays enacted by the female dancers . Later, with the help of the dancer's lover, the dancer performed short plays .
 Kabuki theater reveals important differences between Eastern and Western theater (and since theater mimics real life) Kabuki Theater is a form of theater theater .
 In early Western theater, before the 17th century, women were excluded from the stage entirely, and men and boys played women’s roles . Men and boys play women's roles in early theater .
 Another difference between Eastern and Western theater lies in the plot lines of the plays . The plot lines are different in the plays, according to the plays' plots .
 Both theaters performed tragedies . Western tragedies focused on the downfall of the main character, due to a fatal character flaw . Both tragedies were performed at the same theaters .
 Eastern tragedies portrayed moral conflict interfering with human passions . Eastern tragedies depicted moral conflict between moral conflict and human passions. Eastern tragedies featured moral conflict in Eastern Europe .
 The East dealt with general human characteristics rather than individual individuals . The West tended to focus on individual individuals, but the East did focus on human characteristics .
 Kabuki theater intermingled dance and singing and audience participation, to the point where the story line became blurred . Western drama tended to have a distinct plot line, with Western drama having a distinct story line .
 Around his neck hangs a Christian crucifix, not as a religious icon but as an exotic decoration brought to Japan by Europeans . The crucifix is not as an icon, but as a decoration brought in by Europeans, it is said .
 Japanese people throughout the nation applauded Okuni’s Kabuki theater . Okuni's Kabuki Theater is a popular Japanese theater .
 In 1629, the shogunate banned women from performing Kabuki, fearing that the sensuous nature of the dances perpetuated moral corruption in Japanese society . The ban was lifted in 1629 .
 15-year-old boys were also discovered selling sexual favors in exchange for money . Preadolescent boys replaced the women, but in 1652, the shogunate prohibited them .
 In 1868, a political revolution—known as the Meiji Restoration—toppled the Tokugawa Shogunate . It returned the nation to direct Imperial rule . The country is now Japan's most populous nation .
 During the Meiji period , Japan developed a modern, industrial economy and began incorporating some elements of Western culture . During this period, Japan began incorporating elements of western culture into its culture .
 Kabuki theater introduced Western styles of clothing, though the change did not endure for long as performances retained their unique Japanese flavor .
 Okuni’s plays began incorporating Buddhist and Gonfucian elements into the plots .
 Older men performed the roles, and prostitutes no longer acted on stage . Prostitutes played the roles of older men and prostitutes .
 The Kabuki Theater and the National Theater are both in Tokyo, where men still dominate the stage . Regular performances of Kabuki, each lasting between four and five hours in length, are held at the National Theatre .
 Female actors perform at the Sho Women’s Kabuki Theater . Female actors are also performing at the theater .
 Russian ballerina Anna Pavlova brought ballet to the common people . She created modern ballet, a dance form previously restricted to upper-class audiences, to the people .
 Pavlova took the techniques of ballet and married them to the cult of the dancer as artist . The ballet master masterminded his work in a new way of combining ballet techniques with art .
 Norwegian skater Sonja HENIE learned from Pavlova’s style of ballet and incorporated it into her skating . Her northernmost admirer, Sonja Henie, learned from her style of dance .
 Pavlova began her studies in 1891 at the Imperial School of Ballet at the Mariinsky Theater . She became a prima ballerina in 1906 . She was born in 1903 .
 After 1913 she danced independently with her own company throughout the world . After 1913, she toured the world with her company .
 The word celebrity, however, seems to be an uncomfortable choice when referring to Pavlova . The word "celebrity" seems to seem uncomfortable when used in the Russian singer's name .
 Unlike Sarah BERNHARDT and Ellen TERRY, Anna Pavlova studiously avoided publicity . Unlike Sarah and Ellen, she avoided publicity.
 Anna's parents quickly had Anna baptized, doubting that she would survive . Her parents were worried that she wouldn't survive .
 At Christmas that year, in 1889, her mother took her to Russian ballerina Anna Pavlova with partner Lawrence Novikoff .
 Her mother promised to take her to more performances, but watching did not satisfy the little girl .
 Czarist Russia promoted the performing arts with vigor, instituting several imperial schools into which only the most talented and bright students could hope to enter .
 After an examination, she entered the Ballet Academy at age 10 . She had her first performance only four years later .
 During her debut, she pirouetted so enthusiastically that she lost control and fell with a loud bump off the stage .
 Her over-arched feet were said to symbolize the aspirations of the Russian people . Her over arched feet symbolized aspirations of Russia's aspirations .
 Michel Folkine, choreographer who worked with Pavlova, wrote a solo performance for her .
 Critics remarked on her ability to personify the swan, with her graceful movements of limbs, her facial expression, and, according to some, her very soul .
 Her relationship with the Imperial Ballet benefited both the company and Pavlova . The ballet company was founded by the Russian Countess of the Countessess of Vassarova .
 She took on the canopy of prima ballerina, a mande worn by only the very best dancers in Russia .
 The Imperial Ballet rose in reputation as Pavlova’s artistry became known throughout Europe . The Imperial Ballet was known for its reputation as a ballet master .
 In 1905, Pavlova became the leader of a strike organized by a group of young dancers at the Imperial Ballet who agitated for more independence within the company . In 1905 she led a strike in order to gain more independence in the ballet .
 Pavlova saw herself and all dancers and artists, as independent creators of art, and she sought to retain her artistic integrity . She said she wanted to retain the artistic integrity of her dance career .
 In 1907, she embarked upon a tour of Scandinavian countries, and Germany, Hungary, and Austria . She toured Scandinavia, Germany and Hungary .
 Pavlova purchased a home at Golders Green in England, although her frequent tours did not provide her with much time at home . The singer's frequent tours provided her with time to relax .
 From 1918 through 1921, she toured all the continents except Australia . She toured Australia, Europe and Australia .
 Before Pavlova, a ballerina portrayed herself on stage, regardless of the role . The Russian dancer was a dancer in a ballet ensemble in the Soviet Union .
 Anna Pavlova created modern ballet, combining dance techniques with theatrical role-playing . The Russian choreographer created modern dance techniques to create an artistic image .
 Pearl Primus blended two careers during one life . Primus was a dancer, choreographer, and scholar .
 Her dance and academic careers frequently intermingled, as she studied African cultures . Her study of African cultures inspired her to create new dances .
 Primus developed a unique blend of African and Caribbean sources of dance and music with popular American blues, jazz, and jitterbug dance steps to create new and vibrant forms of dance expressions . Primus is known for its unique African-Caribbean dance and African-American influences .
 The choreographer choreographed dances that deal directly with slavery, and the aftermath of slavery . Her work also has an element of social and political commentary, as well as social commentary .
 She dismissed the idea when she felt that racial barriers would prove too great to overcome . Initially, she had planned on pursuing a medical degree, but she dismissed it .
 The artist was given the understudy position in a dance troupe. and given the title 'Understudy'
 In 1943 she made her professional debut as a dancer with an elaborate ritualistic dance piece called African Ceremonial . In 1943, she performed a dance piece in an elaborate dance piece .
 Her work received such acclaim that she formed her own troupe and opened on Broadway later that year . Her work was so successful she formed a troupe that she opened her own on Broadway .
 She choreographed performances of Langston Hughes poem, The Negro Speaks of Rivers, and an Abel Meeropol poem .
 Langston Hughes, a well-known poet living and writing in Harlem, helped promote the renaissance of African-American culture in the 1920s . Primus also participated in the Harlem Renaissance in which Primus was a member .
 Meeropol’s Strange Fruit inspired Primus to express the outrage at the practice of lynching, or the killing of a person by a lynching .
 Primus introduced her dance interpretations called Slave Market and Rock Daniel on Broadway in 1944 . Primus performed Slave Market, Rock Daniel and Rock Dancer .
 She performed at Cafe Society Downtown, a Greenwich Village jazz nightclub, and its counterpart . Meanwhile, she performed at Café Society Downtown .
 In 1948, Primus visited Africa for the hrst time, with funding provided by a Julius Rosenwald fellowship . Primus spent time in Africa during his time there .
 The purpose of the trip was to study African folklore and dances . She wanted to incorporate what she learned in her choreography back in the United States .
 Primus returned to Africa in the 1950s at the invitation of the Liberian government . She became the director of a performing arts center in Monrovia, Liberia . Primus was a member of Primus' first family .
 Primus, armed with a virtual library of material on African dance and folklore, decided to return to school to finish a doctorate in anthropology . Primus has a specialty in African and Caribbean studies, with a specialty .
 In 1979 she created Michael Row Your Boat Ashore about the bombing of Christian churches in Birmingham, Alabama, in the 1960s .
 Pearl Primus was the recipient of numerous awards, the most prestigious of which was the National Medal of Art in 1991 .
 She was chosen as the delegate from the American Society on African Culture to the Second World Congress on African culture and Writers held in Rome in 1959 .
 Clara Wieck Schumann wrote and performed music for piano and orchestra . She excelled in romantic songs popular in the 19th century . Schumann was a composer and composer .
 Clara Wieck Schumann was born in Leipzig, Germany, on September 13, 1819 . She was the first wife of the composer . Schumann died of a gunshot wound to the head .
 Clara's father, Friedrich Wieck, dreamed of having a musical genius in his family . He made plans to make his dream a reality even before Clara was born .
 A music teacher, Wieck focused all his daughter's attention on learning music . He focused all of her attention on music .
 She gave her first concert at the Leipzig Gewandhaus in 1828 at the age of nine, followed by solo recital in 1830 .
 The following year, her father took her on a concert tour in Germany and France . The next year, she was taken on a tour of France and Germany with her father .
 Returning to Leipzig, Clara Wieck spent her days studying piano, voice, the violin, and composition .
 She excelled at creating music for the piano, and several of her solo pieces were published in Germany .
 By the time she was 16, music lovers throughout Europe hailed her as an incredibly talented musical prodigy . By the age of 16, she was hailed as a talented musician .
 The hold Friedrich Wieck had on Clara’s life seemed to matter little to her, until she made plans to marry . The hold on her life mattered little to Clara, but she decided to marry him .
 Robert Schumann, a student of Wieck’s, fell in love with Clara and asked for her hand in marriage . Schumann was a student at the music school .
 Schumann threatened Wieck’s dream by taking Clara away from him, and he refused the proposal . Schumann offered to take Clara away, but refused .
 The two wed in 1840, a day before Clara’s 21st birthday . Schumann took legal action; a judge permitted the marriage, and the two wed .
 Clara Wieck Schumann’s life illustrates the restrictions that marriage placed on 19th-century women . Schumann's life illustrates how marriage placed the restrictions on women .
 Europeans knew Clara Wieck as a young musical prodigy who had received numerous prestigious awards . Before she married, Europeans knew her as a talented musician .
 After her union with Robert Schumann, Clara Wieck Schumann’s life and name retreated behind the life and career of her husband until his death . After her marriage to Robert, Clara returned to the music business .
 Few recognize the name Clara Wieck Schumann as one of the world’s great musicians and composers . Even now, the name Robert Schumann is widely known, but few recognize the great composer .
 Most music historians now agree that Clara Schumann’s talents outshone her husband's . Indeed, most music historians agree that most of the Schumann's talents outshine her husband .
 Marriage in 19th-century Europe and the U.S. differed, in some ways, from the way many people conceive of the institution today . Marriage in the United States differed from how it was conceived today .
 Because birth control methods were relatively crude, marriage meant children . Since people associated it with prostitution, it was considered taboo . Marriage means children .
 Child-rearing and housekeeping left wives with little time for careers . Housekeeping left them little time to be able to pursue their careers . The careers of many women in the U.S. were left behind by their husbands .
 Most women of that time viewed marriage and career as incompatible for women . One may not be able to choose one or the other, but not both . Furthermore, most women thought marriage and careers were incompatible .
 Nineteenth-century marriage vows called for obedience to the husband on the part of the wife . She submitted her life to his, she submitted her .
 Her diary reveals a woman prepared to succumb to the expectations placed on women of her day . The diary reveals how she dealt with the expectations of a woman in her early days .
 Clara Wieck managed to continue her musical career while she lived with her husband . But she continued to do so to a diminished degree . She died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 The extent to which Clara Wieck Schumann pursued her music during her marriage makes her relative obscurity now all the more inexplicable .
 After her marriage, her husband demanded her complete silence while he practiced and composed music . She refused to speak to her husband while he composed .
 Clara gave birth to eight children, from daughter Marie’s birth in 1841 to son Felix in 1854 . Surrendering time at the piano to her husband, Clara had little time in any case .
 In between deliveries, she made two concert tours in 1842 and 1844 . Nevertheless, in between delivery, she toured the world .
 Clara and her husband both taught at the Leipzig Conservatory, and Clara also gave private lessons . Clara also taught private lessons at the Conservatory .
 Her productivity dwindled during these years, but (in contradiction to her diary entry) she did compose a set of preludes, songs, and chamber music . She also did compose pre-ludes and songs .
 In 1853, the Schumanns moved to a home in Dtisseldorf where the placement of the rooms enabled Robert and Clara to compose at the same time . The placement of rooms enabled the pair to compose together .
 In March 1856, his family committed him to an asylum at Endenich, at his request, where he lived until his death in 1856 .
 Clara Schumann formed a friendship with Johannes Brahms three years before her husband’s death .
 The two may have been lovers; they exchanged passionate letters until her death . The two had a passionate relationship until she died .
 Her two daughters died, her son Ludwig was committed to a mental institution, and her son Felix died in 1879 . Her two sons were committed to mental institutions, her two daughters and her sons died .
 Another son died in 1891; thus, half of her offspring preceded her in death . Half of her children died before her death .
 In 1878, she began teaching piano again, while preparing Robert Schumann’s music and letters for publication . Schumann died in 1878 at the age of 92 .
 Ellen Terry’s life vacillated between an exciting career as a Shakespearean actress and a series of disastrous romances . British stage star Ellen Terry's life vacills between exciting career and disastrous relationships .
 In spite of herself, Terry became one of Britain’s most acclaimed actresses .
 Her stage successes, such as her portrayal of Shakespeare’s character Ophelia, helped to ensure women's place in the acting profession . Her stage success helped to . ensure women’�s place in . the profession .
 Later in life, she traveled throughout England, the United States, and Australia, presenting lectures on Shakespeare’s female characters .
 Ellen Terry was born on February 27, 1847, into an impoverished theatrical family in Coventry, England . She never questioned her place on the stage . Ellen Terry, born in an impoverished family, was born in 1847 .
 Role-playing seemed as natural to her as getting out of bed in the morning, she said . Role-players seemed to be a natural part of her life, even though she struggled to cope with it .
 The question that plagued her during her life was not whether she should act, but whether she shouldn't allow the theater to interfere with marriage and family . The question she faced was whether to act, not to act .
 Ellen Terry enjoyed acting, but longed to devote her life to a mate . Ellen Terry was married at the end of her life, but she was never happy to have a partner .
 During her long life she divided her time between her acting career and her search for a partner . She spent most of her life looking to find a partner with whom she could create a partnership .
 Her life on the stage soared; her search for a life partner ended in failure . Her search for the life of her own failed to find a partner . The search for her own life partner was unsuccessful .
 Her father tried to squeeze her into her costume, but she screamed so loudly that he told her she would never succeed on stage . She screamed so much that he said she'd never succeed in the show .
 A few years later, she landed a real part as Mamilius, the son of King Leontes in Shakespeare's The Winter’s Tale . The Winter's Tale is set to be released in 2015 .
 At age 16, she succumbed to an arranged marriage with the painter G E Watts, 30 years her senior . She was married to Watts at age 16 . She died of a heart attack at age 50 .
 She believes in her talent and the ability to earn enough money to make up the difference . But she did not want to give up her talent to return to football .
 Two years later, she left the theater again, this time with the architect Edward William Godwin . Two years after she left, she was married to the architect .
 Ellen Terry created the domestic bliss she had longed for as a child, but it did not last long . Ellen Terry's domestic bliss was short-lived, but she was never happy again . Terry's new book, "Ellen Terry's Home of the Stars," is published by
 Godwin lived at their country house in Hertfordshire only rarely . Unless she returned to the stage, Terry could not afford to keep the house .
 In 1874, creditors took the house, and, reluctantly, Terry returned to London’s theaters . The house was taken over by creditors .
 Wills' dramatization of Oliver Goldsmith’s The Vicar of Wakefield, constituted her greatest achievement . Wills's dramatized of Oliver . Goldsmith's novel, "The Vicar Of Wakefield," was her greatest work .
 Most critics agreed that Terry’s talents lay in her remarkable speaking voice, her ability to reflect her own personality on stage and her incredible beauty .
 Her image was captured on canvas by several artists, including Graham Robertson and John Collier; William Brodie sculpted her likeness . William Brodies sculpted the likeness .
 Terry’s looks were an asset on the stage, particularly at a time when pictorialism, or the creation of a picture on stage to communicate the theme of the play, reached its peak in British theater .
 John Singer Sargent painted her as the scheming but doomed Lady Macbeth . The painter chose to paint her as Lady MacBeth . She was the most successful actress to play tragic roles .
 During the run of The Vicar of Wakefield, Terry married the actor Charles Kelly .
 She surrendered three-quarters of her earnings to Kelly, whose heavy drinking soon soured the marriage . Kelly was a heavy drinker .
 Another theatrical triumph came in 1878, with her portrayal of Ophelia in Shakespeare’s Hamlet .
 Ophelia, the Danish Prince Hamlet’s lover, breaks under the pressure of court life and succumbs to insanity and suicide . The Danish prince's lover succeseses to insanity in the playful play . Hamlet is the most famous play of the play by
 In her Story of My Life, Terry describes venturing into London's insane asylums to study patients’ behavior . Terry says she spent most of her life trying to understand patients' behavior .
 In 1903, she took a lease of the Imperial Theater; her son managed the set construction . Her son managed to build the set .
 Her natural style of acting and her friendly rapport with audiences endeared her to U.S. audiences . She was known for her natural style and easygoing charm .
 In 1907, she made another attempt at marriage, with actor James Carew, four years younger than her son . She was married to a man four years older than her child .
 As a middle-aged actress, Terry began to have difficulty finding parts to play and managers who would hire her . Terry's career spurs her to fame .
 She continued to pursue theatrical work by giving lectures on Shakespeare's heroines . She also continued to give lectures on the heroines of Shakespeare .
 Terry toured England, Australia, and the United States in 1914 . The lecture series flourished, and Terry toured Australia, Australia and the U.S. Terry toured the world in 1914.
 West’s alluring figure on screen stole the show . That bit of shtick, combined with West's alluring image on screen, stole the movie .
 Mae West's bump-and-grind routine, paired with her sultry invitation to ‘come up and see me sometime,” live on in the imagination of American moviegoers . Mae West has been dead for decades .
 West constantly challenged the moral standards of U.S. filmmakers with the characters and dialogues she created . West's work challenged moral standards in the United States .
 West demonstrated to depressionera audiences that supremely confident women could take care of themselves, regardless of the harsh realities of their lives . West demonstrated .
 West parodied America’s veiled romance with female sexuality and the double standard by openly presenting sexual freedoms for both men and women . West parodies America's veiled romance .
 Toward the end of her life, she even poked fun at her own stage persona .
 West’s career followed the history of American entertainment from vaudeville to Broadway, film, radio, and even rock and roll music . West's career included as a radio host .
 She developed acting and musical skills by acting in stock theatrical productions, such as the Ziegfeld Follies, throughout her teens .
 She introduced Broadway audiences to the “shimmy dance,” an erotic routine usually performed by African-American artists . The controversy that followed her throughout her career began when she introduced the dance . She introduced the erotic routine to Broadway audiences .
 By 1918, West’s performances were at once causing riots and selling out . West's performances caused riots and sold out, but he sold out .
 She might have disappeared in entertainment history as a dance hall entertainer if she had not developed a character that stuck in the popular imagination . She may have disappeared from entertainment history if she hadn't developed character .
 West found the perfect blend of allure and double entendre humor that made her characters memorable . Marilyn Monroe won fame by capitalizing on the former sex symbol .
 Her first efforts went unproduced, but her third, Sex, a play about a do-gooder prostitute, was staged in 1926 . Her first play, Sex in 1926, was about a prostitute .
 The performance included several explicit scenes that led to a police raid, the closing of the show, and a fine and jail term for West . West was sentenced to jail for his role in the incident .
 The play made West a cause celebre among the gay and lesbian community . West's play made him a cause for the gay community .
 West lampooned a new feature of the Jazz Age that would soon become synonymous with Americana . The Wicked Age was panned by critics, but West's play panned critics .
 Margaret Gorman was crowned the first Miss America at Atlantic City, New Jersey, in 1921 . Women have been modeling bathing suits for judges in hopes of winning male approval .
 In The Wicked Age, West played an orphaned flapper from New Jersey named Babe Carson . She gets kicked out of her guardians’ house when she brings home her gindrinking friends .
 It was in the play Diamond Lil that West perfected her stage persona . West is best known for her performances in the musicals .
 This popular film placed West among the most popular, powerful, and wealthy women in Hollywood . West was one of Hollywood's most famous, powerful and powerful women .
 The actor Don Ameche and West were guests on a radio program called The Chase and Sanborn Hour in 1937 . West and West appeared on the show in the same year .
 Ameche knew the dialogue would be offensive to many people, and he tried to persuade West to change it . But she liked the bit and wanted the show to go on .
 The skit was a conversation between Adam and Eve, in which Eve, a forceful woman, tempts the snake, rather than the other way around . It was the first time Adam had been tempted by a snake in the Bible .
 The Federal Communications Commission went into a tailspin and effectively banned West from performing on radio again . West was banned by the FCC from performing again on radio .
 In the 1960s and 1970s, when she was over 70 years old, West experienced a comeback . West is best known for her role in the television series, "American Horror Horror Horror"
 The youth counterculture of those years, with its mantra of ‘letting it all hang out,” resurrected West’s earlier forays into sexual openness and acceptance . The youth . counterculture . of those . years, the youth counter culture of those days, resurrected
 Critics agreed that West’s performance was the best thing about both films . Both films bombed, but critics said West was the only thing about them .
 Professor Zheng Xiaoying is China’s hrst female music conductor . Her career interweaves inextricably with turbulent times in which she has lived .
 Zheng risked her career in music, and her life, by teaching music and conducting illegally during the Cultural Revolution in China . Later, during the excesses of the Cultural Rev. in China, she risked her life .
 Zheng lives in Beijing and works as the art supervisor of Beijing’s Ai Yue Nu Center of Music Arts . He is the managing director of the China Association of Musicians . Zheng also works as a conductor and art supervisor for the Ai Yue N Philharmonic Society .
 In 1995, she conducted the Woman's Philharmonic at the 1995 United Nations Women’s Conference in Beijing . She conducted the Women's Symphony Orchestra at the U.N. Women's Conference .
 The Kuomintang splintered into various factions after the death of Sun Yat-sen in 1925 . Sun Yats-sen died in 1925, leading to the split of the Kuomintsang .
 When World War II ended in 1945, China erupted in civil war from 1945 until 1949, when the communists could claim victory all over mainland China . When the communists claimed victory in 1949, China was ruled out of civil war .
 Zheng Xiaoying began performing publicly at the age of 14 . She had set her sights on a career in medicine . She now hopes to become a doctor .
 In 1937, Nanjing witnessed the Japanese invasion, capture, and burning of much of the city . She studied to become a physician at Jinling Girls’ College in Nanjing .
 Zheng joined a revolutionary group that opposed Chiang Kai-shek’s nationalist government . Zheng was a student at Jinling, China's second-largest university .
 She spent the years between 1948 and 1952 performing in song-and-dance troupes, teaching music theory, and composing folk songs and operettas .
 In 1962, she returned to China to conduct operas such as Puccini’s Tosca and Ai Yi Gu Li, a popular Chinese opera . She returned to the United States in 1962 to conduct opera in China .
 Mao Zedong raised the curtain on “the great proletarian cultural revolution” in 1966 . Mao Zedongo raised the curtains on ‘the great Communist revolution’ in China in 1966.
 The purpose of the revolution was to purge all elements of the nation’s bourgeois cultural past and instill communist ideology afresh . Zheng brought European music to Chinese music lovers .
 Mao mobilized the youthful “Red Guards,” then “Revolutionary Rebels” and “People’s Liberation Army” to achieve his goals . Mao mobilized his youthful ‘Red Guards’ then the ‘Revolutionaries Rebels’ and ‘
 Mao succeeded in destroying opposition to the CCP, but the party itself was in shambles . Large parts of the government and economy ceased functioning after Mao's defeat of opposition .
 The Cultural Revolution ended when the government declared that all economic classes had been eliminated, except the working and peasant classes . All economic classes were eliminated in the Cultural Revolution, except those of working and peasants .
 Zheng continued to teach courses in conducting from 1965 to 1969, though it was illegal to teach Western styles of music in China .
 Zheng conducted operas such as Giuseppe Verdi’s La Traviata and Giacomo Puccini's Madame Butterfly . After the revolution ended, Zheng again conducted popular operas . Zheng conducted the operas after the revolution .
 She received France’s Honorary Medal of French Literature and Arts in 1985 . In 1981, she was named China's Excellent Conductor, and received France's Honorary medal of French literature and Arts .
 Zheng established the all-female performing group Ai Yue Nu Philharmonic Society to introduce the public to classical music, develop Chinese national music, and stimulate international music exchanges .
 Ai Yue Nu features both modern and classical Chinese and Western music in its concerts . Ai Yue nu features both classical and modern Chinese and western music in concerts .
 She supported Turkish independence in the hopes that it would bring more freedom for women . She supported Turkey's independence in hopes of bringing more freedom to women .
 Halide Adivar became synonymous with the women’s movement in Turkey . Indeed, the name Halide was synonymous with a women's movement in the country .
 Throughout her political and literary career, Adivar remained a devout Muslim, despite the fact that Muslim fundamentalism remained a threat to women's freedom in Turkey and throughout the Muslim world .
 In her Memoirs of Halide Edib, Adivar begins her story with her upbringing in a wealthy Istanbul household . In her memoirs, she tells how she was raised in wealthy Istanbul home .
 Her mother died when she was very young; her grandmother reared her in the strictest observances of Muslim traditions . She was reared in strict Muslim traditions by her grandmother .
 Halide Edib’s father embraced Western life and culture and had his daughter educated first at a primary school operated by a Greek woman, Kyrie Eleni .
 In 1901, Adivar became the first Muslim girl to graduate from the institution . She was also the first woman to do so at the time .
 All her life, Adivar would vacillate between the Muslim traditions that her grandmother taught to her and the Western influences absorbed by her father . Her father was a Muslim convert to the Western world .
 Adivar married her mathematics instructor Salih Zeki Bey shortly after she finished school . She is now married to her mathematics teacher, Salih .
 Bey suddenly married another woman nine years later . Adivar divorced him nine years after . Bey was still married to another woman .
 The realization that women are not treated as equals in traditional marriages, she noted, became the fountainhead for much of her subsequent writing about women's lives in Turkey and for her political activism .
 After her divorce, she re-entered college and finished teacher training courses . She is now a successful teacher in the United States .
 She taught at girls’ schools and then worked as an inspector for the educational system in Turkey . She worked as a teacher at girls' schools before becoming an inspector of the education system .
 She established the Society for the Elevation of Women in 1910 . The organization drew upon the notion of self-improvement to encourage women to educate themselves, popular during the 19th and early 20th centuries .
 The Society established connections between Turkish and European women, facilitated by Adivar’s articles on emancipation published in the liberal newspaper Tanine .
 Adivar also worked in relief organizations for impoverished women and children . He also worked for relief organizations .
 She wrote editorials sympathetic to the nationalist movement in Turkey for Tanine .
 In 1912, she became the only woman elected to the Ojak, the Turkish nationalist club . She was the only female member of the club in 1912 .
 Her novel Handan, a romance between a young woman and a socialist intellectual, also came out in 1912 . She began publishing the weekly Yeni Turan, in which she outlined her nationalistic proclivities .
 In the aftermath of World War 1, Turkish nationalists won their cause, after much bloodshed and suffering . The Turkish nationalists were defeated in the war, but suffered a lot of bloodshed .
 Shortly before the war began, the Ottoman sultan Mehmed V signed a secret alliance with Germany promising protection . Shortly before he died, the sultan agreed to join the war with Germany .
 Two German warships asked for shelter in the waters off Istanbul . A few days later, two German warships were asked to shelter in Turkish waters .
 When an Allied victory appeared imminent in 1918, the sultan mutely signed an armistice in October 1918 that gave the Allies the right to occupy the empire . The sultan's silence in the face of an impending Allied victory in 1918 led to the end of the Sultan's rule
 Allied forces settled in various parts of the old empire, except in the areas surrounding Istanbul . Allied forces stayed in the area, except for Istanbul .
 During the war, Adivar taught in Syria and Lebanon, where she met her second husband, activist Dr. Dr. Ghitis . She also taught in Lebanon and Syria and Syria .
 Halide Adivar elected to the Ojak Council, the policy-making arm of the organization . Halide is a member of the Council of Ojaks . She is the first woman to be elected to a council .
 The Adivars fled the occupation of Istanbul to Ankara, where they joined the movement for independence . The couple joined the independence movement in Ankara, Turkey .
 Istanbul itself began shifting under the early eruptions of nationalism . Under British occupation, Istanbul itself shifted under early nationalism .
 Mustafa Kemal set up a national assembly in Ankara in the spring of 1920 . Kemal, a successful general who had fought in the war, set up the assembly .
 The Treaty of Sevres was signed by the Allied powers in 1920 . It obliged Turkey to renounce all rights over Arab Asia and North Africa . Turkey was abolished from the Ottoman Empire .
 The treaty was rejected by the new Turkish nationalist regime and replaced by the Treaty of Lausanne . The treaty would soon be replaced by a treaty signed by the French-Turkish alliance .
 Adnan Adivar became deputy speaker of the national assembly in Ankara . Halide and Adnan served on western front as nurse and interpreter, press adviser, and secretary to Mustafa Kemal .
 The British invited the last Ottoman sultan, Mehmed VI, and Kemal to participate in a peace conference . But the Ankara assembly abolished the sultanate before such a meeting could take place . In the meantime, the British invited Mehmed II to participate .
 Mehmed VI fled Istanbul on November 17, 1922; the Treaty of Lausanne established Turkey as an independent nation was signed on July 24, 1923 . Turkey was established as a nation in 1923 .
 President Kemal modernized Turkey’s legal and educational systems and encouraged the adoption of a European way of life . He replaced Arabic with the Roman alphabet, replacing Arabic with Roman alphabet .
 Islam was abolished as the state religion in 1928, polygamy was forbidden, and the Qur’an was no longer the basis for law . In 1928, Islam was abolished as the . state religion . polygamy was . forbidden .
 President Kemal took the word Atatiirk as his name, and he asked all Turks to choose new names . He asked them to choose a new name: Atatiir .
 She and her husband felt that the president had usurped too much power . They felt that he had taken too much of the power .
 Adivars lived in exile in England and France until Atatiirk’s death in 1938 . The Adivar family were exiled to France and England .
 She was a member of Parliament from 1950 to 1954 . She retired from public life to devote her time to writing . She was elected to the Commons in 1950 .
 “Turkish Nationalist’s” in Middle Eastern Women Speak, Elizabeth Fernea and Basima Bezirgan, eds. “The Turkish Nationalist,” is a book on Middle Eastern women .
 Apostoloy organized communist youth groups and working women’s groups . His activism became the focal point of his activism .
 Greek politics during Apostoloy’s lifetime blazed a volatile path between dictatorships, republicanism, and monarchy . Apostooy was a member of the Greek monarchy .
 Theodoros Pangalos suspended the constitution and assumed dictatorial powers in 1925 . Pangalo was the most notorious military strongman in the Greek military .
 He forced the resignation of the elected president and then secured his own election . A year later, he forced the resignations of the . elected president .
 John Metaxas instituted a fascist-style government in Greece on the pretext of destroying the communist threat . In response, George II dissolved parliament and, patterning his moves to coincide with fascist movements elsewhere in Europe, instituted his own fascist government . George II also dissolved parliament .
 Electra Apostoloy embraced communism as a 13-year-old girl . She joined OKNE, the Greek Communist Youth Organization . She was a member of the Hellenic Communist Youth Organisation .
 She formed a secret society with some of her classmates in opposition to the Pangalos dictatorship . The secret society was formed by students against the dictatorship .
 Apostoloy then married a communist physician and officially joined the Greek Communist Parry . Apostoloys then joined the communist Parry and married a doctor who was a communist .
 The communists never gained above 10 percent of the vote between 1924 and 1935 . They had managed to produce a popular movement within a few years . Even though they never gained a large majority of votes, they had produced a popular party .
 Apostoloy promoted the strategy by becoming the editor of the party’s journal for young communists called Youth . He was editor of Youth. Youth. magazine .
 She represented Greek women at the International Conference Against Fascism in Paris in 1935 . She traveled all over Greece organizing women’s educational groups to warn against the dangers of fascism .
 During the Metaxas regime, she was imprisoned for two years for distributing anti-fascism propaganda . She was imprisoned during that regime for distributing propaganda .
 A year later, she was freed but was again arrested for the same reason, but this time she was exiled from Greece . A year after her release she was again exiled from the country .
 After the birth of her child, she managed to return to Athens to a prison hospital, due to failing health . She is now in a hospital in a prison in Athens, Greece .
 War broke out between Italy and Greece in 1939, after Metaxas learned of Italy’s plans to redraw the Balkan map, including Italian occupation of the Epirus, a region of Greece .
 The British offered to aid Greece against the expected German invasion of the Balkans, but Metaxas, who admired German military culture, refused the offer . The British also offered to help Greece in the event of an invasion of Europe .
 Metaxas died in 1941, however, and Greece quickly accepted the British offer . Greece accepted the offer, but it was later cancelled .
 German army overran Greece in April 1941 . But it was too little too late, and the German army was too late to escape .
 Apostoloy formed EPON, the Unified Panhellenic Youth Organization, in February 1943 . In February 1943, Apostooy formed a panhellenic youth organization called EPON .
 Its purpose was to mobilize Greek youth in the service of the Resistance . It was intended to mobilize young people in the fight against the Nazis .
 Mazower: The Greek Resistance movement appealed to Greek women, largely because of Greek society’s treatment of them . Mazower says the movement was inspired by the treatment of women in Greek society .
 Mazower cites American officers’ dismay at the status of women, particularly in rural Greece . Mazower says American officers are dismayed at the situation in rural areas .
 Another commented that Greek women were, on the whole, poorly educated . Another said Greek women are poorly educated and poor educated .
 When Allied forces defeated the Germans in 1945, Greek communists and royalists were brought together in an uneasy coalition government . Under the auspices of the British, the coalition government was formed .
 Civil war erupted when communists refused to disband their guerrilla forces . Civil war broke out when communist forces refused to stop fighting in the country .
 With the aid of British and United States troops, the communists were defeated in 1949 . With the help of the British and U.S. troops, they were defeated .
 Electra Apostoloy had been bludgeoned to death by the Greek secret police . She did not live to see the communists’ demise . Electra had been killed by the secret police during the communist revolution .
 Suu Kyi is an internationally known leader of the movement to reestablish democracy in Myanmar and to resist the authoritarian rule of the military . She is one of the world's most prominent female leaders and activists .
 Myanmar is a nation located next to India on the coast of the Bay of Bengal . Myanmar is located in the region of Myanmar and is located near to India .
 In 1886 the British colonized Burma, combining it with its Indian colony to the west . Burma was the first colony to be colonized by the British in 1886 .
 In the early 20th century, a nationalist movement, composed of Buddhist groups, student organizations, and political parties, first began demanding separation from India and then independence .
 In 1942, the Japanese army, with the support of the Burmese Independence Army, invaded Burma to achieve its goal of expelling all Europeans from Southeast Asia . The Japanese army invaded Burma in 1942 . The invasion was the result of the invasion of Burma .
 When World War II ended in 1945 with the defeat of Japan, Aung San San Suu Kyi’s father and leader of the AFPFL, had monopolized nearly all political power and formed a government .
 He began negotiating with the British to gain Burma’s independence, granted on January 4, 1948, but was assassinated by his rival U Saw soon after . He was assassinated in 1948 by U Saw .
 A new AFPFL leader, U Nu, took power and a new constitution was written . The AFPFL led the country to a new state of martial law . AFPFL was founded in 1961 .
 He faced constant strife between various ethnic groups and from communist insurgents . Despite tolerating diversity, he established Buddhism as the state religion . Buddhism is characterized by quiet meditation and meditation .
 Suu Kyi’s parents, Aung San and Daw Khin Kyi, gave birth to their third child on June 19, 1945 . The couple's third child was born in 1945 as they formed their first government . Sui Kyi was born as a result of
 Aung San is known as the Father of Modern Burma, and his assassination when Suu Kyi was just three years old resulted in his martyrdom . Suukyi was assassinated when she was just 3 years old . She was the daughter of the assassinated leader, who is now
 Suu Kyi has always felt responsible for the welfare of Myanmar . Because of her father’s status, she feels responsible for her country's welfare . She has always been responsible for its welfare .
 Suu Kyi’s education in India also shaped her political values, says her mother . Her mother was in India during her childhood in India .
 She met and married Professor Michael Vaillancourt Aris, with whom she has two children . She has two other children with him .
 Antigovernment riots in Burma resulted in the resignation of General Ne Win and a general atmosphere of chaos . Meanwhile, antigovernment protests in Burma ended in a general state of chaos in the country .
 Suu Kyi’s mother suffered a stroke, and she flew to Rangoon to help her . Suu A. Kyi flew to the country's capital, Myanmar, to help the family .
 On August 26, 1988, Suu Kyi delivered a speech in Rangoon, in which she called for the formation of a strong democratic movement to resist the militarization of her country . The speech was delivered in August 1988 .
 She then became secretary-general of the NLD, which espoused human rights and democracy . She then cofounded and became secretary general of the party . The NLD espoused democracy and human rights .
 Suu Kyi condemned the military’s political power and advocated compromise between civil and military authorities . She has been critical of the military's political power in recent years . Suukyi has urged the military to step down from power .
 Elections held in 1990 resulted in an 80 percent win for NLD candidates to the People’s Assembly . The NLD won 80 percent of the vote in 1990 elections .
 The United Nations and other international humanitarian groups have called for her release . The U.N. has called for the release of the woman .
 In January 1994, United States Congressman Bill Richardson met with Suu Kyi, her first nonfamily visitor since her arrest . U.S. congressman Bill Richardson was the first non-family visitor to Suukyi .
 In 1995, the government released her from house arrest, but the military junta continued to restrict her movement within Myanmar and abroad . She was released from house under house arrest in 1995 .
 Suu Kyi's husband died of prostate cancer before she could see him . In March 1999, her husband died before she was able to see him in March 1999 .
 If she had left Myanmar, she would not have been able to return; the government refused to issue her a visa . She was not allowed to return to her country .
 Djamila Bouhired participated in the Algerian struggle for independence from French colonists . She was Algerian nationalist and defender of womens rights .
 Bouhired was captured in a raid and accused of planting bombs in Algiers . He was accused of bomb attacks at the Milk Bar and the Brasserie Coq Hardi . The attacks were carried out in the early hours of October 31 .
 When independence was won in 1962, she was a candidate to the new National Assembly . She was elected to the National Assembly in 1962 .
 Djamila Bouhired was born into a middle-class family and educated in French schools . She was born in France and educated at a French high school .
 When she was 22 years old, her brother Mustapha Bouhired inspired her to join the Front de la Liberation Nationale . The Front was formed in 1954 and dedicated to using terrorist tactics to rid Algeria of its French colonizers . She was inspired by her brother, Mustap
 French explorers had captured northern Algerian cities in 1830 . By 1914, France had all of Algeria under control .
 Native Algerians began demanding a voice in government, but the French rejected them . The French rejected all attempts to create a representative government .
 When Bouhired decided to join the FLN, she quickly became aware of the sexist attitudes of her comrades . Bouhire decided to leave the country to fight for her country's independence .
 Other women who tried to join were told that the FLN was not women’s business . The FLN is not women's business .
 Bouhired was wounded and arrested after the bombing of the Algiers restaurants . He was wounded in the bombing and arrested in the aftermath .
 After her death sentence was announced, she was moved from a prison in Algiers to Rheims, France, where she was imprisoned until the end of the revolution in 1962 .
 Two communist sympathizers, Georges Arnaud and Jacques Verges, defended her in their book Djamila Bouhired . They made use of her story as a symbol of Algeria’s desire for independence .
 In May 1959, El-Moudjahid, the voice of the FLN, declared Bouhired to be the best-known woman in Algeria . Bouhire was a member of the Algerian National Front .
 She has spent most of her time raising her children in the post-revolution era . The mother-of-two has been married for more than 20 years .
 Bouhired responded to critics of Algeria's women's status in independent Algeria . She said she is first a nationalist and then a woman, adding that she is now a nationalist .
 She admitted that she would like to become better educated but would only do so after her children were grown . She said she would only like to do so once her children are grown .
 Algeria’s government has sent her out of her house and onto the streets again, however . One development in Algeria's government did send her back to the streets .
 In 1981, the National Assembly drafted a piece of legislation known as the Family Code, which contained laws that discriminated against women . The Family Code was drafted in 1981, containing laws that discriminate against women.
 The codes included provisions requiring a husband’s authorization to allow his wife to travel . It forbade women to marry non-Muslim men; it stated that women could only work outside the home if their marriage contract stipulated that they could .
 Djamila Bouhired and other women revolutionaries led the second protest, held on November 16 . The second protest was held in Paris on November 17 .
 The women reminded lawmakers of the equality provision in the constitution . They reminded lawmakers that the constitution provides for equal rights .
 Assemblymen responded by telling the crowd that they should voice their concerns to the Union of Algerian Women, a government-controlled organization . Assemblymen told the crowd to voice concerns to an Algerian government-run organization .
 By this time, all political parties except the FLN had been declared defunct . In essence, Algeria was a one-party system . Algeria's political parties were declared defunct by the end of the war .
 The National Assembly toned down some of the language, but most of its provisions remained . The bill was passed by the National Assembly in 2012 .
 Bouhired signed a petition sponsored by a new organization, the Association for Equality Between Women and Men Under the Law . The group promotes equality between women and men under the law . The petition is sponsored by the new organization .
 Petition demands the abolition of the Family Code and the unconditional right of women to work . Petition also demands the right to work in the workplace . Petition has been signed by a group of women who want to be able to work legally .
 The association is open to all Algerian women, regardless of political or religious leanings . It's open to women in Algeria regardless of their political, religious or political leanings.
 The United Nations and many other human rights organizations are currendy reviewing the Family Code . The Family Code is being reviewed by the United Nations .
 UN described the Family Code as the Muslim world’s most restrictive law against women . UN: It says it perpetuates the subordinate status of women in the family and renders them effectively minors .
 Afghanistan’s fundamentalist Islamic Taliban regime issued decrees in 1996 banning women from leaving their homes without a male relative . The regime required the wearing of a burqa, a garment covering the entire body . The Taliban regime also banned women leaving home without male relatives .
 Both nations, it would seem, have passed restrictive laws designed to keep women from participating fully in public life . The laws are designed to prevent women from participation fully in the public life.
 The Taliban regime in Afghanistan was replaced in 2001 by an interim government that includes two women in its cabinet . Two women are in the interim government of Afghanistan .
 Fernea, Elizabeth Warnock, and Basima Qattan Bezirgan, eds. eds . Fernea and Warnock have been married for years .
 An immigrant in America, she uncovered unpleasant truths about democracy and industrialization that few people wanted to hear . She was an immigrant in the U.S. and an immigrant to America .
 Her advocacy of birth control for women unsetded Americans was at a time when war had threatened existing governments worldwide . She advocated for free speech rights, birth control, and free speech .
 As a woman, Goldman posed a social threat, as women of her time rarely participated in public life . Goldman posed as a threat to women in her time as a woman . Goldman's career spanned decades .
 Until her death, Goldman tried to repatriate until she died of a stroke in 1940 . The U.S. government only allowed her to do so after she died .
 Her mother, Taube Goldman, brought two daughters by a previous marriage to her new husband Abraham Goldman . Her new husband is also a father of two daughters .
 When the couple’s first child was also a girl, both Abraham and Taube looked upon Emma as an added burden . The couple's first child also had a baby girl .
 Even after Taube gave birth to two sons, Abraham could not forgive his daughter for being a girl . Taube had two sons . Abraham could never forgive Taube for having a daughter .
 Teachers showed an interest in her intellectual development, helping her to prepare for examinations that would enable her to advance to the Gymnasium, an elite high school .
 She passed, but her religious instructor refused to grant her a certificate of character, which she needed for entrance to the prestigious school . She passed but failed to get a character certificate for entrance .
 Emma would work in a glove factory owned by her cousin in St. Petersburg, Russia . Emma's father announced that the family would return to Russia .
 Upon the family’s return to Russia, the new tsar, Alexander III, instituted laws that discriminated against Jewish people . The family of Jewish people was forced to leave Russia .
 At 12, Goldman had heard of pogroms, or massacres, against Jewish people . Goldman was 12 when he was forced to leave his home in Russia . He says he is proud of his family's legacy .
 Jewish Jews were unable to maintain businesses and instead worked in factories . Economic conditions were so harsh for Jews that most worked in factory factories .
 Emma Goldman was forced to leave school and work in a garment factory . Emma is the daughter of Emma Goldman and Emma's mother is Emma's sister .
 At 17, she defied her father’s rules by leaving her home and flirting with the men at the factory . She defied her dad's rules by going to the factory at the time .
 One night, she followed her lover to a hotel room, where he plied her with alcohol and raped her . She followed him to the hotel room where he raped her, police say .
 Goldman fled her parents’ homeland in 1885 with her half sister Helena, in part to escape the pending marriage . Following Jewish custom, her father had arranged a marriage for her, but Goldman fled the family's homeland .
 Goldman found work at a clothing factory, where she earned $2.50 per week . She found work as a clothing worker at a factory in New Jersey .
 Her parents joined her in Rochester, and her father achieved some success at a furniture business . Eventually, she moved to Rochester, where she was raised .
 The 1886 Haymarket Square riot in Chicago became a turning point for Goldman . Goldman was inspired by the events in 1886 . The riots were a turning moment for Goldman, who later became a prominent businessman .
 On May 1, workers all over the nation went on strike to demand an eight-hour workday . The strike is the latest in a long line of strikes against the government .
 Two days later, two strikers were killed at Chicago’s McCormick Reaper factory . Two days after the two were killed, two strikes were held in Chicago . The strike was the first of two strikes in 18 years .
 May 4, a rally had been called to protest the killings at Haymarket Square . May 4 was the day of the killings .
 Seven policemen were killed, and eight anarchists were convicted of planting the bomb . Seven anarchists were killed and eight were convicted in the bombing .
 The Haymarket incident exacerbated the nativistic, or antiforeigner, sentiment that engulfed many Anglo-Americans at the time . Haymarket became a symbol of anti-American sentiment .
 Most immigrants who came to the U.S. from 1880 to 1920 were Catholic or Jewish, not Protestant . Furthermore, most immigrants from 1880-1920 were Catholic, not Protestants .
 To many native-born Americans, their appearance and language seemed strange and sometimes threatening . Native-American Americans were often threatened by their appearance or language .
 Emma Goldman responded both intellectually and actively to the Haymarket incident . Emma Goldman, one of those immigrants, responded to the incident with an active response .
 Emma Goldman sought intellectual solutions to social problems . Like many anarchists, she sought to solve social problems with intellectual solutions . Emma Goldman's work was published in the New York City Museum of Modernism .
 The Russian anarchist Peter Kropotkin argued that social justice would replace coercion by the government if authoritarian social hierarchies were replaced with small political organizations in which all members participated equally .
 In such a system, there would be no divisions between factory owners and factory laborers . All would operate the factories, and all would share profits equally .
 In her early years as anarchist, Goldman accepted violence as a method of social change . In her first years as an anarchist, she accepted violence .
 She plotted to kill Henry Clay Frick, manager of Andrew Carnegie’s Homestead Steel plant in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania . She and her lover, Alexander Berkman plotted to murder him . She planned to kill him .
 Homestead workers had gone on strike to seek the eight-hour workday and to protest wage cuts proposed by Frick . Frick proposed wage cuts to offset the expense of new machinery .
 Goldman obtained the weapon, but she was never caught and did not admit taking part in the crime until 40 years later . Goldman had obtained the gun, but Goldman had never been caught . Goldman was never convicted of the crime, but admitted it to police 40 years after .
 Goldman spent two years in Vienna, Austria, studying to be a midwife and nurse . She spent her sentence in prison . Goldman spent her time studying to become a nurse .
 When she returned, her position on violence had mellowed, she rejected the notion that the ends always justify the means . She rejected the idea that an anarchist and violence went hand in hand .
 She abandoned neither anarchism nor public speaking, however, despite the fact that she faced virulent opposition and censorship of her ideas .
 She and Berkman edited Mother Earth, a radical monthly, from 1906 to 1917 . Mother Earth was published by Mother Earth magazine Mother Earth .
 She read a libertarian message into the works of modern playwrights Henrik Ibsen and George Bernard Shaw . The Social Significance of Modern Drama published in 1914 .
 Ibsen's play A Doll’s House, about a wife who liberates herself from a stifling marriage, influenced her feminist leanings . The play was about a woman who liberated herself from her marriage .
 She attacked conventional marriage from the standpoint that it resulted in women being treated as sex commodities . She attacked traditional marriage for treating women as sexual commodities .
 She began lecturing on ‘voluntary motherhood’ and family limitation . Inspired by Margaret Sanger’s birth control campaigns, she became an advocate for voluntary motherhood .
 In 1917, after the U.S. entered World War I, she was arrested for opposing the draft . She was arrested in 1917, 1917, for opposing war draft .
 Upon her release in 1919, immigration officials forced her to leave the country . J Edgar Hoover forced her out of the United States .
 Excited by the Bolshevik Revolution, she went to Russia, but she soon perceived tyranny in the Leninist regime . She saw tyranny in Russia as a woman .
 After several attempts to return to the U.S. she died in Toronto in 1940 .
 Petra Kelly is cofounder of Die Griinen, a political party based on grassroots democracy, environmental awareness, and nonviolent social activism . Kelly is a German political activist .
 Kelly’s blend of environmental advocacy and feminism attracted the attention of other feminists and philosophers, ultimately spawning a new philosophical movement known as ecofeminism . Kelly's blend of feminism and environmental activism spawned a new philosophy known as Ecofeminism.
 Ecofeminists also counter the notion that a ‘natural’ affinity exists between male domination over women and nature, because to make such a claim implies a pattern of domination that cannot be disentangled, they say .
 Environmentalism is a necessary part of resistance against all kinds of oppression, according to ecofeminists . Ecofeminists promote the promotion of community between all living beings . Environmentalists say environmentalism is necessary to resist oppression .
 At the root of all of Kelly's thinking and activism is the fundamental notion that injustice in the world must not be allowed to stand, she says .
 Her mother married an American soldier, John E Kelly, who adopted his stepdaughter . She was adopted by Kelly, a stepdaughter of the soldier . Kelly adopted her from her mother's womb .
 The American South in the 1960s caught fire during the Civil Rights movement, threatening to bring down the rest of the nation with its consumptive flames .
 She had campaigned in the 1968 election for Robert Kennedy, John E Kennedy, Robert F Kennedy, and Martin Luther King, Jr. John E. Kennedy, for whom she had campaigned .
 On a visit to Prague in 1968, she witnessed the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia . She witnessed the invasion in the early days of her visit .
 Kelly became convinced that human rights violations were a global issue that required a unified, global commitment . Kelly was inspired by the brutality of the Prague Spring in the Czech Republic .
 Kelly experienced human suffering closer to home when her 10-year-old sister Grace died of cancer . Kelly's sister Grace was 10 years old when she died from cancer in 1970 . Kelly: "It's not easy to say goodbye to your little sister, but it's a good thing
 From that point on, Kelly fought against the civil and military use of nuclear power and weapons . Kelly fought for mutual disarmament among the world’s nuclear powers .
 Her activism within the antinuclear movement convinced her to become more politically active in her native West Germany . Her activism in the anti-nuclear movement was inspired by her activism in West Germany.
 She studied European integration at the Europa Institute while finishing her master’s degree . She studied EU integration at Europa Institute .
 After finishing school in 1971, she joined the ranks of civil service at the European Economic Community in Brussels . She became its first female political administrator .
 Kelly researched labor problems, public health issues, and environmental protection . Kelly's activism in West Germany led to her later political activism in Germany . Kelly was inspired by her interest in labor, health and environmental issues .
 Kelly became disillusioned by his inability to effect fundamental changes in German society, she says . He was forced to resign in the face of a spy scandal, two years later, after a scandal .
 She looked for an organization that could reform society through the political process . She found a way to get involved in the process of reforming society .
 Kelly was not satisfied with such a limited agenda, and she decided to help create an alternative political party . An organization already existed that used an initiative process to effect stricter environmental laws and regulations . Kelly decided to create a political party instead of an organization already exists .
 The Greens maintained the traditional goals of West German citizens’ initiatives in pursuing environmental and nonviolent policies . Greens maintained traditional goals in West Germany in pursuit of environmental and nonviolence policies .
 Kelly stressed the “anti-party” grassroots nature of the Greens by participating in the 1979 protests against NATO decision to deploy more U.S. first strike missiles in West Germany . Kelly was a member of the Green Party in 1979 .
 Kelly worried that her party would lose its utopian outlook and compromise its values . Kelly, however, took her seat in the Bundestag with some fear and trepidation . Kelly worries that the party will compromise its ideals .
 She rejected any alliance with the socialists, fearing that they would co-opt Green ideas . She said they would 'co-opt' Green ideas to the socialist party .
 Kelly was awarded the Alternative Nobel Prize in 1982 . Women Strike for Peace, an American women’s peace organization, named her Woman of the Year .
 Later that year, on October 1, she was found shot to death at her home in Bonn, Germany, in what was presumed to be a murder/suicide committed by her partner .
 Rosa Luxemburg’s legacy lasted long after her brutal death at the hands of German soldiers in January 1919 . She was a Polish German revolutionary whose brutal death was in 1919 . Luxemburg was a member of the Communist Party in Poland .
 East German dissidents chanted Luxemburg’s slogan “freedom is always the freedom of she who thinks differently” as police arrested them on the anniversary of the death of Luxemburg in 1989 . Police arrested them as they were opposing the government of the German Democratic Republic .
 Rosa Luxemburg’s international outlook derived in part from her multinational background (she lived in Poland, Germany, France, and Switzerland), which left her open to transnational ideologies . Luxemburg lived in France, Switzerland, Switzerland and Germany .
 She was a Marxist who believed in a workers’ revolution that would transfer control of the means of production from capitalists to the workers themselves . She was an advocate of a workers' revolution .
 The revolution would result in international socialism . Property and the distribution of income would be subject to social control, rather than individual determination or market forces .
 Luxemburg thought that nationalist sentiments only served to reinforce the power of the bourgeoisie . Luxemburg: Nationalism is distracting workers from the revolution .
 Rosa Luxemburg was born on March 5, 1871, to Line Lowenstein, a rabbi’s daughter, and Eliasz Luxemburg, a Jewish timber merchant, in the town of Zamosc in Russian Poland . She was born in 1871 .
 At the age of three, she and her family relocated to Warsaw, Poland, where she attended a gymnasium open only to a select few Jewish students . She was moved to Warsaw at age three, and she attended school only to select few students .
 Luxemburg excelled in her studies, but school officials denied her the golden medal because of her confrontational behavior, and because she had joined a group of revolutionary socialists . Luxemburg was denied the gold medal because she was confrontational .
 She fled to Switzerland at the age of 18 when her activities became known to the Russian secret police . She fled when she was 18 .
 She met her longtime lover and companion Leo Jogiches , a Polish Lithuanian student and revolutionary like herself . The couple befriended Karl Kautsky, the “Pope of Marxism” Karl . Kautsy and Luxemburg’s lawyer Paul Levi .
 Luxemburg has traveled extensively all over Europe since childhood . Crippled since childhood, Luxemburg nevertheless traveled extensively .
 She worked briefly in Paris before returning to Zurich to complete her dissertation on the industrial development of Poland . She returned to Switzerland after completing her dissertation .
 By 1905, Luxemburg had authored more than 90 articles published in various newspapers and journals, mostly in Germany and Poland . Luxemburg was born in Switzerland and died in 1903 .
 Luxemburg's fiery radical prose got her in trouble with conservative forces . She landed in jail repeatedly for insulting the German Kaiser Wilhelm II and the government in print .
 Luxemburg argued that under capitalism, a national economy will reach a point when the demand for goods does not increase enough to keep up with the growing supply of goods . Luxemburg: Under capitalism, the demand will not be able to keep pace with growing supply .
 The capitalist nation must expand into nondeveloped nations to create new markets for its products, thus forming the conditions for imperialism . Therefore, the capitalist nation needs to expand into more and more countries .
 After Luxemburg’s death, economist John Maynard Keynes corroborated his findings . Keynes suggested that governments could intervene directly in the economy and control supply and demand through government spending programs .
 Her ultimate goal in Germany was to establish a government based upon workers’ councils . Nevertheless, she still believed in socialism .
 She participated in the events that led to the abdication of Wilhelm II and the end of the German monarchy . To help make her dream a reality, she participated in World War I events .
 She addressed the founding congress of the German Communist Parry . She assumed the editorship of Die Rote Fahne , the party's newspaper .
 “Red Rose” led the Berlin workers’ call for revolution in January 1919 . Although she advocated a gradualist approach to worker revolution, ‘Red Rose' advocated gradualism .
 Luxemburg’s head carried a bounty of DM 100,000, and soldiers beat her and gunned her down on the night of January 15, 1919 . Luxemburg was shot in the head by soldiers in the early hours of that day .
 Winnie Madikizela-Mandela has devoted most of her life to ending the treatment of black Africans under South Africa’s system of apartheid .
 Winnie took over his leadership position among South Africa’s black population during his imprisonment from 1962 to 1990 . Winnie Mandela is the wife of Nelson Mandela, the African National Congress leader .
 In the country’s first multiracial elections in 1994, she became a member of parliament . She was elected to parliament in 1994 . She is the first woman to be elected to a seat in the country's parliament .
 Her testimony before the 1997 Truth and Reconciliation Committee failed to clear her name . However, she was implicated in crimes committed during the apartheid era .
 Mandela's actions raise questions about the use of violence as a method of forcing social change . Mandela’s actions raises questions about using violence to force social change in South Africa . Mandela: "I’m not afraid of violence. I’ve never been afraid of it
 Madikizela-Mandela was born on September 26, 1936, in the Transkei homeland government . She was the daughter of a former cabinet minister and headmaster .
 The Madikizelas were descended from leaders of Xhosa-speaking people of South Africa . They are descended from people of the South African province . The Madzelas are believed to have been descended from the Xhos .
 Winnie’s parents were missionary-educated and spoke fluent English . Both Winnie and Winnie's parents were missionaries-educated . Winnie was born in New Zealand .
 Winnie left home at 16 to attend the Jan Hofmeyer School of Social Work in Johannesburg . Winnie is now a successful social worker and has a successful career in South Africa .
 She began working as a pediatric social worker at the Baragwanath Hospital . She is now working at the hospital as a social worker .
 Winnie Madikizela-Mandelas first encounters with South Africa’s security police occurred just after her marriage . Winnie's first encounter with security police was just after she married .
 The government required African men and, after 1958, African women to carry passes with them at all times . After 1958, they were required to carry a pass with them with them all time .
 Passes were identification cards that included employment history and information that restricted blacks to the lowest paying, least desirable jobs available . Passes include employment history, employment history .
 In October 1958, security police arrested thousands of black women, including Madikizela-Mandela, in South Africa . Security police were in charge of thousands of women in 1958 .
 She spent two weeks in prison, losing her job at the hospital as a result . She was sentenced to two years in prison .
 Mandela was arrested in 1962 for his role in organizing the Umkhonto we Sizwe . In 1961, the South African government outlawed the ANC, and in 1962, he was arrested for organizing the organization .
 Winnie Mandela was banned from making statements to the press, addressing people publicly, and from leaving her home without permission . Nelson Mandela was sentenced to life in prison; Winnie was served with banning orders .
 In 1967, the police arrested her for ignoring confinement orders and resisting arrest . In 1967 she was arrested for ignoring her confinement orders . She was later found guilty of resisting arrest and refusing to obey orders .
 She was later charged under the Suppression of Communism Act, spending 17 months in solitary confinement . She spent the time under the act under the law .
 Winnie Madikizela-Mandela never knew when the police would burst into her house, harass her, or arrest her on trumped-up charges in an effort to mute her voice of protest . From the time of Nelson Mandela’s imprisonment until his release in 1990
 She sent her two daughters to boarding school in Swaziland to protect them from harm . She sent them to a boarding school to protect her daughters from harm.
 In 1977, she was forced into exile when the police arrested her and took her from her house in Soweto to live in the black township outside the rural town of Brandfort in the Orange Free State .
 Winnie Madikizela-Mandela had learned how to capitalize on her struggles with the law . By this time, however, she had learned to capitalize .
 Her televised visits with her husband, during which she was never allowed physical contact with him, evoked international sympathy and monetary aid . The televised visits to her husband evoked worldwide sympathy .
 She used the money to initiate social welfare programs, which in turn helped to politicize the black population of Brandfort . The money was used to help the city's black population .
 In retaliation for the silence, MadikizelaMandela decided to ignore her banning orders . In retaliation, she ignored her ban orders .
 When a police car chased her through Soweto’s streets, a journalist captured the image and published it worldwide . Antiapartheid activists throughout the world now had the symbol they needed to enlighten and ignite international attention to the situation in South Africa .
 Necklacing refers to a practice of placing gasoline-soaked tires around the necks of people whom antiapartheid activists consider “traitors” to the cause and then setting them on fire . The practice was carried out in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Winnie Madikizela-Mandela accompanied her husband outside the prison walls . Winnie's husband was sentenced to life in prison in 1994 .
 Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was charged with involvement in the 1988 kidnapping and murder of youth activists . The couple's nightmare was finally over, but several months later, she was charged .
 Mandela's bodyguards at the time, known collectively as the Mandela Football Club, were charged with the crimes . Mandela’s bodyguards were charged in the crimes in the 1980s .
 A court found Winnie guilty of kidnapping and being an accessory to assault . A judge commuted her sentence to a fine .
 At the end of the ordeal, the ANC elected her to its National Executive Committee . She was also elected to the ANC's national executive committee . The ANC says she will be a member of the party's board .
 The following year, after rumors that Winnie had an affair with a younger man, the Mandelas separated . They divorced in 1996, and they later divorced .
 Winnie won a seat in Parliament, but, after she severely criticized the government, voters ousted her . Voters ousted her from Parliament after she criticized her government . Winnie was a member of the British parliament, but was forced to step down .
 Madikizela-Mandelas past violent acts again interfered with her political aspirations . In September 1997, she was elected to the presidency .
 The Truth and Reconciliation Committee, designed to investigate crimes committed during apartheid, linked her to eight murders and other violent crimes . The committee was designed to look into crimes committed in apartheid .
 McAlisky, also known as the five-foot firebrand, has been involved in the political power struggle between Irish Republicans and Union sympathizers for most of the 20th century .
 An IRA supporter, McAlisky’s political acts have, at times, resulted in her own victimization, she says . She says she is a victim of victimization .
 Bernadette McAlisky was the youngest person ever elected to the British Parliament . She was elected to Parliament in 1969 . She is one of the first women to be elected to parliament in Britain .
 Her politics are an esoteric blend of socialism, Irish nationalism, anticlericalism, and feminism . Representing a young, radicalized Catholic population of Northern Ireland, she writes .
 Political strife, intertwined with religious differences, has been a way of life for Ireland’s inhabitants for hundreds of years . Political strife and religious differences have been intertwined with political strife for centuries .
 An Irish provisional government was proclaimed in 1916 . After more than a century of British rule, an Irish government was declared in 1916.
 In 1920, the British government passed an act dividing the island into the Irish Republic in the south and the mostly Protestant Northern Ireland in the north . The act divided the mostly Catholic, mostly Protestant, Irish Republic .
 In 1921 British and Irish officials signed a treaty securing the separate states . Southerners rejected the division, but in 1921 a treaty was signed securing the separation .
 Northern Ireland has its own parliament, which regulates and administers education, commerce, and agriculture . Northern Ireland is the only country in the United States without a US Senate .
 Other powers, such as levying taxes and maintaining the military, are assumed by the British Parliament .
 Catholics in the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland clamor for a united, independent Ireland . Unionists in Northern Ireland fight to maintain ties with Great Britain .
 Bernadette Devlin was born the third of six children to John James and Elizabeth Devlin in Gookstown, Ireland . She was born to a family of six who were born in the same town .
 Elizabeth had come from a strong farming family with staunch Republican sentiments . Elizabeth was born into a farm family with strong Republican sentiments.
 Catholics in Northern Ireland had long claimed that Protestants discriminated against them in education, employment, and housing . Protestants held most of the political power in the province . Catholics claimed Protestants violated their civil rights .
 The Northern Ireland government tried to stop a civil rights demonstration in Londonderry in 1968 . Bloody riots broke out when the government was trying to stop the demonstration .
 The following year, antigovernment rallies occurred in Belfast and Londonderry . This time, British troops were sent to restore order but failed to stop further rioting .
 The violence began wearing away the unity of Northern Ireland’s Republican, Catholic population . The violence, however, began to wear away Northern Ireland's unity .
 Younger Catholics grew weary of the “go slow” approach advocated by older, seasoned Republicans . Younger Catholics were weary of older Republicans' "go slow" approach .
 They considered civil rights for the Catholic minority in Northern Ireland as more important than Irish unity . They also considered civil right for the Catholics in the province more important .
 Devlin sympathized with the Socialists who viewed unity among Republicans as impossible as long as class differences remained . Devlin: "Unity among Republicans is impossible if class differences remain"
 Bernadette Devlin advocated emulating the African-American civil rights protests by organizing activist movements and holding protest marches . Devlin was an active participant in the uprisings of the 1960s . She was a member of the Black National Congress of Representatives .
 She was one of the founders of People’s Democracy, a civil rights group concerned with civil rights . She was a member of the group that fought for civil rights in the United States .
 The organization marched from Belfast to Derry amid attacks from police and militant Unionists . The march took place amid attacks on police and militants from the city .
 People's Democracy won several seats in the Northern Ireland Parliament in March 1969 . The People’s Democracy won a number of seats in Northern Ireland .
 Devlin urged the growing militancy of the Catholic population; police arrested her for incitement to riot . Devlin was arrested for inciting a riot .
 Upon her release, she traveled to the U.S. to raise money for the Northern Ireland relief fund . She raised money for a relief fund in the United States .
 Devlin lost the favor of many Catholics when she gave birth to an illegitimate child in 1971 . Devlin was reelected to Parliament in the June 1970 general election .
 In January 1972, she assaulted a member of the House of Commons, Reginald Maudling, following the ‘Bloody Sunday’ uprising in Londonderry which killed 13 people .
 On January 30, 1972, British soldiers opened fire on unarmed demonstrators in the Bogside . British soldiers had opened fire .
 The march had been called to protest the internment of Irish Catholics without trial . The British government had introduced the practice of internment in August 1971 as a safeguard against terrorism .
 The following year, she lost her Parliament seat to a moderate anti-Unionist candidate . She lost her seat in Parliament in 2010 .
 By 1980, McAlisky reemerged in demonstrations supporting the IRA hunger strikers . In 1981, she and her husband were shot while getting their three children ready for school .
 The gunmen were later identified as members of the extremist Ulster Defense Association . They were sentenced to long prison terms . The gunmen are now serving long prison sentences .
 South African politician and sociologist Fatima Meet is the first woman to be banned by the white government of South Africa . Meet was banned from speaking freely or freely in South Africa by white government .
 She has participated in the African National Congress’s Defiance Campaign against apartheid . She founded the banned Women's Federation and Black Women’�s Federation . She has also been involved in the banned Black Women's federation .
 In 1976, she was detained and refused a passport under the Internal Security Act . She was denied a passport in 1976 under the same act .
 Meet has written several books on racism in South Africa . Meet is a sociologist and author of several books about racism .
 Her primary contribution to the anti-apartheid cause has been her focus on interracial relations in her South African homeland . She has been married to a South African woman who was born in South Africa .
 Meer Meer is the daughter of Indian immigrant Moosa Ismail, a journalist and editor of The Indian View . Meer was born in Durban, South Africa, and Meer grew up in South Africa . She was born to an Indian immigrant and is married to Indian journalist
 Asian Indians arrived in South Africa primarily to work in the sugar plantations of Natal in the mid-19th century . Asian Indians came to South Africa mainly to work on sugar plantations .
 Gandhi organized the Passive Resistance Gampaign in defiance of the ban on travel by Indians between the Transvaal and Natal . Gandhi was the first Indian to travel to the South African capital . He was the only Indian in South Africa .
 Migrant Indians and native Africans seeking scarce jobs exacerbated economic problems for both groups of people . Friction between migrant Indians and natives has led to economic problems in both groups .
 Poor relations between Indians and Africans intensified during the 1949 riots in Durban . The riots were the result of poor relations between the two sides .
 Meer organized women from two main South African non-white political organizations to form a combined activists’ group called the Durban District Women’s League . Meer was a member of the Indian Natal Congress and the African National Congress .
 The organization’s main goal was to reconcile the two hostile groups and help heal both communities . The organization was formed to help heal the hostile communities .
 Durban District Women’s League set up a milk program for impoverished children . The program aims to mitigate squalid economic conditions among African migrants . Durban district women's league set up the milk program .
 Meer founded and became president of the Women’s Federation in 1952 . The white South African government grew increasingly wary of Indian/African alliances .
 The ANC and INC created joint activist committees, including the Defiance Against Unjust Laws Campaigns . Campaigns protested banning and pass laws that required Africans to carry identification papers .
 As a result of her work in the Women’s Federation, Meer was banned, for the first time, from 1952 to 1954 . Meer herself was banned from using the word 'sex' as a derogatory term .
 In 1975, the government banned Meer for a second time when she became president of the Black Women’s Federation . Officials refused to issue her a passport . Meer was banned in 1975 after she was banned from entering the country .
 Meer described prison life in graphic detail, noting the intense boredom resulting from the total isolation and the same dull routine each day . Meer: "The boredom is the most intense boredom in prison life"
 She was forced to scrub her cell every morning and then taken to a small closet to wash herself in a bucket of cold water . She was then forced to wash her cell in a closet .
 The couple had three children, one of whom died in an automobile accident . One of the children died in a car accident . The couple was married in 1968 .
 Her latest offerings are a revised version of Apprenticeship of a Mahatma . She has also written a children's book about Gandhi and a script .
 Guatemalan human rights activist Rigoberta Menchii won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1992 . Her activism on behalf of human rights in Gentral America earned her the award .
 Menchii’s life, shaped by the turbulence of Gentral American politics, demonstrates the oppression of Central American indigenous populations by the descendants of Spanish colonialists . The life of the indigenous man is shaped by turbulence of the turbulent world of politics .
 Menchu based her activism, in part, on liberation theology conceived of by Latin American Catholics beginning in the 1960s . Menchu's activism was inspired by liberation theology, she says .
 Guatemala has been torn apart by power struggles between military dictatorships and leftist insurgents during the late 20th century . Guatemala is sandwiched between Mexico to the north and El Salvador and Honduras to the south .
 The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency toppled the democratically elected President Jacobo Arbenz Guzman in 1954 . He began redistributing land owned by the United States United Fruit Company to landless peasants .
 The coup resulted in a series of military dictatorships that inspired antigovernment guerrilla movements in the country’s remote Sierra Madre mountains in the central part of the nation .
 The government responded with violence but applied its heavy hand indiscriminately against both innocent peasants and genuine threats . The government—convinvinced that the guerrillas were communist— responded to violence .
 U.S. President Jimmy Carter suspended economic aid to Guatemala in 1977 . Human rights violations led to the suspension of economic aid from the United States . The Guatemalan government was accused of human rights violations .
 Vicente Menchii was born on January 9, 1959, in the village of Chimel in the northern Sierra Madre mountains . He was born to Turn, a midwife and healer, and a catechist and a day laborer .
 Menchii’s family picked cotton and coffee in southern coastal plantations . Her family grew subsistence crops in the mountain home in the off-season, according to her autobiography . Her autobiography is published today .
 At the age of 13, Menchii left home to work as a domestic for a wealthy Spanish family in Guatemala City . He was raised by a wealthy family in the country's capital, Guatemala .
 indigenous people had few rights of citizenship, even though they made up about 60 percent of Guatemala’s population . Indigenous people made up 60 per cent of Guatemala's population .
 Vicente Menchii and his followers, the United Peasant Committee, opposed the government’s forceful takeover of Indian-occupied land on behalf of plantation owners . Meanwhile, Vicente menchii's followers opposed the forceful takeover .
 Vicente Menchii began his crusade with a series of petitions to the government and then protests to keep the land in the hands of indigenous people . The land is now under the control of the government in Mexico .
 In 1979, soldiers kidnapped Rigoberta’s brother Petrocino; he was finally tortured and burned alive . In 1979 he was tortured, tortured, burned alive by soldiers in the U.S.
 Vicente and 38 others died in a fire at the Spanish Embassy in Guatemala City, while protesting Indian human rights abuses . Vicente died a year later, a year after the embassy fire, in a protest in Guatemala .
 Rigoberta Menchii cites liberation theology as an additional catalyst to her political activism and leadership . The outrages suffered by her family at the hands of the Guatemalan government were enough to incite retaliation .
 The liberation theology movement holds that Jesus Christ had a special message of freedom for the poor and oppressed . Followers seek to involve the Catholic Church in reform of social ills and human rights abuses .
 After her father’s death in 1979, Menchii led Guatemala's 22 Indian groups against further exploitation by the government . Her autobiography says she led Guatemalan Indians to protect themselves from exploitation .
 When her mother was kidnapped, raped, and killed by the army, Menchii sensed that she would be next . However, when her mother's rape and murder were committed, she sensed she was next .
 She fled to Mexico in 1981, where she joined the United Nations Working Group on Indigenous Populations . She joined the U.N. Working Group in 1981 .
 Venezuelan anthropologist Elisabeth Burgos and Rigoberta Menchu collaborated on the book . Menchu brought the plight of Central American Indians to the attention of human rights activists worldwide .
 When the Mountains Tremble, which illustrates the suffering of Guatemala’s mountain population, is published in Guatemala's new book, When the Mountain Tremble . The book is based on the experience of Guatemala's mountain population .
 Menchii returned to Guatemala periodically after 1988, though doing so put her in danger of arrest . She was arrested in 1988 after returning to the country .
 In 1992, when she learned that she would receive the Nobel Peace Prize, she accepted it on behalf of all the indigenous people of the world . She accepted the award for all indigenous people in 1992 .
 Menchii was the first Indian and the youngest person to receive the award . He was also the youngest recipient of the award at the age of 18 .
 The $1.1 million award enabled her to set up a foundation dedicated to human rights . The award also allowed her to establish a foundation .
 The UN declared 1993 to be the International Year for Indigenous Populations . Menchu played a key role in electing Ramiro de Leon Carpio, a human rights advocate, as president .
 In 1999, Middlebury College anthropologist David Stoll wrote a book highly critical of Menchu’s autobiography .
 He also views Menchu’s description of a political awakening and revolutionary consciousness among the mountain population as simplistic . He says Menchu's description of the political awakening is simplistic .
 The poet and politician cared passionately for the anguish in the world, especially between Hindus and Muslims, and for the loud cries of Indian nationalists who worked for independence from Great Britain . She was one of India's most famous poets and politicians .
 In 1947, after India won independence from Great Britain, Naidu became the first woman governor of the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh . She was also the first female governor of India's Uttar Pradesh state .
 Hindu and Muslim unity remained the strongest ideal of Naidu’s life, for which she worked ceaselessly, but which never materialized . Hindu, Muslim unity was her strongest ideal, she said .
 Naidu also campaigned for the education and emancipation of Indian women . He also fought for the abolition of purdah, the practice of secluding women in India .
 Sarojini Naidu was born on February 13, 1879, in Hyderabad, India . She was the eldest of eight children born to a Bengali Brahmin family . She is one of the most famous women in India .
 Naidu’s father, Aghorenath Chattopadhyay, left Bengal to found and administer the Nizam College in Hyderabad, India . He left Bengal for Hyderabad to administer the college .
 Naidu’s birth in a state controlled by the Muslim nizam, or government, gave her many of the themes she explored in her poetry and her understanding of Muslim culture that became useful in her political life . The poet was born in a Muslim state where the elite
 Naidu served Indian nationalist Mahatma Gandhi’s efforts to heal Hindu/Muslim hatred as a necessary step toward Indian independence . He served as part of Gandhi's efforts to . heal Hindu-Muslim hatred . Gandhi's attempt to heal .
 When Naidu was a young woman, she witnessed the partitioning of her Bengali ancestral homeland in 1905 . She was a witness to the partition of her ancestral homeland .
 East Bengal went to Pakistan until 1971, when it became the independent state of Bangladesh . East Bengal was part of Bangladesh until 1971 when it was independent .
 The following year, Naidu met with nationalist Gopal Krishna Gokhale at the Indian National Congress in Calcutta . She began her lifelong participation in India’s political life .
 Sarojini Naidu was educated in England at King’s College, London, and Girton College, Cambridge . She was also educated at Girton and King's College .
 When she returned to India, she married Govindarajul Naidu, a medical doctor who belonged to a low caste . She was married to a doctor who lived in a low-caste family .
 The marriage caused much consternation in Sarojini’s family and in orthodox Hindu society . But the couple enjoyed a long and happy marriage that produced two sons and two daughters . The marriage was a happy one of the most famous marriages in India .
 Naidu wrote about illicit love between members of different castes in her poem, “An Indian Love Song” One of several poems published in three slim volumes of poetry .
 Naidu began her early political career by honing her oratorical skills . She is now an international spokeswoman for Indian unity and nationalism .
 When she was in India, Naidu toured the country giving speeches on independence and reading from her poetry .
 In March 1913, she addressed a huge gathering of Muslims at a session of the New Muslim League in Lucknow, Lucknow .
 The purpose of the meeting was to discuss Indian unity and independence . The meeting was held in a bid to promote Indian unity .
 The following year, she met Mahatma Gandhi in London, becoming one of his most trusted followers and confidants . She became one of Gandhi's closest friends in London .
 Gandhi sent her as his envoy to South Africa to help Indians in their struggle against the South African government’s discriminatory policies toward the Indian population . Gandhi was in South Africa at the time .
 The following year, she became president of the Indian National Congress, an organization made up primarily of Hindus seeking Indian independence from Great Britain . She was president of an organization that sought independence from Britain .
 As tensions between Indians and the British mounted in the 1930s, Naidu’s political activism put her in danger . She was killed in the early 1930s .
 In 1930 she took over the AntiSalt Law campaign in defiance of the British monopoly on salt production and sale in India after Gandhi’s imprisonment . In 1930, she led the anti-Salt Law movement against British monopoly .
 Police arrested her when she led a raid on a salt depot on the Gujarat coast . She led the raid on the salt depot in Gujarat, Gujarat .
 Officials jailed her two more times for her participation in the Quit India movement in 1942 . Quit India was Gandhi’s final attempt to purge the British from India .
 When independence was finally won in 1947, it brought both ecstasy and immense sorrow . Sarojini Naidu died in 1947 at the hands of a soldier in the Indian Army .
 Gandhi was struck down by the bullet of a Hindu nationalist in January 1948 . As a result of religious conflicts, the country was divided into Pakistan and India . Gandhi was killed by a bullet fired by Hindu nationalists .
 As the first woman governor of the largest state of India, Uttar Pradesh, she brought to her post her ability to unify and mollify religious tensions . She is the first female governor of Uttar Pradesh .
 Temperance became one of the most important women’s reform efforts in the U.S. Second only to suffrage or the right of women to vote . The Volstead Act banned the manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages in the 1880s .
 Members of the WCTU became convinced that men’s abuse toward women was rooted in drink . Saloons were at least partly responsible for men's abuse of liquor, the union says .
 In the 19th century, women perceived of themselves as the moral standard-bearers of the family and of society . Women perceived themselves as moral standard bearers of family and society .
 In the ideal—if not the real—middle-class family, the husband went off to work while his wife remained at home . Thousands of women made factories productive along with men, in the ideal middle-class .
 As more families rose to middle-class status, as the middle class came to signify success in American society, women’s ideal role became that of housewife . The role of a housewife became more important as more families became more successful .
 Perceived as primarily mothers and homemakers, women took on the task of raising children to be good moral citizens . Women were seen as primarily as homemaker and mothers .
 Women advocating temperance and other reforms tended to come from middle or upper-class backgrounds . Lower-class women’s time was devoted to work both in and out of the home .
 Often, temperance activists assumed saloons were a working-class vice . Temperance activists thought saloons, and activities inside them, were a classless vice .
 The period from 1880 to 1920 represented peak years of immigration, and as immigrants tended to come from the working class, they also became targets of the temperance movement .
 The WCTU campaigned for the enactment of laws that would require schools to teach the dangers of drinking in all public schools . The law would require the teaching of drinking to be taught in schools .
 Garry was a sickly child and spent much of her childhood reading the Bible . Garry was born in Gerrard County, Kentucky, to the prosperous plantation owners Mary Campbell Moore and George Moore .
 Charlien, also weak and sickly, suffered because of her husband’s drinking . Charlien suffered from her husband's drinking. Charlien was also sickly .
 She left Gloyd because of his habit and because he could not earn a living, she said . She left him because he was unable to afford a living .
 David became pastor of the Christian Church in Medicine Lodge, Kansas, in 1890 . The family moved to Medicine Lodge in 1890, where David became a pastor . David was pastor of Christian Church .
 Carry organized a local chapter of the WCTU, served as a jail evangelist, and taught Sunday School . Carry also served as an evangelist in jail . Carry was also a prison evangelist .
 The Nations divorced in 1901, leaving Carry with more time and energy to devote to temperance . Carry and his wife were married in 1901 .
 Voters of Kansas had adopted a constitutional amendment in 1880 prohibiting the manufacture and sale of intoxicating beverages, except for medicinal purposes . The amendment was adopted in 1880 .
 Carry asked God to use her to save Kansas . Kansas’s saloon keepers violated that law, and Carry asked him to help .
 She smashed her first saloon on June 1, 1900, using stones and bricks wrapped in newspaper, and an iron rod strapped to her cane .
 She moved around Kansas wielding a hatchet, undeterred by jail sentences . She gained publicity for her cause, gaining much publicity .
 Nation’s hatchet jobs revealed an illegal traffic in liquor in Kansas . Kansas was officially a dry state, but was officially dry state .
 Her effort won Nation and her cause front-page coverage in newspapers . Her opponents began reaping their own benefits from her destructive bent . Nation's efforts won her support, but her efforts failed .
 Nation's strategy brought alcohol abuse to people's attention . Nation’s strategy brought people to the attention of alcohol abuse, Nation says .
 In 1900, as a result of a WCTU campaign, the secretary of the navy prohibited the use of alcohol by enlisted men . In 1900 it was banned by the Secretary of the Navy . The campaign led to the ban on alcohol use in the navy .
 Founder and president of the Federation of South African Women for more than 20 years, Lilian Ngoyi spent her life fighting against South Africa’s system of apartheid and for women's rights .
 Ngoyi resisted all attempts to stifle her activism . Although the South African government silenced and physically restrained her, she fought back .
 Ngoyi was born to a Bapedi family in the village of Gamatlala near Pretoria, South Africa . He was born in a village near the city's capital, Pretoria .
 Poverty forced the end of her formal education after one year of high school . She attended primary school in the village of Kilnerton, but poverty forced her to quit .
 She had an experience during the years that she worked as a domestic servant that would shape her later life . She had to work as a housemaid during her childhood .
 Lilian was delivering laundry for her mother to a white housewife who refused to let her or her younger brother into her house . Lilian and her brother were delivering laundry to the housewife .
 She left domestic service in 1935, when she began working as a nurse’s assistant and trainee . She worked as a trainee and nurse's assistant .
 She met and married a van driver, but the marriage ended with his death at an early age . She had a son with her, but he passed away at a young age .
 To support herself after her husband's death, Ngoyi found work as a machinist at a clothing factory .
 She experienced firsthand the exploitative wages and working conditions worsened by the worldwide economic depression of the 1930s and ’40s . She became convinced that a labor union could improve the lives of working-class blacks .
 She joined the militant Garment Workers’ Union and became a leader of one of its local offices . She was a member of the union and leader of a local office in London .
 ANC formed in 1912 to fight for black South Africans’ rights . Nationalists had formed the ANC in 1912 . ANC was formed by Nationalists to fight against black South African rights .
 Dutch, German, and French people, known collectively as Boers, began settling in South Africa during the 18th and 19th centuries and creating independent Boer republics . The Boers were originally from Holland, Germany, France and Germany .
 British immigrants began pouring into South Africa when explorers discovered gold in Transvaal . Imperialists in Great Britain launched a campaign to take over the Boer republics .
 The Boer War resulted in British victory and sovereignty in South Africa . The war ended in defeat of the South African Republic .
 In 1913, the Native Land Act introduced territorial separation, restricting black Africans to homelands, which consisted of only 15 percent of the total area of South Africa . The act was introduced in 1913 .
 The Native Land Act anticipated a series of ‘homeland’ laws that instituted South Africa’s system of apartheid . It was the first land law to be passed in South Africa .
 The government passed the Mixed Marriage Act and the Immorality Amendment Act in 1948 . The act outlawed marriage and sexual relations between different races .
 The government created separate local administrations according to racial groups . The government then created separate administrations for each group .
 South Africans can now live anywhere and the homelands have been abolished . Before apartheid ended in 1992, the ANC fought against restrictions imposed by the system .
 Lilian Ngoyi took part in the 1952 Defiance Campaign in South Africa . The campaign saw black South Africans collectively defy apartheid laws .
 She ignored ‘Whites Only’ signs hung in public buildings such as post offices, for which she was arrested and sentenced to prison . As part of this campaign, she ignored “Whites only” signs hung .
 The Defiance Campaign, along with other ANC activities, resulted in the governmental ban on the organization in 1960 . The organization was forced underground .
 In 1954, Ngoyi became president of the ANC’s Women League . In 1956, she became the first woman elected to the ANC National Executive Committee . She was also the first female member of ANC's Women League.
 The year 1954 also marked the formation of the FSAW . Ngoyi became its president in 1956 . The FSAW was formed in 1954 and Ngoyo became president of the organization .
 In essence, the ANC and the FSAW represented the only political organizations in which black South Africans could participate . The ANC and FSAW were the only organizations that could participate in elections .
 South Africa’s Parliament included separate houses for whites, Asians, and coloreds . Blacks had no representation at all .
 The Federation of South African Women was formed to agitate against the extension of the abhorrent ‘pass laws’ to women . It was formed in response to the introduction of the 'pass laws'
 Beginning in the 1950s, pass laws were instituted to help enforce the segregation of races and prevent blacks from encroaching in white areas . The laws were created to help prevent blacks encroaching on white areas and prevent black encroaching .
 The government required all non-whites to carry documents authorizing their presence in restricted areas . The government requires non-white people to have documents authorizing them to enter restricted areas.
 The idea was to keep black laborers away from urban areas where white workers competed for jobs . It was designed to keep white workers from competing for jobs in urban areas . White workers were kept out of urban areas to avoid competition for jobs.
 Ngoyi represented South African women at various conferences, including the International Democratic Federation of Europe . During her tenure as president of the FSAW, she represented South Africa women at conferences .
 In 1954, she and a companion, Dora Tamane, slipped out of South Africa without a passport to attend the World Congress of Women .
 On August 8, 1956, Ngoyi and the FSAW organized one of the largest demonstrations in South African history to protest the pass laws .
 Ngoyi led protesters to the government buildings in Pretoria, South Africa’s administrative capital . The protests follow a series of demonstrations against the government .
 There, authorities placed her under arrest and charged her with high treason . She was arrested and charged with treason .
 She spent five months in jail during the 1960 State of Emergency, in which the ANC launched a massive antigovernment campaign . She spent 71 days in solitary confinement . Four years later, she was jailed for five months during the 1980s .
 Upon her release from prison, Ngoyi was acquitted of the 1956 treason charge . She was released from prison in January 1956 .
 The government served her with banning orders, which meant that she could not leave her hometown of Orlando, near Johannesburg . The government said she was banned from leaving her home in Orlando .
 The government lifted the ban order in 1972 but then reinstated it in 1975 . The ban was lifted in 1972, but reinstated in 1975, but was reinstated in 1976 .
 Ngoyi did not live to see the 1994 all-race election in South Africa . Nelson Mandela and the ANC chose Nelson Mandela to lead the nation in a transition to democracy .
 More than 2,000 mourners attended Lilian Ngoyi's funeral in Soweto, Johannesburg’s black township, on March 22 . The ANC mourners wore ANC's colors of black, green, and gold .
 Two years after her death Lilian Ngoyi became the first woman awarded with the Isitwalandwe, the highest award in South Africa . The award is granted by the African National Congress to honor those who participated in the liberation struggle .
 She took part in the nationalist uprising against French colonialism in Vietnam, and later against U.S. intervention in Vietnam War .
 She held various posts in the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam . She was one of the most prominent women in the country .
 She was her nations chief negotiator at the Paris peace talks that officially ended U.S. involvement in Vietnam in January 1973 . She was one of the signatories of the Paris Agreement between South Vietnam, North Vietnam, and the United States .
 Since the end of the war in 1975, she has held several appointed and elected positions in the government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam . She has also been elected and appointed positions in Vietnam's government .
 Nguyen was born on May 26, 1927, into the family of a middle-class administrative bureaucrat in Quang Nam province . He was born into a family of an administrative administrative bureaucrat in Quangnam province .
 Her political awakening occurred in college, when she discovered that educators considered the Vietnamese language inferior to the French language . She discovered that Vietnamese language was considered inferior to French language.
 She joined the movement of students and intellectuals against French colonization of Vietnam . Her grandfather, Phan Chu Trinh, was a revered nationalist hero before her .
 Vietnam was a French-administered territory of Japan until 1945 . For five years, until the U.S. defeated the Japanese in 1945, Vietnam was an American-controlled territory .
 At the end of World War II, while Nguyen was a teenager, Vietnam became a divided nation . Nguyen was the son of a former president of Vietnam . Nguyen is now the president of the country's largest state of origin .
 In the north, communist leader Ho Chi Minh declared the formation of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, recognized by China . The country is now recognized as Vietnam by the Communist Party of Vietnam .
 France established former Vietnamese emperor Bao Dai as the new governor of Vietnam . France established ex-Vietnamese emperor as a new governor . Former Chinese emperor was appointed as governor .
 Bao Dai’s government was immediately recognized by Western powers . Clashes between Ho Chi Minh’�s nationalists and the French led to war, which ended in French defeat at Dien Bien in 1954 .
 In 1954, Western powers held negotiations in Geneva, Switzerland, to try to solve the Vietnam crisis . Western powers met in Geneva to try and solve the crisis .
 Geneva Accords agreement recognized separate governments of North Vietnam and South Vietnam . North Vietnam was ruled by a new leader in the south . South Vietnam was later ruled by an independent government .
 Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem was appointed by Bao Dai under U.S. pressure . He was appointed under pressure from the United States . Diem is now the prime minister of Vietnam . He is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 Kennedy administration sent military advisers to aid the South Vietnamese government in its fight against the communist north . In the early ’60s, the Kennedy administration began intervening in the war .
 President Lyndon Johnson escalated the American presence in Vietnam in 1964 . U.S. troops began sending in troops in 1964 after the war began in Vietnam . President Johnson began sending troops to Vietnam in 1965 .
 Nguyen had participated in anticolonial movements, organizing demonstrations to protest the French occupation of Vietnam . Nguyen had been involved in anti-colonial movements in Vietnam .
 On March 19, 1950, she rallied with other students to protest the presence of an American naval fleet near Saigon, in the South China Sea . She joined the militant Association of Progressive Women .
 Released after the Geneva Accords, she became a schoolteacher . She actively encouraged the Geneva agreements .
 NLF, it seemed, had built a viable government and army in the span of five years . The NLF had built an army and government in just 5 years .
 She also became a member of the Central Committee of the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam, and vice chairman of the Women’s Liberation Association of the South .
 In 1969, Nguyen became the minister of foreign affairs of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam . Nguyen was in charge of a covert bombing campaign of neighboring Cambodia and thus widening the war .
 The government chose her to be the head of the Delegation of the Provisional Revolutionary Government at the Paris Conference on Vietnam . The following year, she was chosen to be head of a delegation at the conference on Vietnam.
 She participated in negotiations to end the war, always demanding the complete withdrawal of U.S. troops . She was always demanding a complete withdrawal from American troops .
 She made agreements with the United States to release American prisoners of war in exchange for the withdrawal . She made deals with the U.S. to release prisoners in return for withdrawal .
 In addition to acting as spokesperson for the NLF, Nguyen chaired the Women’s Liberation Association from 1963 to 1966 . The organization claimed more than 1,000,000 members .
 In January 1973, negotiators arranged a treaty between North Vietnam, South Vietnam, and the United States . The treaty was signed by North Vietnam and South Vietnam .
 A cease-fire commenced, and the United States promised to help North Vietnam rebuild after the war . The United States agreed to help rebuild North Vietnam after the end of the conflict .
 Nguyen Thi Binh served her new nation as minister of education from 1976 to 1987 . Binh was the education minister of Vietnam's new nation .
 Voters elected her deputy to the National Assembly legislature four times . From 1987 to 1992, she was elected to the legislature . She was elected four times in the 1990s .
 In 1992, she was elected vice-president of the SRV, and reelected in 1997 . She was reelected as SRV's first female president in 1996 .
 Interview with Foreign Minister Binh of South Vietnam Concerning the Vietnam War . Interview with foreign minister Binh on Vietnam War: "It's a war of revenge"
 Ovington’s primary concern, however, remained that of race relations in the U.S. The author's primary concern was that race relations should be addressed .
 American historians often discuss the variety of political and social reforms that attempted to reduce the negative impact that industrialization had on American workers . Ovington's work was part of the Progressive Era, the period from 1890 to 1920 .
 Reformers lobbied for shorter working hours, better working conditions, and the ending of child labor . They lobbied for short working hours and better conditions, all of which improved the life of American workers .
 For many African Americans, conditions deteriorated during the Progressive Era . The Progressive Era did not result in progress, but instead, conditions worsened . African Americans are still struggling to find a way to improve their lives .
 In Springfield, Illinois, a race riot bloodied the streets of President Abraham Lincoln’s hometown . President Lincoln's hometown, Springfield, was the scene of the race riot .
 Many of the founders of the NAACP, including Ovington, were descendants of abolitionists or reformers who fought for the end of slavery . The NAACP was founded by the descendants of the abolitionists .
 Many of the NAACP founders were socialists, as was Ovington . In addition, many of them were socialists . The NAACP founder was a socialist .
 As socialists, reformers thought that the U.S. government should have more control over industrial production . Instead of industry being under the control of private corporations, the government should control it .
 socialism hit its highpoint of popularity at a time when the effects of industrialization were most serious . Not surprisingly, socialism had hit its highest point at the time when industrialization was most severe .
 Overcrowded cities, labor strikes and riots in 1897 and 1907 led many to question the benefits of industrial capitalism . Economic depressions in 1897, 1907 led to serious economic depressions . Many of the world's largest cities were overcrowded and crowded .
 The U.S. government had promoted industrialization by securing land for railroads helping to industrialize the western states . Progressive politicians increasingly insisted that the federal government restrict unchecked industrialization .
 Progressivism’s detractors warned that government intervention in free-market capitalism smacked of socialism . Progressivism's detractors said government intervention into free-markets smacked socialism .
 The NAACP did not advocate socialism as a means of bettering the lives of African Americans . Afraid of seeming too radical, the NAACP didn't advocate socialism .
 It advocated the attainment of complete civil and political rights for blacks as a way of overcoming blacks’ history of enslavement . Instead, it advocated for blacks to achieve complete civil, political rights .
 Mary White Ovington held many leadership positions within the NAACP, including chairman of the board from 1919 to 1932 . She was also a member of the NAACP's board .
 Many people who advocated civil rights for African Americans also pursued woman suffrage as a way to widen the scope of participation in the American political process .
 The entry of the U.S. into World War I in April 1917 divided suffragists . Suffragists were divided by the war's entry .
 Other women could not bring themselves to support the destructiveness of war . Other women did not want war to destroy the environment .
 She attacked President Wilson for his indifference toward the atrocities committed against African Americans during the East St. St. African American atrocities .
 American military troops exacerbated the race riots, reported Ovington . American military forces exacerbated the riots, according to the report .
 Ovington and other members of the NY-WPP noted the contradictions between the U.S.’s war aim of spreading democracy to other countries, and its unwillingness to provide a democratic system of justice for African-American citizens living within its own boundaries .
 Ovington pointed to contradictions within the women’s movement . Similarly, he pointed out contradictions in the movement .
 Racial attitudes deflected attention from the need for woman suffrage . Racial prejudices among reformers threatened to divide and weaken the suffragists . Suffragists fought for the right to vote for the first time .
 Ovington expressed concern southern women had opposed suffrage for black women . She urged the NWP to include a plank endorsing black women’s right to vote at the meeting .
 She suggested that the secretary of the National Association of Colored Women, Mary Talbert, be invited to speak and that a committee be formed to investigate discrimination in the South .
 Ovington understood that continued prejudice against black women weakened and divided the women’s rights movement . The women's rights movement continues to be divided, divided by prejudice .
 Both the National Association of Colored Women and the National Republican Colored . Women’s clubs were represented at the February ceremony .
 Mary White White Ovington died on July 15, 1951, in Newton Highlands, Massachusetts .
 Her life and work synthesized the multitude of Progressive Era reforms that marked the early 20th century, including civil rights, suffrage, and pacifism . She synthesized many of the reforms she made in the Progressive Era .
 Studying Ovington’s work enables historians to see how opening the doors of democracy for one disenfranchised group of Americans, such as African Americans, resulted in the knocking and pushing open of other closed doors, as well .
 Gender, Race, the Progressive Peace Movement, and the Debate Over War, 1895-1919 . The Peace Movement was a precursor to the Progressive War Movement .
 Parks started the movement because, on one evening after a long day at work, she had grown weary . Parks, an energetic woman, started it because she was tired . Parks started it after she grew weary at work .
 She worked as a tailor’s assistant at a Montgomery, Alabama, department store and spent long hours helping persnickety customers .
 Whites were generally allowed everywhere but did not care to go where blacks were . Whites were allowed to go everywhere but didn't care to visit blacks .
 She had grown tired of being told by Montgomery bus drivers where she could and could not enter the bus, and where to sit once she got on the bus .
 She was weary of the rudeness exhibited toward black people by one bus driver, she said . She said she was tired of the bus driver's rudeness .
 Rosa Parks sat on the Cleveland Avenue bus in Montgomery, Alabama, on December 1, 1955 . Rosa Parks had planned to use the bus to get people on their way home from work . Parks was the first black woman to sit on a bus in the U.S. for more than
 The first 10 rows of the bus were reserved for whites . It was one of many Jim Crow laws designed to maintain white privilege and supremacy .
 Parks sat down next to a man sitting in the last row of seats in the white section, because the black section of the bus was full . Parks sat next to the man sitting next to him, who was sitting in a seat in the middle of the aisle . Parks said the man
 Customarily, when a “white” seat was occupied by a black person, the black person relinquished his or her seat to the white passenger . The black person either moved to the back of the bus or stood up until a seat in the “black” section
 Four black passengers in the "white" section of the plane left their seats on December 1 . A white passenger stood expectantly expectantly before the black passengers .
 A white passenger complained loudly to the bus driver, and he called the police . The white passenger called police after the incident . The incident happened on a bus carrying white passengers .
 Rosa Parks had performed this small act of civil disobedience . Rosa Parks was not the first time she had performed such a small act .
 Another way that blacks were to tip their hats to white supremacy was by only entering the bus from the rear, so that whites sitting in the front of the bus would not have to encounter them .
 AfricanAmerican activists in Montgomery had already been making attempts to rectify injustices relating to the bus system .
 The police car that the bus driver had radioed pulled up alongside the bus . The bus driver radioed that the police car had pulled up behind the bus, police said .
 Parks was led into a police car by an officer who boarded the bus . Parks was arrested and taken into custody by the officer .
 Parks was taken to police headquarters, fingerprinted and led into a jail cell . Parks was arrested in the wake of a domestic disturbance . She was charged with assaulting a police officer .
 She was later released on a $100 bond to Edgar Daniel Nixon, a National Association for the Advancement of Colored People member, and Clifford Durr .
 The following day, December 2, the Women’s Political Council distributed fliers calling for a oneday boycott of Montgomery buses on the day of Parks's hearing . The group distributed the fliers .
 On that day, more than 7,000 blacks convened at the Dexter Street Baptist Church . The Dexter Street church is a historic African-American church .
 The group organized the Montgomery Improvement Association and elected Martin Luther King, Jr. as their president . King was the president of the Montgomery improvement Association .
 MIP voted to continue the boycott indefinitely by organizing carpools, encouraging people to walk and bicycle . Carpools will be organized by the MIP to encourage people to ride and walk .
 On February 1, 1956, the MIP filed a suit in United States District Court on behalf of all Montgomery bus riders . The suit was filed in Montgomery, Alabama, in 1956 .
 The Supreme Court of Alabama upheld the lower court’s decision and on December 20, 1956, the order was served to Montgomery city officials to integrate the bus system .
 The success of the bus boycott sparked similar acts of civil disobedience throughout the south . A sit-in at a Greensboro, North Carolina, Woolworth’s Department Store, where four blacks demanded to be seated at an all-white lunch counter, led to the sit-ins
 Ending segregation, however, did not solve the problems faced by African Americans . Ending segregation was not the end of segregation .
 Rosa and Raymond Parks could not find employment anywhere in Montgomery, so they moved to Detroit . Rosa, Raymond Parks, moved to the city of Detroit to find employment . The couple was able to get a job in Detroit .
 Rosa Parks was a staff assistant to U.S. Representative John Conyers . Rosa Parks retired in 1988 .
 She is the recipient of numerous prizes and awards, including the Eleanor ROOSEVELT Women of Courage Award .
 In 1990, she celebrated her 77th birthday in Washington, D.C., with 3,000 AfricanAmerican leaders .
 Rosa Parks was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal of Honor in 1999 . Rosa Parks served as a civil rights activist in the Civil Rights Movement .
 American political and social activist Sojourner Truth lectured throughout New England and the Midwest for women’s rights and abolitionism . Truth, an illiterate former slave, lectured for women's rights .
 When Isabella was 16 or so she married another slave named Thomas, who was also owned by Dumont . Isabella married Thomas to Dumont's slave Isabella .
 As a legal contract, marriage represented the transference of property from the wife to the husband . Slaves' marriages represented an agreed upon union between two people to share a household, which often included raising children .
 Slave owners did not acknowledge or respect their slaves’ desire to raise their children themselves . Isabella soon found out, however, that slave owners didn't respect or respect slaves' desire to be children .
 Evidence seems to suggest that the union between Thomas and Isabella was not a happy one . Thomas was married to Isabella in 16th century and died in 17th century .
 Isabella Dumont left the Dumont family of her own accord to work nearby on the farm of Isaac Van Wagener . In 1826, Isabella left her family of Dumont to work on a farm in 1826 . Isabella died of her injuries in 1831 .
 Isabella Dumont and her husband had five children, including a son, Peter . Peter was sold to one of his inlaws, a Dr. John Dumont's inlaws .
 Peter Gedney was sold to his brother-in-law, who resold him to his Alabama planter, Fowler . Fowler was a planter who owned Peter . Fowler sold Peter to his planter brother, Solomon, who sold him to Solomon . Fowler resold Peter to
 Determined to get her son back from his current Alabama owner, she filed a lawsuit against John Dumont for violating state law . The lawsuit was filed against Dumont in Alabama . Dumont is accused of violating the law by selling his son to the wrong person .
 She sought and received money from the Ulster County Quakers, especially from two Dutch Quaker lawyers for whom she worked as a domestic . She was found guilty of soliciting and receiving money from two lawyers for her work .
 This would be the first of three lawsuits that the illiterate female ex-slave would win during her life . The illiterate former slave would win three lawsuits in her lifetime .
 These organizations had only included white members before Sojourner Truth joined . These organizations only included members of white people .
 Another commune member of the commune accused her of attempted poisoning . She was accused of trying to kill herself after she was found guilty of poisoning herself .
 Sojourner Truth won her second lawsuit, suing for libel and clearing her name . Truth was cleared of libel and cleared her name in a lawsuit .
 The Second Great Awakening beckoned Christians to remember their spiritual lives in the midst of the temporal pleasures of making money and consuming material goods . Sparked by the shift from farming to an industrial economy, and intensified by the financial Panic of 1837, the Great Awakening was a revival of Christianity
 Among the most enthusiastic revivalists was William Miller , founder of the Adventist Churches . William Miller was founder of Adventist churches .
 Miller eagerly looked forward to the time when Christ would reappear in his midst and destroy nonbelievers . Miller eagerly awaited Christ's return to Christ's midst and destruction of nonbeliever .
 Called millenarians, preachers such as Miller predicted the exact date of Christ’s return . Miller predicted Christ's return in the Bible .
 Truth traveled among various Millerite camps during these years, joining in the activities of the tent revivals . Truth traveled with Truth among various camps, including those of the Millerites .
 Utopian communities were another outgrowth of economic displacement during the 19th century . Utopians were created by economic displacement in the United States .
 The Northampton Association was founded by George Benson, brother-in-law of William Lloyd Garrison . The abolitionist leader founded the Northampton association .
 With the royalties she earned from the book, she purchased her first house . With the money she earned, she bought a house for herself .
 Truth’s appearance at abolitionist meetings sparked debate and controversy, particularly since, at the time, it was considered improper for women to speak in public . Truth was the first woman to speak at abolition meetings . Truth's appearance in public sparked debate, controversy .
 Truth’s question was meant to shame those who would even consider anything other than peaceful means of change into realizing that for Christians to wield a sword, even for a worthy cause, would be hypocritical . Truth's question was aimed at shaming those who want to use a sword for peaceful
 Truth demanded that poor and working women be included in the women’s emancipation movement . Truth addressed a crowd of Ohio feminists in Akron, Ohio, in 1851, in which she demanded inclusion .
 In 1856, Truth sold her house in Massachusetts and moved to Battle Creek, Michigan, to be closer to her daughters . Truth's daughter was born in 1856 .
 When the Civil War ended in 1865, Truth relocated briefly in Washington, D.C., where she worked with the Freedman's Relief Association . Truth helped newly freed slaves find a place to live, food to eat, and the means to make a living .
 She tried, unsuccessfully, to get the government to give land in the unsettled West to ex-slaves . She also tried to get land given to former slaves in the West .
 She won her third lawsuit against the city for an injury she received while riding a streetcar . Her lawsuit was the result of a lawsuit filed by the city .
 In 1867, she built a house big enough for her two daughters and their families . She became financially one of the most remarkable African-American women of her time . She built a home in 1867 .
 Appalled by the continuing poverty experienced by the nation’s African-American population . Appalled that the country's black population continues to struggle .
 The legendary Chinese female warrior Mulan inspired Xiang Jingyu to organize the women’s rights movement in China . The story of Mulan was made into an animated Disney movie called Mulan in 1998 .
 Xiang thought that educating women would bring universal human rights to China . Early in her life, Xiang thought education would bring human rights in China .
 Later, however, she regarded communism as the key to altering social ills . Later she regarded it as the 'key to altering ills'
 Xiang followed through on her girlhood vow, but her life was cut short when Chinese Nationalist authorities executed her at the age of 33 . Xiang was executed by the Nationalist government in China .
 The women’s rights campaign in China in the early 20th century differed from similar movements in the West, Xiang pointed out .
 In China, women agitated for rights in a nation that had no universal human or civil rights . Women activists were not struggling to persuade men to grant them rights, as they were in countries such as the United States.
 Chinese women hoped that women activists would imbue all Chinese people with a greater sense of human dignity and worth . Instead, they said they hoped that all Chinese women would have a sense of dignity .
 Xiang's primary contribution to women's rights in China was to open the movement to peasant and working women . Xiang’s primary contribution was to opening the movement, which was confined to upper-class Christian women, to peasants .
 Xiang hoped that the notion of human rights would sweep across all of China . Xiang hoped to extend the women’s rights movement to all women in China .
 In the late 19th century, China faced an identity crisis as Western nations aggressively sought to eliminate trade barriers between China and other countries . China faced a identity crisis when it faced a trade crisis in the late 1800s .
 The Republic of China was established in 1912 as the last Chinese emperor, Pu Yi, abdicated the throne . The Republic had been established as the Chinese emperor was the last emperor .
 Chinese traditionalists resisted absorption in Western, modern cultures that often included human rights provisions in their constitutions . Few had extended these rights to women, though few had extended them to women .
 Mulan and Roland chose their own life’s course, independent from a father or husband . Roland chose his own life's course, independently from a husband or father . Roland and Mulan were both born in China .
 Such women, however, were a rarity in China in those days, as elsewhere in the world . Such women were rare in China .
 Xiang made plans to institute more progressive education for women . She attended traditional schools in Xupu, but once her brother introduced her to the Western literature he had studied in Japan, Xiang made her plans .
 Xiang joined the May Fourth Movement in 1919, in which 3,000 students marched in Beijing to protest the decision of the Paris Peace Conference to award the former concessions of Germany in Shantung province to Japan . Xiang was born in China, China's second largest city .
 Xiang returned to Xupu to start a coeducational primary school . Xiang started the school after graduating from high school . He now runs a co-edicated primary school in Xingu .
 Xiang left her teaching post to join students in France for a work-study program in France . Xiang left teaching post and eagerly joined the students . Xiang is a member of a group that organized a work study program .
 Xiang and Cai worked in a factory in a town near Paris, learned French and read Marxist literature . They also studied Marxist literature in Marxist literature and studied Marxist theory .
 Xiang gradually became convinced that merely educating Chinese women would not be sufficient to effect real change in Chinese society . Xiang: "Just educating women is not enough to change Chinese society"
 Change in women's lives would only take place by tearing down Chinese traditions, she said . Instead, fundamental change in women’s lives would take place in China, she concluded .
 Xiang and her husband returned to China in 1922 to begin working for the CCP . The CCP had been founded in the previous year in Shanghai . Xiang's husband died of a heart attack in 1922 .
 Xiang devoted her time and attention to organizing the women workers of Shanghai . Xiang dedicated her time to organizing women workers .
 She spent many hours visiting working women in their homes and organizing formal study groups with them at night . Never entirely dropping her earlier emphasis on education, she spent much more time with working women .
 In 1924, she participated in the strikes in the Shanghai silk mills and Nanyang tobacco plants . She participated in strikes in silk mills, tobacco plants and silk factories .
 Xiang and Cai traveled to Moscow to attend the Sixth Plenum of the Comintern (communist international) Executive Committee . Xiang was one of the founders of the Communist Party .
 Xiang returned two years later to Wuhan, the largest city in Hunan province, where she worked as a propagandist for the CCP . She was sent back to the city to work as an editor of a CCP journal . Xiang returned to China two years after she was sent
 The cooperation that had existed between the Nationalists and the Communists collapsed in 1927 . Chiang Kai-shek began gaining more power in China, forcing the minority CCP underground .
 Xiang continued her work despite the dangerous circumstances, and she was arrested and executed in May 1928 . Xiang was executed in 1928 .
 Aishah is third and favorite wife of the prophet Mohammed . She was third wife of Mohammed, founder of Islam . She is believed to be the most powerful figure in Islam .
 Men's perception of Aishah as vulnerable and her sexuality uncontrollable led to an important change in the Muslim religion and law during its infancy in the seventh century . Men’s perception of a woman as vulnerable led to a change in Muslim law .
 After the death of Mohammed, Aishah became known as the dispenser of hadith (“traditions”), or the orally transmitted words and deeds of Mohammed not contained in the Muslim holy book, the Qur’an .
 Aishah also played a political role in determining her husband’s successors after his death . She played a role in deciding the succession of her husband's successors .
 Mohammed’s first wife, the wealthy Khadijah, died . Abu Bakr agreed to wed Aishah to Jubair Mutam when she died .
 The marriage clearly had a political purpose, as such a union would solidify the friendship between Mohammed and one of his earliest supporters . The marriage was intended to solidify Mohammed's friendship with Mohammed . Mohammed was one of the earliest supporters of Mohammed .
 Muslim tradition holds that the marriage brought joy to both partners, despite the four-decade age difference . Muslim tradition says marriage brings joy to the couple despite the age difference.
 Aishah allegedly carried her toys to court with her, and she enticed her husband to join her in play . She enticed him to play with her toys .
 In 628, when she was in her 15th year, she accompanied the prophet in his military campaign against another tribe, the Banu al-Mustaliq . The prophet's wife was in 628 when she accompanied him in his campaign .
 When the caravan stopped for ritual ablutions, Aishah emerged and performed hers away from the others .
 When she returned to her litter, she realized she had forgotten her shell necklace . She raced back to fetch it, closing the curtains behind her .
 Mohammed gave the signal for departure, unaware of his wife’s absence, Mohammed said, “I’m going to leave. In the meantime, Mohammed gave his wife the signal to depart.”
 Eventually, the caravan’s rear guard, Safwan ibn al-Muattal, discovered her, and the travelers caught up with the others . Eventually the caravan's rear guard discovered her .
 Mohammed experienced a revelation, recorded in the Qur’an, that exonerated his wife . Mohammed experienced the revelation before making any decisions, however, .
 When Mohammed died in 632, his wife was left, at the age of 18, a childless widow . Mohammed's wife died in his death, leaving her with a husband and a daughter . Mohammed was left with a wife and daughter .
 As the wife of Islam’s founder and daughter of Abu Bakr, she was the daughter of the first caliph . Her prestige among the Muslim hierarchy remained undiminished . She was married to Mohammed's successor and the first Caliph .
 A group forced their way into Uthman’s quarters and murdered him in 656 . Led by Egyptian Mohammed ibn Abu Bakr, the group forced his way into his quarters .
 Aishah wisely fled Medina under the pretext of making a pilgrimage to Mecca . She was forced to flee the city to make a pilgrimage .
 When Aishah’s enemy Ali was elected to succeed Uthman, she joined his rivals Talha and al-Zubair's army . She started for Basra, in present-day Iraq, and started for the city of Basra . She joined Talha
 Nabia Abbott: Men and women came from faraway places to seek Aishah’s wisdom and knowledge . Abbott: ‘Aishah is a woman who has lived in her homeland for more than 30 years . She says she is proud to be the oldest woman in
 She is regarded as the most honorable woman in Islam, second only to the prophet’s flrst wife, Khadijah .
 Aylward, a parlor maid, began pondering his words as she cleaned up after parties in London's well-to-do .
 Her life became the subject of a BBC radio broadcast, a book, and a film, all in celebration of her experiences as a missionary . Her life was the subject to a BBC Radio broadcast and a book .
 She had been accepted for missionary training by the Protestant nondenominational China Inland Mission, founded in 1865, but she soon flunked her coursework .
 Aylward was born on February 24, 1902, in Edmonton, in Middlesex, England . She was the eldest of three children of Thomas John and Rosina Florence Whiskin, the daughter of a boot maker .
 Aylward had only an elementary education before going to work as a store clerk, a nanny, and finally a parlor maid . She was also a store worker, nanny and parlormaid .
 Aylward finds Jeannie Lawson in Yangzheng, in the northern Chinese province of Shanxi .
 The two British women established a travelers’ inn for mule drivers, providing food, shelter, and free lessons on the Gospel . The inn was established by the British women in 18th century .
 Aylward continued as proprietor of the inn, known as the Inn of the Sixth Happiness, on her own . When Jeannie Lawson died a year later she continued to run the inn .
 Aylward encouraged her customers to find and join the nearest Christian missionary wherever their journeys took them . Her religion knew no denomination, and she encouraged customers to join the missionary .
 Aylward quickly learned conversational Mandarin and became friends with the local population . He learned to speak fluent Mandarin and was friends with locals .
 Aylward signed citizenship papers in 1936 and became a Chinese citizen in 1936 . He was born in China .
 In 1937, while Chinese communists and nationalists were fighting one another for ascendancy, Japan invaded China . By 1938, Japan’s military controlled most of eastern China, and by 1938, it had control of the country .
 China Inland Mission offered to buy her a round-trip ticket to London where she could continue to mend . Aylward collapsed from exhaustion at Fufeng, and she was recuperating when word reached her .
 Alan Burgess, a writer for the British Broadcast Company, contacted Aylward and arranged a radio interview . Alan Burgess arranged the interview for a British broadcast company .
 Small Woman by Alan Burgess, and then a film called Inn of the Sixth Happiness in 1959 . Small Woman is a film based on Small Woman .
 Aylward unsuccessfully tried to stop production of the movie due to a fictionalized love interest in the script . The film greatly exaggerated her infatuation with a Chinese colonel, and a divorced woman, Ingrid Bergman, was portraying .
 She operated an orphanage in Taipei until her death on January 3, 1970 . Still practicing active Christianity, she operated a Taipei orphanage .
 St. Brighid is an Irish abbess and Christian saint . She is the daughter of a Catholic nun who was a nun at the time of her death .
 St. Brigid was abbess of the monastery at Kildare, the first convent and the only double monastery in Ireland . The monastery is where communities of nuns and monks worship in the same church . It is the first double monastery to be built in Ireland and is the only
 The Irish linked Christian Brigid with their pagan past, indicating the syncretic nature of early Christianity . Christianity arrived in Ireland at about the same time as Brigid did, and the Irish linked her with their ancient past .
 Christianity was probably known in Ireland before the missionary activities of St. St. St. Merchant Catholics were previously known in Ireland .
 The early Irish Church operated completely independently of the Roman Catholic Church . Developed its own liturgy and calendar, developing its own .
 The Irish Church discarded its services and adopted those of the Catholic Church . Obedience to Rome did not occur until the 12th century, when the Irish Church adopted its services .
 Sources from the Catholic Church and Irish folktales differ on Brigid's parentage . Most agree that her father, Dubhthach, was the Irish chieftain of Leinster and her mother, Brotsech, was his concubine and slave .
 Irish stories tell of Brotsech’s jealousy and her eventual sale to a sorcerer, who brought her to Faugher, where she gave birth to Brigid . The sorcerer sold her to the sorcerer and brought her back to the city .
 One day, Brotsech left her house while her daughter was still inside, bundled up in her bed . The story goes on . One day she left the house while she still had her daughter in bed .
 Neighbors suddenly noticed a huge blaze around the house, with flames leaping off the roof all the way to the heavens . Neighbors say the fire started at the house in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 The fire miraculously died, and the baby girl cooed and giggled as if nothing had happened . When they approached the house to save Brigid, the fire died .
 Brigid may have absorbed earlier pagan myths about an Irish fire goddess . Her name, “breo-shigit,” means fiery arrow . Brigid was a pagan goddess of fire .
 Brigid supposedly kept a perpetual, ash-less fire ablaze in her fireplace at Kildare tended by nuns and surrounded by a border . No male could enter .
 Brigid and her mother returned to the court of Leinster during the course of her childhood . Brigid's mother died in childbirth at the time of her birth .
 Dubhthach's riches were sold to the king of Leinster . However, Brigid sold them to the poor and sold them again, this time to Brigid . Brigid then sold the pair again, giving the wealth to the people of the poor .
 The king set Brigid free, saying, “It is not meet that we should judge her, for she has greater merit before God than we.” Brigid was freed by the king . The king freed Brigid, who died in childbirth .
 Dubhthach attempted to marry Brigid off to a wealthy suitor, but the girl refused . Brigid refused to marry, dedicating her life and her virginity to the Lord . The story is said to have taken place in the Middle Ages .
 Brigid started a school of art at the monastery, where nuns produced illuminated manuscripts of the Gospels . Brigid also started an art school at the Mononary .
 Brigid chose Bishop Condlaed (also spelled Conleth) to govern the community with her . Brigid died in childbirth in childbirth . She was married to Brigid and married to the bishop .
 A ninth-century monk named Cogitosus described the church as it looked in his day . The church is now a Roman Catholic cathedral in Rome .
 A great wall bisected the building, separating the men's and women’s sections of the church . The wall was built between the men and women's sections . The church was built in 1903 .
 Brigid and Bishop Condlaed, highly decorated with crowns of silver, gold, and gemstones, were placed on either side of the altar . The pair were placed in front of each other on the altar at the time .
 Brigid was ‘the Mary of the Gaels,” a selfless woman who devoted her life to helping others . Brigid's life was devoted to helping her family and the world .
 Broccan Cloen, who is thought to have died in 650, wrote the following poem praising St. Louis Cathedral .
 Saint Brigid was not given to sleep, Nor was she intermittent about God’s love; Not merely that she did not buy. She did not sleep, nor was intermittent about the love of God .
 She did not seek for the wealth of this world below; The most holy one. She did . The most . holy one, she said .
 Cho Wha Soon’s ministry is inextricably intertwined with her concern for social justice . The Korean Methodist minister's ministry is intertwined with social justice in China . She has been in China since 2002, where she is a member of the U.S. Korean Methodist .
 The UIA sent ministers into factories to work alongside female wage earners . They were sent to help women form unions to fight for more humane conditions and equitable pay .
 Cho Wha Soon developed a liberation theology that arose out of her wartime experiences . She developed the liberation theology after her experiences in the war .
 Liberation theology interprets liberation from social, political, and economic oppression as a precursor to salvation from sin . Liberation theology is a theory originating among Latin American theologians .
 Only when Christians share in the lives of the poor will their Christian message take effect, liberation theologians say . Only then will society be transformed, they say, if Christians share with the poor .
 Cho's ministry is based on her experiences among Korea’s needy and for the ministry she developed afterward . Cho is the leader of the Korean War, which ended in 2007 . Cho was born in Seoul, South Korea, and is now leading a government ministry .
 The Korean War had roots in the early part of the 20th century when Japan annexed Korea in 1910 . Korea was annexed by Japan in 1910.
 The Korean peninsula, which juts out into the Sea of Japan, was divided at the 38th parallel . It was divided into two administrative zones, north and south .
 Nationwide elections were attempted to reunite the two halves, but these failed . Nationwide elections in 2011 were also attempted, but failed, and were unsuccessful .
 A proWestern government was instituted in the south, with Syngman Rhee as president . In the north Premier Kim Il-sung established the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea .
 North Korea invaded South Korea in 1950, triggering a three-year war . In 1950, North Korean troops invaded the South Korea, triggering the war . North Korea and South Korea have been at odds for decades .
 The United Nations, led by the United States, defended South Korea, while China defended North Korea . The U.N. led the U.S. to defend South Korea . North Korea has been accused of a series of human rights violations .
 President Rhee held elections in 1960, but when demonstrators charged that the election had been rigged, he fled to Hawaii, where he died in 1965 . Rhee was elected president of Korea in 1960; he fled the country to Hawaii .
 He was assassinated in 1979 by the head of the South Korean intelligence agency . He was killed by a South Korean government assassination .
 Park succeeded Park, but a military coup followed, naming Chun Doo Hwan president in 1980 . Choi Kyu Ha succeeded Park but was overthrown in a coup by the military .
 Democratic uprisings occurred throughout the 1980s, calling for the elimination of the military presence in Korean politics . The military presence was a key part of the Democratic Uprisings . In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the U.S. remained in control of the Korean
 President Chun agreed to implement a new, voter-approved constitution in 1987 . Chun agreed in 1987 to implement the new constitution . The constitution was approved by voters .
 The constitution established direct presidential elections and protection of basic human rights . The constitution also set up direct presidential election and protection for basic rights .
 In 1993, Kim Young Sam became the first civilian to hold the office of president in Korea in more than 30 years . Finally, in 1993, he was elected president of the Korean Republic .
 Her father participated in Korea’s move toward independence from Japan . Her father was a well-educated man who participated in the independence movement from Japan.
 Cho joined the Methodist church and a youth group that studied discrimination against rural workers in Korea . Cho was a member of a Methodist youth group studying discrimination in rural workers . Cho has been married for more than 20 years .
 Cho chose to become a Methodist Christian . Cho is a member of a minority religion in Korea . Cho was elected to the South Korean parliament in 2010 .
 Most South Koreans follow at least some aspects of Confucianism, a philosophy requiring adherence to filial piety, ancestor worship, and ritual ceremonies . Most of the South Korean population follow Confucanism .
 Shamanism, a religion based on a belief in the presence of spirits and their interactions with humans, is also practiced . Shamanism is based on the belief that spirits interact with humans with humans .
 Buddhism and Christianity—mostly Protestant, are making inroads in South Korea . Buddhism, Christianity and Christianity --mostly Protestant -- are making a big difference in South Korean .
 Cho joined a choral group that performed for soldiers stationed in Pusan, a city in South Korea . Cho joined the group during the Korean War . Cho was 16 at the time . Cho is now a Grammy winner .
 During the choir’s stay at the base, the war worsened, and its members could not safely leave . During the war, the choir's members were not able to safely leave.
 Cho became a war refugee overnight, with nowhere to stay and no money . Cho was forced to leave his home in South Korea with no money and no place to stay . Cho is now a refugee in the United States .
 Cho complained bitterly at the tasks she was made to perform, and at the disrespect with which the soldiers treated her . Cho initially complained bitterly about the tasks and the disrespect she received from the soldiers . Cho said she was not happy with the treatment she received .
 Later, she came to believe that God had chosen her to help soldiers heal because she had special powers to do so .
 After the war, Cho returned to Inchon where her parents had lost much of their material lives . Cho's parents were killed in the Korean War .
 Cho's parents sold their last remaining luxury, a piano, to pay for her schooling . Cho is now a primary school teacher in China . Cho was too poor to send her daughter to high school .
 Upon graduation, she was sent to the island of Dokjokdo to minister a church there . Upon graduation she became a minister . She is currently serving a church on the island .
 The island's only inhabitants were refugee boat people from the aftermath of the war . The island’s only inhabitants are refugees from war refugees .
 Cho's church had long since been abandoned; there were no congregants . Cho's island had no running water, and Cho’s church had been abandoned . Cho was killed in a car crash in 2010 . Cho is the son of Cho, who was killed by a car bomb
 Most villagers were extremely suspicious of Christianity, believing that if anyone became a Christian, the entire village would be destroyed . Most of the villagers believed that if they became Christians, they would be attacked .
 For years, she had only one man and his mother coming to her church services . She says she had one man, his mother and their mother come to her services .
 She opened the church doors to young children, offering them songs, dances, and plays . She also opened the doors to other days to young people .
 She was sent to Hwasudong, near Inchon, to work at the Dong II Textile Company . She has been sent to work for the Dong I Textile company .
 She experienced firsthand firsthand the working conditions that oppressed Korean women were forced to endure .
 Many of the young women workers were sending their pay home to poor families . Some of the money they made was used to send their brothers to school .
 Cho’s mission at the textile factory was to encourage democratic union activity . Cho's mission was to promote democracy at the factory .
 The other union was a democratic union whose membership was almost all female . It was headed by elected chairpersons, headed by women .
 Park was sending secret police to threaten workers who protested conditions . By 1975, Park was threatening workers with secret police . Park's secret police were used to threaten protesters .
 In 1978, tensions came to a head when women started a sit-in at the factory to protest the Park regime’s intimidating methods . The Park regime was known for its intimidating methods and intimidating tactics .
 On Korea’s Labor Day, March 10, the women used a televised Labor Day event to make their feelings known . They disrupted ceremonies and were promptly arrested .
 A thing that has caused me pain for twenty years was the unequal treatment of women . A thing I have caused her pain for 20 years was to see women treated differently, she said .
 'I also experienced the agony of discrimination and alienation caused by sexism' says author . She says she has experienced 'angess of discrimination' and 'alienation' from sexism .
 Women are oppressed wherever we go, at home, at work, in society, and even before the law . Women's rights are not only at home but at work and society, they are oppressed everywhere they go .
 True human liberation can't be achieved only when the women’s liberation movement is realized at the same time . The women's liberation movement must be realized at same time as the liberation of women's rights .
 Eddy created a religion based upon a new understanding of the relationship between religion, science, and health, derived from her own experiences with pain and suffering . Eddy's religion is based on her own experience with pain .
 Mary Baker Eddy was the American founder of the Christian Science movement . She was the founder of Christian Science, the first woman to be a Christian Science leader .
 Eddy was all too familiar with human suffering, part of the human condition with which he was familiar with . Eddy's story is published in the Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division .
 Born Mary Baker on July 16, 1821, in Bow, New Hampshire, to the farming couple Abigail Baker and Mark Baker . Eddy’s childhood was punctuated with long bouts of poor health .
 She did not attend school but was educated by an older brother . Like many 19th-century Americans, she studied the Bible intensely . She was born in New York City, New Jersey .
 Her father, like other Calvinists, believed in the teachings of John Calvin that only a select group of Christians will be saved from damnation .
 She returned to her parents’ farm, where she gave birth to her only child, George Glover . She went on to give birth to George Glover at the farm .
 Ten years later she met and married a traveling dentist, Daniel Patterson . She married him ten years later .
 Quimby hypnotist or “mesmerist’s” put Eddy into a trance, during which time she felt no pain . Eddy was put in a trance by the hypnotist, who hypnotized her . She felt nothing pain during the trance .
 Less than a year later, she slipped on ice and sustained a spinal injury . She suffered the injury a year after slipping on ice on her bike .
 To alleviate her pain this time, she tried healing herself through reading portions of the Christian Bible that dealt with Christ’s power to heal the sick, especially Matthew 9:1-8 .
 She found that by concentrating on these verses, she was able to reduce her pain . The healing touch was actually coming from God, she says .
 Ghristian Science as a healing system and, ultimately, a church . What she believed to be God’s act of ridding her body of pain led to Ghristan Science .
 By 1870, Eddy was teaching her scientific healing in collaboration with practitioners who treated those in need . Eddy's scientific healing was first developed in the 1870s .
 Eddy responded to the incongruity of a powerful, loving God allowing humans to suffer by postulating that, in fact, God did not create the earth nor what it contains . Eddy upheld the Galvinist belief that God was sovereign .
 In her mind, if God is good and is a spirit, then matter and evil must not be real, she says . She believes that God is the spirit of God, and evil is not real .
 Since medical treatment involved using matter to treat the body, it was also not real and was rejected by Christian Scientists . Christian Scientists rejected the idea of treating matter with matter .
 The ‘science’ in Christian Science is in the acceptance of this truth about human existence on the part of the sufferer . The “science” in Christian science is in accepting this truth, the author says .
 Eddy believed that all sin and suffering would disappear if humans would abandon their reliance on the physical senses and surrender to what she believed was the truth . She believed that only the spiritual is real .
 Eddy’s existence from 1870 until the founding and chartering of the church in 1879 seemed to be steeped in spirituality . She lived in poverty, relying on the charity of her followers for room and board .
 In 1877, she married one of her students, Asa Gilbert Eddy, a sewing machine salesman . She died in 1877 at the age of 92 .
 She followed the success of her first book with several others, including Christian Healing and A Defense of Christian Science . In 1908, she started publishing The Christian Science Monitor, a highly regarded newspaper still in circulation .
 The years from 1880 to 1890 were trying times for Eddy and other Christian Scientists . Eddy died in 1890 at the age of 60 .
 In 1881 she and her followers began the Massachusetts Metaphysical College, which abruptly folded in 1889 . The college was founded by her followers .
 She started and disbanded the National Christian Science Association in 1886 and 1889, respectively . She then started and disbanded the organization .
 Much of the turmoil of this period stemmed from acrimoniousness between Eddy and her adherents, and among the group as a whole .
 Edward J Arens, for example, accused Eddy of borrowing Phineas Quimby’s ideas without attribution . Eddy in turn brought suit against Arens for plagiarizing Science and Health .
 Eddy reorganized the church in 1892 and published The Manual of the Mother Church, a guide to the Christian Science organization, in 1895 . Eddy published the Manual of The Mother Church in 1895, which was published by 1895 .
 The new organization allowed Eddy to retain her function as head of the main church, the First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston . It gave branch congregations more autonomy .
 The purpose of the reorganization was to cut down on internal disputes . The purpose was to reduce internal disputes, according to the government .
 Former member Josephine Woodbury filed a lawsuit against the church for defamation of character . Former member of the church filed the lawsuit for defamation .
 Eddy could claim 100,000 believers by the time she died on December 3, 1910, in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, in 1910 .
 Eddy is the only woman to have started a religion based upon a new understanding of the relationship between the spiritual and the profane . Eddy holds a unique place in American religious history as a woman .
 The Christian Science church now has branches in most parts of the world . Christian Science has branches around the world, with branches in many countries .
 Her use of the inclusive phrase ‘MotherFather-God’ influenced later religious thinkers, including Elizabeth Cady STANTON, writer of The Womans Bible .
 Mary Baker Eddy, An Interpretive Biography of the Eounder of Christian Science, was published by Christian Science. Eddy was a founder of the Christian Science movement . Eddy died in 1903 at the age of 40 .
 Mohammed, the founder of Islam, left no male heirs when he died in 632 . Fatima remained as the link to his posterity . Mohammed left no heir to Fatima because he left no heirs .
 Her religious importance is also due to her marriage to the founder of Shiite Islam, Ali ibn Abu Talib . Ali is cousin to Mohammed, cousin to the prophet Mohammed .
 Shiite sect began as a political faction whose members supported Alis caliphate as the true heir of Mohammed . Members of the Shiite sect supported the caliphate as a true heir to Mohammed . The Shiite sect has been in decline for decades .
 Ali’s opponents murdered him in 661, his followers continued asserting that only descendants of Fatima were qualified as rightful heirs to Mohammed . Fatima's descendants were descendants of Mohammed's descendants .
 The more pragmatic Sunni majority accepted the leadership of any caliph, as long as he required rigorous attention to religious rituals and maintained the stability of the Muslim world .
 Ali’s opponent Muawiya (died 680) became the fifth caliph . Fatima's son by Ali, Husayn, refused to acknowledge his legitimacy . Husayn refused to accept the legitimacy of his son by Fatima, Ali's son .
 The division between the two branches of Islam became entrenched . Thus, the division between Islam and Islam was entrenched .
 Fatima was born to Mohammed and his first wife, Khadijah, in Mecca . She was raised in a household that included her father’s cousin and her later husband, Ali .
 As a child, Fatima experienced the trials of her father’s persecution in Mecca, and after the hijra, or Mohammed's flight from Mecca to Medina, she was reunited with her father . Ali brought Fatima to Medina to meet her father, Mohammed .
 After the Battle of Badr, Ali married his cousin’s daughter . Mohammed and Ali battled the Quraysh enemy and won a victory that consolidated the power of the religious state .
 According to Muslim hadiths, the marriage between Fatima and Ali was an unhappy one . The marriage is said to have been unhappy by Ali and Fatima .
 The prophet frequently intervened in the discord that developed between the two, proving his love for his daughter by protecting her and acting as arbiter in the couple's disputes .
 Little is known about Fatima's life between the hijra and Mohammed’s death in 632 . Fatima is believed to have been the wife of Mohammed, who died in 631 .
 Two men stepped forward to claim the crown of leadership of the Muslim world . When the prophet died without a male heir, two men claimed the title .
 He rejected her claim to a portion of Mohammed’s estate upon his death . He raised her ire further when he rejected her bid to a part of the estate .
 Fatima's role in determining the next leader of Islam was short-lived . She died within a year of Mohammed’s death . However, Fatima was able to determine the next Islamic leader .
 Shiite commentators on the Qur’an view references to the ‘people of the house’ as including Mohammed, Ali, Fatima, and their sons Hasan and Husayn . Shiite commentators say references to “people of house” are including Mohammed and Ali, Ali and
 Shiite interpreters have noted that Mohammed, the imams and Fatima all embodied the spiritual attribute of infallibility . Fatima, Mohammed and Mohammed are considered infallible by Shiite interpretations .
 The cultish status of Fatima is explained by the hadiths, which declare her to be “queen of the women of paradise,” a virgin, a virgin and “mistress of the waters” and of RELIGIOUS LEADERS salt .
 Fatima appears to have been aware of her own importance to the Shiite Muslims . Fatima is known for her role in Iraq's civil war with Iraq .
 Green, the color of the Edenic garden to which Fatima hoped to ascend, became the symbol of Shiite Islam . Green is a symbol of the Garden of Eden . Fatima is Fatima's first wife .
 Little is known of the life of Hadewijch . Flemish religiousispiritual leader of the Twererpies . He was a member of the Anwerpies, a Belgian political party .
 Her extant works include 31 letters, 61 poems, and 14 visions, or prose . Hadewijch describes spiritual images she experienced in her works .
 Many scholars consider her visions to be among the greatest work of literature in the Dutch literary tradition . Her visions are considered among the most enduring works of Dutch literature .
 Hadewijch represented the Beguine movement, a religious community of women founded in the 13th century . He represented the religious community, which was founded by women in France .
 It seems likely that Hadewijch came from an upper-class background . Many of her works deal with the language and traditions of chivalry and courtly love .
 Her works reveal a well-educated mind, although we do not know how or where she may have been formally educated . Her works show her well-trained mind, but we cannot reveal how she was educated .
 She was familiar with Latin, French, the rules of rhetoric, numerology, Ptolemaic astronomy, astronomy, music theory, the church history, and most canonical 12th-century writers .
 Beguines promised to live celibate lives while living in Beguine communities called Beguinages . They were allowed to retain private property and were free to leave the community and marry .
 Married women could still participate in the community while they lived with their husbands . Married women were allowed to participate in community while living with husbands .
 Social and religious conditions help to explain the rise of the Beguines in the 13th century . The Beguinean kingdom was founded in 13th Century . The kingdom was ruled out of control by the Roman Empire .
 The Catholic Church began diverting its resources from monasteries to universities during the 13th century . Women were discriminated against economically and legally .
 Pope Honorius III orally recognized the women as a community, but the Beguines came under increasing suspicion in the late 13th and I4th centuries . The Beguine women were also considered a community by the pope .
 The Council of Vienne condemned the Beguines as ‘an abominable sect’ and tried to supress those living outside Beguinages . The Council also tried to impose restrictions on people living outside of the region .
 The daily routine of the Beguines’ lives included attendance at Mass, prayers in honor of Mary and the passion of Christ, meditative reading and contemplation, communal penance, and monthly confession .
 Groups of Beguine women who shared living quarters also provided refuge for women who were single women or widows in need of protection . Women who were not members of the groups also provided shelter for women not members .
 For many within the established Christian church, the Beguines represented a challenge to women’s ecclesiastical place . For many in the church, women were not allowed to have a place in ecclesiastical places .
 Hadewijch’s letters indicate that she acted as a spiritual adviser to younger Beguines . Her letters show that she was a spiritual advisor to the Beguine .
 Scholars agree that Hadewijch was the most important exponent of love mysticism in the 13th century . Scholars agree he was an important figure in the history .
 Love mysticism appeared in the second half of the 12th century in present-day Belgium . It was an exclusively feminine phenomenon .
 This mystical love is not one quietly received; instead, ecstatic experiences accompany the person who has met God as her lover . But this mystical love isn't quietly received, it is accompanied by ecstatic experiences .
 At times, mystic lovers experiences could be highly emotional and even violent, causing psychosomatic symptoms and visions . At times the mystic lovers experience could be violent and emotional .
 Events surrounding the church and the larger society in which it existed help explain love mysticism and a Beguine leader such as Hadewijch .
 Two key changes relating to the church occurred between the 12th and 13th centuries . The changes were made in the early 12th century and the 13th century .
 Innocent III , the church had reached its zenith of political and secular power . Innocent III was Innocent III . The church was at the height of its secular and political power .
 The Grusades were declared by the pope for the sake of recovery of Christian property or in defense of Christendom against its enemies, especially Muslims . But at an enormous cost of human life and destruction, the pope declared them at the expense of the church .
 Scholasticism created a division between urbane scholars who based their religion upon reason, and the ruraldwelling, less well-educated Christian faithful . The Bible was written in the Middle Ages .
 Ordinary Christians longing for authentic spiritual experiences as signs of a living faith . Ordinary Christian believers were longing for genuine spiritual experiences .
 The Dominicans and Franciscans were the first apostolic orders to emerge from the Catholic Church . They were followed by the Dominicans, who lived a life of communal living, and cared for the poor .
 Women's place in the traditional church was extremely low; they were seen primarily as their husband’s property . Women were seen as their husbands’ property .
 Canon law, for example, allowed wife beating if a woman did not obey her husband . Canon law also allowed a woman to be beaten for not obeying her husband's wishes .
 Men were thought to be needed to channel the religious energies of women, lest they succumb to heresy or unruly behavior . Furthermore, it was thought that men were needed .
 Men could become monks, clerics, canons, or members of any number of other male communities sponsored by the church . Men could also become members of a number of male communities .
 The bishop of Liege, who helped organize the movement, saw the Beguines as the new mothers of the church . The bishop saw them as the "new mothers"
 The Second Council of Lyons and the Council of Vienne expressed opposition to the group . One bone of contention was their public readings of scripture in the vernacular, instead of in Latin .
 Hadewijch herself experienced opposition both from within and from without her community . She faced opposition from both inside and out of the community .
 She leh her group of Beguines at one point but continued to write letters to some of the members aher her departure .
 Hadewijch’s poetry communicates her central belief that true and perfect love is only found by worshiping Christ . She ohen used bridal imagery to express this belief .
 Hadewijch contended that the mystic experiences three stages of mystic love; first, an awareness of the connection between Christ’s love and herself; next, next the complete surrender to love; and finally a restored sense of balance between the earthly life and mystical love .
 Hadewijch’s letters, poems, and visions express the centrality of mystical love in her life . Her letters and poems express her centrality in mystical love .
 German religious leader Hildegard von Bingen was probably the most important female religious leader of the 12th century . She was probably one of the most influential female religious leaders of the century .
 Hildegard von Bingen left a wealth of manuscripts . She is the female German writer from the medieval period about whom we know the most .
 Hildegard is unusual in the amount of written material she composed, during a time when few women wrote at all . She is one of the most prolific writers in the world .
 The Play of the Virtues and the music with which it was accompanied, as well as treatises about natural history and the medicinal uses of plants, animals, trees, and stones, were accompanied .
 Hildegard was born in Bermersheim-bei-Bei-Alzey, the 10th child of a noble family . She was born on the side side of the river .
 Hildegard von Bermersheim was offered to the church when she was eight years old . Her parents, Hildebert and Mechthild von Bermersheim, offered their daughter to be adopted . HildEGard was born in a family home in the village of
 Jutta and her young charge held prayer services, fasted, performed manual labor, and studied biblical scriptures . Jutsta's young charge was led by Jutsa, who led her children to daily labor .
 Hildegard’s visions began when she was a child, although she kept her experiences to herself until she reached adulthood .
 When she turned 42, she received a vision in which Jesus Christ directed her to write and preach about her visions . Jesus Christ told her to do so when she was 42 to write about her vision .
 She had received only a rudimentary education from Jutta, and this left her with feelings of inadequacy .
 Her visions filled her with a variety of emotions, from terror to exultation, from humiliation to a sense of pride, she says . Her visions fill her with range of emotions ranging from fear to pride .
 She also designed—but probably did not paint—the illustrations accompanying the work .
 Archbishop Henry of Mainz and Bernard of Clairvaux have asked Pope Eugenius III to review her work . Archbishop Henry and Bernard have asked the Pope to review the work .
 So many women came to the monastery at Disibodenberg to take instruction with Hildegard that she decided to move to her own quarters . The monastery was so popular that she moved to her quarters .
 The abbot refused to allow the women to leave the monastery . Hildegard described a vision that she had had, in which evil would fall upon the monastery if the women were not permitted to leave .
 The abbot relented, and Hildegard established a convent at Bingen, called St. St. Catharina . St.Catharina was the first to establish a convent in Bingen .
 The first occurred in 1178, when the clergy of Mainz, in the diocese in which Bingen was located, claimed that an excommunicant had been buried on the monastery property . The body should be removed from the sacred ground .
 Hildegard countered that the man had reconciled to the church before his death . The man had been reconciled with the church prior to his death, she said . She said he had a long history of reconciling relations with the Catholic Church .
 The priest refused to believe that he had been reconciled, and he mandated that the body had to be exhumed for burial elsewhere . The priest's body was eventually buried in a Catholic cemetery .
 Hildegard hid the man's grave, so that the body could not be exhumed . Unchastened, she proceeded to conceal the man’s grave, and the grave was never found . The grave was then hidden so that it could be buried again .
 In response, the bishop put the convent under interdict, meaning that the nuns could not receive communion or other sacraments . In response to the bishop's decision, the nun's convent was put under an interdict . The nuns were not allowed to receive communion .
 Hildegard fired off a series of letters to church officials in Mainz, Germany, describing a vision she had of an evil power inundating St. Mary's Cathedral . She wrote that she had a vision of evil power flooding the church .
 The archbishop found a knight who claimed to have been absolved at the same time as the dead man . To act as witness, the archbishop acted as witness to the case .
 When Hildegard von Bingen died, her sisters claimed that two streams of light appeared in the sky and crossed over the room in which she lay waiting for death .
 The visions of light that Hildegard had during her life are perhaps her most important contribution to the Christian faith . In dying, she seemed to be leaving her sisters with a last impression of the essence of her faith .
 "When I was forty-two years and seven months old, that the heavens were opened," he writes . "A blinding light of exceptional brilliance flowed through my entire brain," he says .
 "It kindled my whole heart and breast like a flame, not burning but warming brightly. And so it kindled me whole heart," she said .
 The process of canonization, through which important church flgures are granted sainthood, began immediately after Hildegard’s death, but it was abandoned, unfinished . The process was abandoned and unfinished .
 The inquisitors had failed to record the names of people or places in their descriptions of miracles attributed to Hildegard .
 The Catholic church has beatified her, proclaiming Hildegard to be blessed and worthy of religious honor . She is frequendy referred to as a saint .
 An intelligent young woman, eager to learn but shunned because of her sex, disguised herself as a man . She traveled to Athens (or possibly Fulda, Germany) where she earned many accolades .
 She set forth for Rome around 844, where she was made a notary and a cardinal . She was elected Pope John Anglicus in 855, who died in 854 .
 After about two years, Pope John led a procession from the Coliseum to St. John's Cathedral . Pope John's funeral procession took place at the end of the year .
 She went into labor and gave birth, whereupon her gender was discovered and she was stoned to death . She was found to be a woman at St. Clements Cathedral, where she died .
 Whether the crowd murdered her for her deception or for breaking her vow of celibacy, no one knows for sure . No one knows if she was murdered for breaking the vow .
 Throughout the ages, women have had to disguise themselves as men to achieve the power and recognition they have deserved . Women have been disguising themselves in order to gain the power they need to achieve .
 Some women, such as George ELIOT, merely adopted a male nom de plume . Others such as AGNODIKE, actually assumed a male identity .
 Joan's story differs from others in that almost all records of her existence were deliberately obliterated . Joan’s story differs . from others . In that case, almost all of the records of Joan's existence were intentionally obliterated by her family .
 Historians traditionally have not considered ordinary women as shapers of human history . Women's lives have typically not been recorded in history books .
 The first extant sources are the writings of 13th-century Dominicans John de Mailly, Stephen de Bourbon, and Martin of Troppau . The first surviving sources are those of the Dominican .
 Troppau’s account circulated most widely; he declared that Pope John Anglicus was, in fact, an educated woman who came to Rome from Athens . He declared that he had been educated .
 Joan disguised herself as a man so she could accompany her lover to Athens . Platina, a 15th-century Vatican librarian, described Joan as a German-born woman who had disguised herself in disguise .
 Her intelligence so astounded her audiences that when Pope Leo IV died she was chosen by common consent to replace him . Her intelligence astounded audiences that she became a member of the Pope's inner circle .
 In the 19th century, the Greek novelist Emmanuel Royidis wrote a satirical romance based on Joan’s experiences .
 Royidis claimed to have based his book, first published in 1886, upon fact . Royidis claims to have been based on fact .
 In Donna Woolfolk Cross’s Pope Joan, the heroine follows her brother John to the cathedral school in Dornstadt, Germany, where she is the sole female student . She is the only female student at the school in the cathedral .
 Joan dons his clothing and travels to the Fulda monastery, where, pretending to be him, she becomes Brother John Anglicus, a healer . Later, when John is brutally killed in a Viking raid, she travels to a monastery where she pretends to be a healer. Joan
 Later, in Rome, her healing powers gain the confidence of the Vatican, and she is ultimately elected pope .
 Cross’s final chapter includes a discussion of the question of the existence of Joan . Cross's final chapter of the book is a discussion about Joan's existence . Cross: Joan was born Joan, not Joan, but Joan, and Joan died in 1973 .
 Up until the I6th century, Joan’s papacy was universally known and accepted by the Catholic hierarchy . Joan was universally accepted as the papacy of Joan of Rome . Joan's papacy is universally known .
 After the Protestant Reformation, the Catholic Church came under increasing attack . The Catholic Church began a deliberate effort to destroy the embarrassing record of a female pope who gave birth during her rule .
 Manuscripts that confirmed Joan’s existence were seized and destroyed by the Vatican . Records of her papacy were erased and records were erased .
 Some Catholics dismiss Joan as a Protestant invention designed to cast shame upon the Catholic Church . Some Catholics, in turn, dismiss the myth of Joan as an invented invention .
 Disaffected Catholics claim that disaffected Catholics created the Joan myth as an allusion to the domination of two women who influenced politics during the Byzantine Empire . Theodora I and theodora II controlled the election of popes during the early tenth century . They claim that they created the
 Donna Woolfolk Cross offers the Papal Seat as her final piece of evidence that Pope Joan really existed . Cross says she believes Pope Joan was really Pope Joan .
 The chair, which still exists today, looks like a wooden toilet seat, or an obstetrical chair . The chair was designed to look like a toilet seat .
 A keyhole shape was cut out of the seat of the chair to enable a deacon to examine the genitals of the popeelect and pronounce him male . A deacon had to examine his genitals to pronounce him as a man .
 Joan’s story—whether true or not—remains compelling because many women, and members of other oppressed groups, identify with her struggle for recognition in a male-dominated institution such as the Catholic Church . Joan's story remains compelling because of her struggles for recognition .
 Margery Kempe’s autobiography is believed to be the first ever written in the English language . Christian mystic and author believed to have written the first English book in the world .
 Kempe’s book, intended for the edification of nuns, is part mystical treatise, part moral lesson, and part history of 15th-century Europe in the form of a travelogue . Kempe's book is meant to be a guide to nuns .
 Her primary aims were to live a life devoted to Christ and to obtain official recognition of her status as a spiritual leader from the Catholic Church . Her primary aim was to live in a life dedicated to Christ . She was also seeking official recognition from the Church .
 While she seems to have reached her first goal, her second goal remained elusive . She has reached the first goal of reaching the top of the world's highest ranking .
 A scholar named Hope Emily Allen visited the library of Colonel Butler-Bowdon of Pleasington Old Hall, Lancashire, where she found an enormous manuscript . It turned out to be Margery Kempe’s autobiography .
 Kings Lynn, north of London, had become a thriving center of trade and manufacture by the I4th century . Kings Lynn was a thriving trade center north of the city of London .
 Kempe s father, merchant John Brunham, served as the town’s mayor five times between 1370 and 1391 . Brunham served as mayor of the town five times before Kempe .
 Margery Kempe married John Kempe, a merchant and town official, with whom she had 14 children . Margery died at the age of 92 .
 After the birth of her first child, Kempe suffered an attack of hysteria, including outbursts of crying and wailing and self-inflicted wounds . Kempe was diagnosed with a form of hysteria after birth of first child .
 In gratitude, she and her husband made a pilgrimage to Canterbury, England, east of London .
 In 1413, she persuaded her husband that God was asking them to take a vow of celibacy . She persuaded him to take the vow in 1413 . She convinced him that God had asked them to do so .
 Kempe’s hysterical visions, combined with her denunciation of all pleasure, her belief in mortification (the self-inflicting of pain for spiritual benefit) smacked of Lollardism to some of her contemporaries . Kempe's insistence that all conversation be exclusively religious
 Lollardism developed as a religious sect in the 1380s and continued until 1420 . Lollardistism was a sect of Lollardists who lived in the Middle Ages .
 Wycliffe preached obedience to God, reliance on the Bible as a strict guide to Christian living, and simplicity of worship . Wycliffe was the founder of Wycliffe College of Oxford University in Oxford .
 His followers rejected the ritual and opulence of the Catholic Mass, the sacraments, and the infallibility of the pope . His followers reject the ritual of the Mass and the papal infallibility . The Catholic Church was founded in 1783 .
 Lollards wore russet gowns, carried staffs, and lived off what they could beg . Lollards used to live off begging for food and living off rucksacks .
 Henry IV of England persecuted the Lollards, because their beliefs ran counter to Catholic doctrine and to English law . The Lollards were persecuted by Henry IV because they were Catholic . Henry IV persecuted them because they believed they were contrary to the Catholic doctrine .
 Margery Kempe narrowly escaped burning at the stake when the archbishop of Canterbury intervened on her behalf . Perhaps out of fear of further persecution, or because she felt a calling, she made another pilgrimage to Jerusalem .
 In I4l5, Kempe underwent a “mystical marriage” to Christ . Kempe and Christ traveled to the Holy Land via Rome, where they met in Rome . They traveled to Israel via Rome via Rome .
 She returned to Norwich, England, where she consulted Julian of Norwich for spiritual advice . Julian was Julian's spiritual adviser .
 Kempe spent the next six years nursing her husband until his death in 1431 . Kempe died six years later in the same place .
 She and her daughter-inlaw embarked upon another pilgrimage to religious places in England, Germany, and Poland . She buried both her husband and her son, who had died in the same year .
 The unusual intensity of Margery Kempe’s piety, and the fact that she was a married woman, was undoubtedly threatening to more orthodox believers, and therefore, her desires for recognition by church officials went unheeded .
 Most children of prominent, middle-class burgers—even daughters—^were learning to read and write in 15th-century England .
 Kempe dictated her autobiography to scribes, who faithfully recorded her words for posterity . Kempe therefore dictated her own autobiography . Her autobiography was published in the 1930s .
 Ann Lee’s Shakers were the first American religious group to espouse pacifism, abolition of slavery, equality of the sexes, communal property, and absolute celibacy . The United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearance was founded in 1881 .
 A number of spiritual leaders in England—put off by the Anglican Church—spawned an anticlerical, evangelical revival in the 18th century . The revival in England was a form of anti-Anglicanism .
 Some revivalists remained orthodox in their theology, merely infusing traditional Christianity with spontaneous, emotional worship services . Others infused traditional Christian worship services with spontaneous worship .
 Others, like the Shakers, departed with convention by insisting on celibacy for all members and by welcoming female ministers . Others, such as the Shaker, disagreed with the convention by inviting female ministers to their meetings .
 A virgin priest the altar best attends, A state the Lord commands not, but commends. A state of a virgin priest is a state the lord commands not to condemn, but to honor .
 She developed an early revulsion toward sexual intercourse . She became convinced that the sexual act was the original sin of Adam and Eve, and that lust spawned all evil .
 She was born on February 29, 1736, in an overcrowded, filthy Manchester slum . She was the second of eight children in an oppressively overcrowded city slum.
 Her father, John Lee, was a ne’er-do-well blacksmith, never able to feed his family . Her father was a blacksmith who never was able to pay his family enough .
 Lee remained uneducated and illiterate, serving as a cook in an insane asylum when she was old enough to work . Lee remained illiterate and was illiterate until she was 18 .
 The squalor and alcoholism she witnessed among Manchester’s poor convinced her that moral sin and depravity led to ruin . She said moral sin led her to believe that moral . sin led to . ruin .
 In 1758, Lee found consolation in religious sect formed by former Quakers Jane and James Wardley known as the Shaking Quakers . The Shakers are a Quaker sect of former members of the Shakers .
 The Shakers borrowed many Quaker tenets, including the notion that all humans possess an inner light designed to lead them to spiritual truth . Shakers were Quaker members of the Quaker community .
 During Shaker meetings, believers would meditate until the Holy Spirit manifested itself in them . They would then begin violently shaking, shouting, and singing .
 Shakers’ boisterous behavior, including crashing into worship services and proclaiming worshipers a sinful, lustful lot, resulted in charges of disturbing the peace, arrests, fines, and jail sentences . Many of them could not pay the fines and were jailed because they couldn't pay
 They reasoned that since he first appeared on earth as a man, his second appearance would surely be as a woman . They reasoned he would have appeared as a new woman .
 Ann Lee succumbed to a marriage to a blacksmith’s apprentice, Abraham Standerin, arranged by her father . Ann Lee died in 1762 in childbirth .
 Bride and groom were illiterate, and the marriage registry is marked with two X’s instead of their names . Bride was illiterate and wedding registry was marked by two X's instead of names .
 Lee believed the deaths were God’s punishment for her earthly indulgences . Lee believed she was being punished for indulging in the flesh .
 Husband and wife quarreled over Lee’s insistence upon a celibate marriage, but apparently Standerin relented for the time being, since he, too, became a Shaker . Lee and Lee were married at the time .
 Lee beheld a vision that changed her life and the lives of the other Shakers . Lee was arrested in 1770 after a night spent in jail after a Shaker meeting . Lee saw a vision in jail that changed the life of the Shaker . Lee's vision inspired her to
 From that point on, she referred to herself as Mother Ann or Ann the Word . She now calls herself Mother Ann and Ann the word .
 Lee became the undisputed leader of the Shakers . Filled with a new self-confidence and purpose, Lee became a new leader . Lee is now the president of the organization .
 In 1774, the well-to-do Shaker John Hocknell booked passages for the tiny group on the Mariah, headed for the United States . The group made their way to the U.S. in 1774 .
 Lee’s marriage fell apart when Standerin brought a prostitute into their bedroom one night, demanding that either either Lee sleep with him, or he would commit adultery . Lee and his wife were married for more than 20 years .
 Lee refused, Standerin and his guest stomped out, never to be seen again . Lee refused to give up on the invitation .
 The Society refused to bear arms during the American Revolution . Ann Lee and the others were imprisoned in July 1780 for refusing to acknowledge the laws of the land .
 Rumors spread that because they were English, the Shakers were actually British spies . During the war, rumors spread that, because they are English, they were actually spies .
 Local citizens protested the mistreatment of the sect, citing revolutionary ideals of freedom and liberty . However, the gossip soon dissipated, and many local citizens protested .
 Ann Lee and other Shaker elders set out on a missionary journey to gather more converts . Ann Lee was released from prison after serving time in prison . She and others set out to gather converts .
 Lee never recovered from mob violence after being attacked by mob members . Lee was a victim of mob violence during his time in prison . Lee died in prison in 1968 after being shot in the head with a gun .
 Elders Lucy Wright and Joseph Meacham wore the mantle of leadership jointly after Mother Ann’s death . Mother Ann's death was the last of her life .
 Indian Buddhist nun Mahaprajapati established the first order of Buddhist nuns in world history . Her aunt was the aunt of the founder of Buddhism, Siddhartha Gautama .
 Gautama’s mother died seven days after his birth, and his aunt reared him along with her other children . The boy's aunt married her sister's widowed husband Shuddhodana .
 The establishment of an order of female renunciants provoked controversy over the role of women in the Buddhist religion that has never been fully eradicated . Despite the large numbers of Buddhist nuns that exist today, there are still large numbers .
 Mahaprajapati "started a spiritual and social revolution" when she asked the Buddha to ordain a community of nuns . She started a "spiritual revolution" by asking for nuns to be ordained .
 Gautama had a son, but the pain of his family and clan took a heavy toll on him . The 29-year-old man became an ascetic after he was born .
 Ascetics, who were relatively common in India at the time, wandered throughout the countryside teaching, meditating, and begging for their subsistence . Ascetics wandered throughout India teaching and meditating in search of their livelihood .
 Gautama practiced yoga, refrained from sexual activity, and organized a community of disciples . Some of the disciples remained with their families, while others followed Gautamas' teachings .
 The charismatic Gautama and his followers sought escape from the human condition through meditation . Meditation would ultimately bring enlightenment, or nirvana, or enlightenment .
 Gautama, better known as the Buddha (one who has awakened’), instructed his followers (called the Sangha) in the dharma and the Middle Way, a path between worldly existence and intense spirituality .
 To end desire is to follow the eight-fold path, which consists of 1. right views 2. right intentions 3. right speech 4. right action 5. right livelihood 6. right effort 7. right awareness . Mahaprajapati approached Gautama on the question
 Buddha is said to have responded by telling his aunt that only she should be able to shave her head and don the robes of the Sangha . Buddha told his aunt she should not be allowed to shave and don't wear robes .
 The Buddha’s closest disciple, Ananda, found Mahaprajapati weeping by the gate and asked her to tell him why she was crying . Ananda was the closest disciple of the Buddha .
 When she explained that the Buddha had rejected her request, Ananda spoke to the Buddha himself and convinced him to ordain the women . The Buddha himself convinced her to do so .
 No nun may spend a rainy season in a place where no monks are resident 4.5% of the population is in the region .
 A nun must have both orders perform the end of the rainy season ceremony for her with reference to the seeing, hearing, or suspicion of faults committed by her 5.5 nuns . The ceremony must be performed by both orders .
 Nuns may not accuse or warn a monk about transgressions in morality, heretical views, conduct, or livelihood . It is not forbidden for a monk to accuse a nun of wrongdoing .
 When a nun violates the eight rules, penance must be performed every half month 8. 8. Penance must also be done every half a month .
 A nun of one hundred years of age shall perform the correct duties to a monk; she shall, with her hands folded in prayerful attitude, rise to greet him and then bow down to him . The Buddha raised concerns regarding the renunciant life for women .
 He feared that women would only enter the monastery after their husbands had died and they had no means of livelihood, and that their vows would not be sincere, he said . The monastery was founded in 1903 .
 He worried that family life would disintegrate if women joined the Sangha . But he acknowledged that women’s presence in the community would bridge the division that existed between mendicant life and the outside world .
 Buddha worried that the presence of women would distract the men from the men . Buddha worried about the danger of women distracting him from his men .
 Buddha viewed women primarily as sexual beings, not realizing that women, like men, could and have rejected sexuality in favor of a more spiritual or intellectual life .
 Therigatha—The Songs of the Women Elders—part of the canon of Theraveda Buddhism . They produced songs and hymns that were collected and became known as the Therigathatha . The Songs of The Elders are now part of the Canon of Buddhism .
 Historians agree that some centuries after the Buddha’s death, monks became less receptive toward female mendicants . They insisted that women could not achieve nirvana and therefore should not be part of the Sangha .
 Vajrayana or Tantric Buddhism, the newest sect, welcomes women’s participation most enthusiastically . Tantric Buddhists welcome women's participation in the sect . The sect is known for its tolerance of women's rights .
 Thousands of women have followed in the footsteps of Mahaprajapati and pursued the disciplined life of the Sangha . Today there are thousands of women who have followed .
 Mirabai, India's most famous medieval woman saint, wrote devotional poems and music . Devote Hindus still recited and sung by devoted Hindus .
 Though much of her work has been described as religious and devotional, it is also passionate, erotic, and highly emotional . Her work is described as 'devotional' but passionate and erotic .
 During Mirabai’s lifetime, turmoil and conflict plagued northwestern India . She was born in the village of Merta, in a region called Rajasthan, in the country's northwestern region .
 India came increasingly under the influence of Muslim kings who invaded Rajasthan from Afghanistan . India was invaded by the Muslim kings from Afghanistan in the early 12th century .
 Mirabai grew up in a noble, well-educated family of maharajas, or local rulers, living in a lavishly equipped fortress that they used to defend themselves against Muslim attacks . She was born into a noble family of local rulers who used to live in the fortress
 Mirabai’s family was Vaishnava, or worshippers of the Hindu god Vishnu . She was born in India and married to a Hindu Hindu woman .
 Like most Hindu families, Mirabai's was strictly patriarchal; honor among both sexes was expected . Like most families, honor was expected for both sexes in Mirabia's family .
 In men, honor implied courage and military prowess; in women, honor signified obedience, loyalty to family, and chastity . Honor signified loyalty, loyalty, family, chastity, obedience and obedience .
 Aryan religious practices blended with indigenous religions to form the Hindu religion . The Hindu religion is based on Hinduism .
 There is no single set of religious beliefs or practices in the Hindu religion . Instead, it is a fluid mass of religious ideas and expressions . The Hindu religion is a 'fluid mass of ideas'
 Among others, Hinduism is polytheistic, involving the worship of many gods . Hinduism involves worshiping many gods, including those of many .
 There is no clear-cut path toward truth or error in Hindu life, says author . "A variety of truths exist, which are sometimes contradictory, existing alongside each other," he says .
 Central to Hinduism is the belief in reincarnation and in karma, or the notion that past actions determine one’s present life .
 Temples are Hindu places of worship and ritual, and festivals mark days of celebration . Temples include temples, temples and temples, and temples are Hindu temples .
 Hindus regard Vedas, or hymns, and the more philosophical Upanishads, as scriptures . Hindus regard the Vedas as scriptures. Hindus regard them as hyms, or scriptures, as holy texts .
 Hindus accept the caste system as part of their religion . Some believe it was actually constructed by Brahmin priests . The caste system was constructed by Hindu priests, according to some .
 Brahman, or priestly class, receives the highest social rank . Kshatriya, warrior caste, comes next; the Vaisya, or traders and farmers, below that; and the Sudra, or servants, comprise the lowest caste .
 Those living outside the caste system are known as untouchables . They include those who kill for a living, such as butchers, and workers who come into contact with human waste .
 A Hindu is born into his or her caste and cannot rise above it during this lifetime . A Hindu can't be born into a caste and can't rise above this lifetime. A Hindu cannot be born in a Hindu family .
 It is thought that one’s karma, or past actions, determine the caste into which one is born .
 Some Hindus believe that the god Vishnu appeared in human form as Krishna . Krishna is believed to be the Hindu god of Krishna, Krishna .
 Mirabai’s family was devoted to Krishna . Hindu households have gods that are worshipped as part of family life . The family worshipped Krishna .
 Mirabai’s mother died very young, and since her father was a military man, she was sent to live with her grandmother . Her father was military man and her mother was very young .
 The marriage was a political one, designed to strengthen the region against the Muslim threat . It was intended to strengthen Syria against the threat of Islamism .
 Tradition called for a woman to take on the religion of the man she married . Tradition calls for the woman to be married to her husband's religious beliefs .
 The first duty of a daughter-in-law, according to Hindu custom, is to perform a puja, or worship ritual, before the family deity . According to Hindu customs, the first duty is to worship before a family deity.
 The Bhoj Raj household goddess was Kali, associated with the Hindu god Shiva . Kali is associated with Shiva and the Hindu goddess of Shiva .
 Mirabai refused to perform the ceremony, continuing to worship Krishna instead . She refused to attend the ceremony and continued to worship the deity .
 Mirabai began consorting with sadhus, or wandering yellow-robed holy men . She was no longer tied to a marriage, she consorted with wandering sadhus .
 She accepted a Raidas, or a man of very low caste, as her guru, or religious instructor . The Raidas are Raidas . She had accepted a raidas as her spiritual guru .
 Mirabai's brother-in-law became convinced she was spying for the Muslim invaders . Vikramjit Singh became convinced that she had been spying for them .
 Legend has it that Singh, together with Mirabai’s mother-in-law, conspired to assassinate her three times . Legend has said Singh conspired with her to kill her . Singh is believed to be the only person to have succeeded in assassinating her .
 During her religious pilgrimage across Rajasthan, she sought out places where Krishna was rumored to appear in forests and villages throughout the region .
 Mirabai learned to play the bamboo flute, the instrument associated with Krishna . She learned the instrument from her mother, who is famous in India .
 She traveled to Vrindaban, the site of Krishna’s childhood, and a gathering place for his worshippers . Krishna was born in Krishna's childhood .
 Mirabai’s family had belonged to Vaishnava worshippers to whom her family was . She came to know Jiva Goswami, a guru of the Vaishnavas worshippers . She was married to a woman who died of a heart attack .
 Goswami refused to see Mirabai because she was the only male devotee at Vrindaban, who were gopis, or cowherders . Krishna was only male among his devotees, who are female cowherds . Goswamam refused to
 Parashuram Caturvedi compiled the most authoritative collection of Mirabai’s poetry in 1983 . The most important collection of poetry was published in 1983 by the poet laureate .
 Mirabai’s poems may have been written in a vernacular language called Gujarati, but were translated into Hindi during her lifetime . Her poems may be written in Gujarati but translated into  Hindi .
 Mercy Amba Oduyoye developed a Christian liberation theology based upon her knowledge of, and experiences within, her African cultural heritage . Mercy Ambi Oduioye is a Ghanaian theologian .
 She has become particularly interested in the liberation of women whose oppression has arisen from social, religious, or cultural ideologies . Like CHO WHA SOON in Korea, she has become increasingly interested in women's liberation .
 Oduyoyoye is president of the Ecumenical Association of Third World Theologians . She continues to make the world aware of the great potential that Africans, and other non-Europeans, have .
 Mercy Amba Oduyoye is the daughter of the Methodist Reverend Charles Kwaw and Mercy Dakwaa Yamoah . She was born in Asamankese, Ghana, and is a daughter of a Methodist .
 English is Ghana’s official langauge, with 44 percent of the population speaking Akan . English is the national language of Ghana, with Akan being spoken 44 percent .
 Oduyoyoye was raised in the Akan cultural tradition, a tradition that influenced her religious beliefs . She was born in Nigeria and raised in Akan .
 About 30 percent of Ghanaians are Muslim, and 24 percent are Christian . About 30 per cent of Ghanaian are Muslim .
 Reverend Kwaw, an educator and minister, preached in three parishes in Akan communities . He is a native of the Akan people .
 Mercy received instruction on Christian theology but also in the Akan culture and in the native Ga language . Mercy was a child who received instruction from Christian theology and from the native language .
 In 1954, she completed a certificate of education from Kumasi College of Technology . She also obtained a teaching certificate from the Methodist Ministry of Education .
 After receiving her B.A. in religious studies in 1963, she left for England to pursue graduate studies in England .
 Mercy Amba Oduyoyoyo is a Nigerian born born in Nigeria . She says she grew up critical of the way missionaries placed themselves at a distance from African communities they were supposed to serve .
 British officials kept to themselves even more than did the British government officials . They kept quiet more than any other British officials .
 Mercy’s history as a colony influenced her interest in social justice . Mercy's theology and interest in the social justice was influenced by Ghana's colonial history . Mercy was born into a family of four .
 Ghana became the first African colony to gain independence from Great Britain in 1957 . In 1957, Ghana became an African colony of Africa .
 In 1960, the country became a republic, and Nkrumah became its elected president . He was elected president of Ghana in 1960 .
 Oduyoyoye sees Africa as a mixture of traditional African culture, Islamic norms, and Western civilization . He sees Africa, and particularly West Africa, as a mix of traditional and Western culture .
 She is proudest, however, of her Akan heritage, which she feels has helped her understand the centrality of women in the human community .
 Traditional Akan society is built upon matrilineal clans; members trace their descent from common female ancestors . Members of the Akan clan trace descent from their ancestors .
 Matrilineal descent determines inheritance, succession, and land tenure . It determines inheritance and succession of land ownership .
 Having been raised in a multicultural setting, Oduyoye is sensitive to how different cultural groups hear the Christian Gospel . Having raised in multicultural settings, he is particularly sensitive .
 The Akan culture is rich in oral traditions that provide a basis for hearing the Gospel through the spoken language . For example, the Akan people have oral traditions .
 This, she points out, is what missionaries miss when they isolate themselves from the communities that they were intended to serve . This is when they are isolated from their communities .
 Oduyoyoye believes that one’s cultural background determines, in part, the type of Christian one becomes . He says that one's cultural background can determine a Christian's identity .
 Africans use symbols, language, and prayer to demonstrate their dependence on God . Africans often use symbols and language to demonstrate dependence on their faith .
 Akan expression Gye Nyame means the belief that without God, nothing holds together . The Akan means "without God, everything holds together" Akan is an Akan word for the belief without God .
 In African Christianity, God does not suffer from the evil that humans do to each other . Instead, God demonstrates concern as the creator of humanity . African Christianity is based on African Christianity .
 Many African women view patriarchy as the substitution of the will of the male over the female . Patriarchy is seen as a substitution of God's will of God for the female over the male .
 Women refuse to allow men to obscure the image of God in themselves by submitting to their husbands . They refuse to . Allow men to . obscure . image of . God in . themselves .
 Other women view God as the source of patriarchy and Jesus as the liberator . Other women see God as a source of male oppression .
 God sent his son Jesus Christ, according to these women, to express his concern for their oppression . The women say Jesus Christ was sent to them to express their concern for oppression .
 Mercy Amba Oduyoye confirms her liberation theology, but offers a criticism of it as well . She says Christianity is the means by which the oppressed can free themselves . She also rejects the notion of Christianity as the means of Christianity helping oppressed .
 Some liberation theologians are unaware that sexism is basic to the web of oppression in which most Third World people live . She notes that despite Third World liberation . theologians’ calls for social justice, some are unaware of sexism .
 Christianity will only be credible, she insists, when African women become liberated through the Christian religion . Christianity will be credible only when women are liberated, she says .
 She held a research assistant position at Harvard Divinity School from 1985 to 1986 . She then became the Henry Luce Visiting Professor at Union Theological Seminary the following year .
 She is the first African woman to become a member of the World Council of Churches’ Commission on Faith and Order .
 Mercy is married to Adedoyin Modupe Oduyoye . She has raised five foster children with her husband .
 Elizabeth Seton was the first American woman to found an order of nuns and to be declared a saint by the Catholic Church . Seton initiated the parochial school system and the first Catholic orphanage .
 Her conversion to the Catholic faith horrified her friends and family, and she was ostracized from the society and culture in which she was raised . Not surprisingly, her conversion to Catholicism horrified her family .
 The American Sisters of Charity was founded in 1809 . She moved to Maryland and founded the sisters' first group .
 Her mother, Catherine Charlton Bayley, was the daughter of the rector of St. Mary's Church, London . She was born in 18th century London . Her mother was also a member of the church's rector .
 Elizabeth Bayley spent much of her childhood ministering to the sick and needy . Her benefactors came to know her as the Protestant Sister of Charity .
 Even the letters she wrote as a young girl reveal deeply held spiritual and religious convictions . Her letters reveal her deep held spiritual convictions .
 At the age of 19, Bayley married a wealthy merchant and banker named William Magee Seton . Bayley was married to Seton, a wealthy banker .
 William Seton’s business failed—a disaster from which he never recovered . Seton's business failed, and he was never able to recover from the disaster .
 William's health fared no better, and in 1803, the couple and their eldest daughter, Anna Maria, traveled to Italy, where they hoped William’s health would benefit from the drier climate . His health fared well, and the couple hoped the climate would improve .
 They stayed with friends the Filicchi family of Livorno, Italy, on Italy's west coast .
 Antonio and Filippo Filicchi were Catholics, and their ability to console the bereaved widow impressed Elizabeth Seton .
 When Seton booked her passage back to the United States in 1804, she was on the brink of conversion . Seton was a convert to the U.S. when she died .
 Her friends and family never forgave her, and she had no contact with them afterward . She never had any contact with her family again .
 Anti-Catholic sentiment in the U.S. had deep roots by the early 19th century . Anti-Catholics in the United States have deep roots in anti-Catholic sentiments .
 There were only about 25,000 Catholics out of a total population of about 2 million in the American colonies by the 1770s .
 Most Catholics were living in Maryland, which had been founded by the Catholic Calvert family . Most Catholics in Maryland were Catholic .
 New Englanders, especially, feared ‘popery’ in their neighbors to the north . The nation’s largest city, New York City, was the birthplace of New England .
 Catholics in every colony, including Maryland, were disenfranchised . Catholics could not vote or hold public office or vote in Maryland . Catholics in Maryland could not hold office .
 Anti-Catholicism cooled somewhat as the colonists tried to enlist the help of Canadians in their cause . When the war for independence erupted in 1775, anti-Catholics had cooled somewhat .
 Given prejudices that her chosen religion provoked, Seton feared for her livelihood . Given the prejudices that she had provoked, she feared for the livelihood .
 Most women in the early 19th century had few skills and little education, there were few opportunities for them to earn money . Widows generally were forced to rely on their families to support them until they could remarry .
 At first she could rely on Antonio Filicchi's generosity, which provided her with a way to pay for her and her children’s living expenses . At first, she was able to rely on his generosity to provide her and children's living costs .
 Dubourg, to establish a girls’s school near a Baltimore college and seminary, was to establish the school . The school is located near a Maryland college and a seminary . Dubourgs is the daughter of a former mayor of Baltimore .
 With the guidance of John Carroll, the Baltimore bishop, she fulfilled a lifelong wish of founding a religious community . She fulfilled her lifelong wish to become a nun in Baltimore .
 In 1809, she moved to Maryland, made her vows before the archbishop, and exchanged her everyday attire for a nun’s habit . The archbishop made the vow to her in 1809 .
 Mother Seton formed the American Sisters of Charity of Emmitsburg, Maryland, and became Mother Setont . Seton was the founder of St. Vincent de Paul and formed the U.S. Sister of Charity .
 Seton developed the American parochial school system by training teachers, preparing textbooks for classroom use, and translating religious books from the French . During her years at Emmitsburg, Seton trained teachers, prepared textbooks and translated religious books .
 Seton never ceased the charitable work for which she was known . She also wrote several religious treatises herself .
 As the Mother Superior of her religious order, she combined nurturing the sick and destitute with converting supplicants to the Catholic faith . Now, she is known for her role as a nurse who nursed the sick .
 The Catholic Church honored Mother Seton by declaring her venerable in 1959; four years later . The Catholic church also declared her venerable four years after .
 Pope John XXIII beatified her, and she was canonized, or declared a saint, in 1975 . She was the first woman to be declared a sain in the United States .
 It is doubtful that Seton herself would have considered all of this very important . Seton's death was a suicide attempt .
 Order of Sisters of Charity of Pittsburgh and Allegheney, United States of America. Rules and Regulations for the Order of . Sisters of . Charity of . Pittsburgh .
 Scottish missionary Mary Slessor once described herself as “wee, thin, and not very strong” She worked as a missionary among the peoples of the Calabar region of West Africa, in what is today Nigeria .
 Slessor broke with her community and chose to live independently in Africa . Instead of clinging to the society of other Europeans in Africa, she chose to be independent .
 Mary was born on December 2, 1848, the second of her family’s seven children . She was born in Gilcomston, a suburb of Aberdeen, Scotland, in Scotland .
 Her father, Robert Slessor, cobbled shoes, while her mother, wove textiles in a local factory . Her parents, Robert and Robert, worked in shoes and textiles .
 Robert Slessor soon could not support his family in the shoemaking trade, so the Slessors relocated to Dundee . Mary began working in the mill in Dundee, where she worked as a shoemaker .
 She even integrated the practice of converting people into her play with other children . She was even able to play with her own children .
 Once, she stood her ground against a group of thugs, one of whom swung a metal weight on a string increasingly closer to her face . One of the thugs swung the metal weight as she stood in front of her .
 She got the ruffians to agree that, if she did not blink, then they would have to join her Sunday School class . She got them to say they would be joining her Sunday school class .
 Despite the long and arduous 12 hours a day she spent working at the textile factory, Slessor still found time to volunteer as a teacher at a local mission school .
 When she turned 28, Slessor applied to the Foreign Mission Board of the United Presbyterian Church . She is a member of the board of the U.P. Presbyterian Church's Foreign Missions Board .
 Calabar is the name of a town and port in southeastern Nigeria . It lies along the Calabara River . The name of the town is the same as the name given to the town of Calabars .
 The Efik branch of the Ibibio people settled the region in the early 17th century . Later, the town developed as a center of exchange between white traders and Africans living farther inland .
 Calabar also served as a major slave-trading center until the mid-19th century . Great Britain abolished the practice in 1807, and the slave trade diminished .
 The slave trade had had a pernicious effect on traditional African society, as the tribe lost control over the fate of its members .
 Missionaries arriving in the mid-19th century witnessed the human sacrifice that routinely followed the death of a village dignitary . The ritual murder of twins, which the Ibibio considered a sign of bad luck, was commonplace .
 The church encouraged the local chiefs to pass a law in 1850 prohibiting human sacrifice . The law was passed by local chiefs in 1850 .
 The Reverend Hope Waddell established the first missionary school in 1846 . The Free Church of Scotland established the school in Scotland .
 When Slessor arrived in 1876, her first priority was to learn the Efik language . She learned quickly and learned the language quickly .
 She soon became the leading authority in the language among seasoned and new missionaries alike . She became a leading authority among seasoned missionaries .
 After becoming immersed in Ibibio culture, Slessor decided to travel further inland to explore other regions and make contact with other African peoples .
 No other European missionaries were willing to join her expedition . Slessor journeyed alone and had few contacts with other Europeans during the rest of her life .
 She began working with the Okoyong, a little known people in the interior of the continent, where few Europeans had traveled . The Okoyoyong people are little known but few Europeans have traveled to the region .
 The Okoyong were unaffected by the law prohibiting human sacrifice, or the ritual abandonment of twins . They were not subject to the law banning human sacrifice or abandonment .
 Of results as affecting the condition and conduct of our people generally, it is more easy to speak . Of results, it's more easy for the government to speak. Of results it's 'easier to speak' of results affecting people generally .
 Anyone from any place can come now for trade or pleasure, and wherever they choose, their persons and property being as safe as in Calabar . The people of any place in Nigeria can now come from anywhere for trade, pleasure or trade .
 "For fully a year we have heard of nothing of violence from even the most backward people," says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "For a year, there has been no violence in this country"
 They have thanked me for restraining them in the past, she said . They have begged me to be their consul, as they neither wished black man nor white man to be king, she added . She said: "They neither wished ... nor black or white man"
 Slessor admitted that she made little headway in converting the Okoyong to Christianity, but she had made great strides toward ending practices she saw as abhorrent .
 In 1854 they formally met bound themselves by treaty with the Consul . To submit to his authority did not mean loss of liberty but the opposite, and gradually objections cleared away .
 He has proclaimed them a free people in every respect among neighbouring tribes, and so, placing them on their honor so to speak, has made out of the roughest material a lot of self-respecting men .
 She also left little doubt that she believed that the Okoyong needed guidance from the European Union .
 For her years of work among the Okoyong, British colonial authorities invested Slessor with the powers of a magistrate .
 Many 19th-century missionaries left Africa after only a few years in residence, often for health reasons . Missionaries left Africa for only a short time, often because of health reasons, many of them leaving for a short period of time .
 Mary provided vaccination against smallpox and set up mission hospitals for treating illnesses and injuries suffered by Africans and Europeans alike . In the early years of the 20th century some remedies and precautions against mosquito-borne disease were becoming available .
 On January 13, 1915, after a prolonged bout of fever, she died in Africa . By 1915, Slessor s own physical strength had greatly declined .
 Edith Stein died at the hands of Nazi officials in the gas chambers of Auschwitz . Stein was a Carmelite nun and philosopher Jewish by birth .
 Those who survived the death camps, and Stein’s contemporaries in the Catholic Church, have interpreted her words in different ways . Edith Stein is remembered for her words, which led to a controversy in how she is remembered . The Catholic Church has interpreted Stein's words differently .
 The Catholic Church beatified her as a Catholic martyr in 1987, an act which disturbed many Jews, who understood her final words to mean that she had reconciled with the religion of her birth .
 Edith Stein wrote books in which she attempted to reconcile her philosophical understanding of phenomenology with the Christian writings of St. St. Paul . Stein was a philosopher and religious leader . Stein's books were published by the New York-based National Geographic .
 Phenomenology is a philosophical perspective in which material objects are viewed as objects of perception rather than as existing independently of human consciousness . Phenomenalists are concerned with perception of objects that are not independent of consciousness . The philosophy of phenomenology is based on the view of the world's
 Thomas Aquinas, a Dominican monk, helped establish scholasticism in Europe . Aquinas was a method of integrating Christian teachings with preChristian philosophy of Aristode .
 Aquinas used logic to try to solve problems relating to science and faith . In 1879, the Catholic Church declared Aquinas works to be the basis of Catholicism .
 Edith Stein, something of a child prodigy, began school at the Victorian School at a young age . She advanced quickly through the grades and was a prodigy . Stein died at the age of 92 at the end of her life .
 Auguste Stein sent Edith to live with her older married sister in Hamburg, Germany . Edith's mother thought she might be ill and sent her daughter to live in Germany .
 Stein realized that, although she no longer believed in God, she did seek a higher sense of truth about her existence and about the nature of humanity in general . Stein spent eight months at the center of her faith .
 She hoped that furthering her education would help her find some answers . She said she wanted to find out more about her life's purpose .
 She returned to the Victorian School and began preparing for the university . She is now studying at the University of Cambridge .
 She enrolled in a psychology course, but the course did not convince her that the mind could be quantified or measured . Hoping to gain greater insight into the human mind and spirit, she enrolled in psychology class .
 Stein realized that she sought wisdom, which she did not think science would help her attain . Stein realized she sought knowledge, but she didn't think science could help her achieve it . Stein: "I'm not a scientist. I'm a woman. I want to be a woman who
 She turned to the philosophical works of Edmund Husserl, including Logical Investigation, for inspiration .
 Graduate students at Gottingen introduced her to the Catholic Christian faith . Max Scheler, who was also of Jewish birth, also introduced her .
 Stein attended Scheler’s lectures on religious philosophy and learned the tenets of Christianity . Stein attended the lectures .
 Stein’s dissertation, “The Problem of Empathy,” was so well received that Freiburg offered her a position as lecturer in 1916 . Stein's dissertation was so successful that she was offered a job as a lecturer in Germany . Stein died at the age of
 His widow asked Stein to compile the papers he had left into a manuscript . Stein's widow has asked him to compile his papers into a book .
 Stein read in her friend’s papers convinced her of the divinity of Jesus Christ . Stein's friend's papers convinced Stein of Christ's divinity, Stein says .
 Edith waited to join a religious order and spent the next several years teaching at a Dominican nuns’ school for girls in Speyer . Not wishing to upset her mother more, Edith decided to wait until she was ready to join .
 By the early 1930s, educators in Germany were becoming increasingly anti-Semitic . Educators in the 1930s were also anti-Semitism .
 When she reapplied to her former position at Freiburg, her overtures were rejected . She reapplied for her job at the German university .
 Hitler came to power, and Stein and other Jewish educators lost their jobs . Stein found a position at the Educational Institute in Munster, Germany .
 Stein sent Pope Pius XI a request for an encyclical in defense of the Jews . Stein sent the Pope a request . Stein was Jewish leader of the Jewish community .
 Before she finished her book, the horrors of Kristallnacht, the November night in 1938 when Nazis terrorized Jews, swept across Germany . The November night, in 1938, was the night in Nazi Germany when the Germans terrorized the Jews .
 Edith Stein left Koln for Echt, Holland, where her sister Rosa, who had also converted to Catholicism, joined her . Not wanting to bring harm to herself or her convent, she moved to Echt to join her sister .
 Stein continued to work on Endliches und ewiges Sein, but knew that, as a former Jew, her book would not be published in the current circumstances . Stein: "As a Jewish woman, I'm sure that I'm not going to be able to publish my
 In July 1942, a letter of protest against the persecution of the Jews, written by a group of Catholic bishops, was read aloud in Dutch churches . The letter was read out in July 1942 .
 Stein was arrested on August 2, 1942, in retaliation for the letter of protest . SS troops arrested Stein and other Catholic Jews . Stein was a Catholic Jew; he was arrested in 1942 .
 The two women traveled to Amersfoort, and then Auschwitz, where they became victims of the gas chambers . The women were victims of Nazi gas chambers in Nazi Germany .
 Four Women Confronting the Holocaust: Edith Stein, Simone Weil, Anne Frank, Etty Hillesum . The Holocaust was the focus of the four women who spoke out against the Holocaust .
 Teresa combined great spiritual works with practical reforms to help remake the church in the 16th century .
 Camino deperfeccionCWzy oiVttfrcnon (1566), 1566; Castillo interior , 1580; and Las Fun, 1582; . Castillo de Perficio (1582) is the name of a Spanish town in the
 The Catholic Church borrowed a judicial technique to root out heresy, sorcery, witchcraft, and alchemy throughout Europe . The technique was used to question the accused until a confession was procured .
 Catholic Church viewed heretics as threats against its power . Catholic Church had consolidated its power during the Middle Ages and early modern period .
 Pope Gregory IX assigned church officials to the task of inquiring into heresy in specific areas . The pope's office was tasked with investigating heresy into specific areas of heresy .
 Those accused of heresy were questioned and granted the opportunity to confess their crimes . If no admission of guilt came forth, inquisitors ordered torture if no confession was made .
 In Spain, Ferdinand and ISABELLA I used the Inquisition to force political and religious unity by deporting Jewish people . Even Jews who were conversos had to leave the country . Ferdinand and Isabella I used to use the Inquisition as a way to force unity .
 In 1485, the Tribunal of the Inquisition offered a pardon to all those who confessed their “secret” Jewish practices . Teresa of Avila’s grandfather, Juan Sanchez de Cepeda, and his son Alonso were Jewish converts who had reverted to their Jewish customs
 In 1485, the two men were “reconciled” to the Catholic Church by proceeding barefoot through the streets of Toledo wearing the sambenitos symbolizing their rapprochement .
 Teresa of Avila’s reforms, however, made religion a private, spiritual, detached-from-the-world relationship between humans and God . The reforms were made to make religion more of a private relationship with God .
 Teresa was born March 28, 1515, in Avila, Spain, in 1515 . Teresa’s calling to the faith occurred early in her life .
 She was one of 10 children of her father’s second wife, Teresa de Cepeda y Ahumada . She was born into a 10-strong family .
 In 1535, Teresa entered the Carmelite Monastery of the Incarnation, in Avila . Teresa was a nun at the Monastery . She is now a nun in the Spanish city of Avilas .
 The Carmelite ideal was to live a completely cloistered, or isolated, existence devoting oneself to prayer and contemplation . Carmelites were meant to live an isolated, or cloistered life devoting themselves to prayer .
 Teresa herself left the Incarnation three times . She returned home to recover from an illness, to nurse her father before his death, and to make a pilgrimage to a Spanish shrine .
 During one revelation, God exhorted her to reform the Carmelite order, which had lost some of its early zeal . The Carmelites lost some early zeal in the early years .
 Teresa founded a reformed house of Carmelite in 1562, called the “Discalced,” or unshod, order . The nuns adopted coarse clothing and sandals to wear, instead of shoes, to wear .
 At first, Teresa’s confessor and her other advisers had encouraged her in her plan to establish the new order, but when the townsfolk caught wind of the change, a public outcry erupted against her . Teresa's confessor: ‘Teresa’
 The opposition to the establishment of a new convent stemmed primarily from Teresa’s intention to operate the convent in complete poverty . Teresa wanted the convent to operate in poverty .
 City fathers complained that existing orders, too, were impoverished . The city could not stand the strain on its resources, they said . City fathers said existing orders were impoverished, too .
 Biographers contend that the objection put forth by the city officials masked their true fears that the reformed convent would be run separately, beyond the city’s control . Teresa's biographers say the objection was meant to be a cover up for the city .
 Teresa and her sister, Juana, and her brother-in-law, Juan de Ovalle, purchased a home in Avila to begin the life of the new order . Father Alvarez, lent his support, and Teresa and Juana bought a home for the order .
 Pope Gregory XIII recognized the Discalced Reform as a separate order in 1580 . The reform order was officially recognized by the Pope as an order of order .
 Teresa of Avila began writing books as a way of guiding her nuns in the spiritual life . Teresa wrote books to guide her nuns to the life of a nun .
 She insisted upon three prerequisites for a fulfilling Christian spiritual life . She insisted on three pre-requisites to a fulfilling spiritual life: faith, faith, prayer, love and prayer .
 One must remain emotionally detached from human beings in order to be able to devote one’s life wholly to God . At the same time, however, one must remain emotional detached from humans, says the author .
 Teresa described an observable path taken by Christians from conversion to Christianity, to death and salvation . She recognized that each individual’s path may differ from that taken by other believers, since God leads each person differently .
 Teresa, like other mystics in her time, conceived of Christ as a bridegroom .
 One’s spiritual journey, then, is really the progression that one makes before finally achieving a spiritual marriage with God . One's spiritual journey is to achieve a spiritual union with God, says author .
 Her book Castillo interior traces the spiritual journey toward communion with God . The author's latest book, Castillo Interior, is about the journey to God's side .
 Teresa used the idea of a multiroom castle as a metaphor for the journey one takes during one’s spiritual life . Teresa used it to be a symbol of the journey she takes during her life .
 Some rooms in the castle present the believer with obstacles that can only be overcome by active love, not by mystical powers . Some of the rooms present the believers with obstacles .
 Teresa warned her nuns that visions and revelations did not constitute a special relationship with God . Such a relationship could only be achieved through embarking on a spiritual journey, she said .
 Literature examined during the Inquisition would often be passed from one inquisitor to another, resulting in a wider circulation than the book might otherwise have enjoyed . Literature examined by inquisitors was often passed between inquisators to another .
 Mother Teresa was the founder and leader of the Order of the Missionaries of Charity in India from 1950 until her death in 1997 . Mother Teresa died in 1997 at the age of 85 .
 The primary task of the Order of the Missionaries of Charity is to love and care for those persons for whom others are unwilling to assume care . The Order is to 'love and care' for those people for whom people are unwilling .
 The order includes more than 1,000 men and women in India . Many of them work as doctors, nurses, and social workers .
 The order has also undertaken relief work in African, Latin American, and Asian nations . It has outposts in Great Britain, Italy, Ireland, and the United States .
 Mother Teresa operated some 50 relief projects, including work among slum-dwellers, AIDS and leprosy victims, and undernourished children . Mother Teresa worked among slums, AIDS victims, children and AIDS victims .
 Mother Teresa was born Agnes Gonxha Bojaxhiu in Skopje, in what is now Macedonia, on August 26, 1910 . She was born in 1910 . Mother Teresa is one of the world's most famous women .
 Agnes' mother, Drana, kept house and looked after Agnes, her sister, and her brother . Her father was a grocer, and Drana kept house . Agnes was born in a family home in London .
 Her family is of Albanian origin but practiced the Gatholic religion, instead of Islam . Her family practiced the religion of most Albanian people, not Islam . She was born in Albania .
 Agnes’s father traveled a great deal, was multilingual, and was a member of the community council . Agnes's father was a multilingual member of a community council, Agnes' father was also multilingual .
 He died suddenly in 1919, leaving the family dependent upon Drana’s work as a seamstress . Drana's husband died in 1919 .
 A devout Catholic, Drana Bojaxhiu educated her children in the Catholic faith and charitable activities . She was also a devout Catholic .
 Mother Teresa of India receiving the Medal of Freedom in Washington, D.C., at the White House . Mother Teresa received the award for her efforts to raise awareness in India .
 Agnes went to an elementary school and later became a member of a sodality, or charitable society, sponsored by the Catholic church . Agnes attended elementary school, attended Catholic school and attended Catholic church school .
 Agnes knew she wanted to become a missionary when she was a teenager . Agnes wanted to be a missionary at the beginning of her life . She has since been married to a woman in a missionary family .
 Several of her older colleagues in the sodality who had gone to Bengal, eastern India, had sent letters back to Skopje, encouraging others to come to Bengal .
 Agnes sent a letter of inquiry to the Loretto community in Ireland whose main missionary work took place in Bengal . Agnes was sent to Ireland to find out about the community .
 Agnes left for Dublin, Ireland, in 1928 . Agnes was a member of the community in Dublin .
 She traveled to Darjeeling, India, to live in a novitiate, or a house provided for nuns who had not yet taken the final vows . From there, she traveled to India, where she lived in a house for nuns .
 Darjeeling, located at the foot of the Himalayas, is a popular tourist destination in India . Agnes Agnes. Agnes was disappointed with the sight of the area but decided to take it on her own .
 She accomplished her goal, which was to take instruction in the monastic life of the Catholic religion . She accomplished .
 She took initial vows as a Loretto sister in 1931, changing her name to Teresa . She chose in honor of the patroness of the missionaries, St. St. Teresa .
 Sister Teresa faced more disappointment after she completed her final vows in 1937 . Sister Teresa's final vows were completed in 1941 .
 Her church sent her to teach high school at Entally, Calcutta . This time, she was sent to teach at a school in the city .
 The school was for daughters of wealthy European and Indian people, not the poor people for whom Sister Teresa desired to work . Sister Teresa wanted to work for the poor, not for poor people .
 Sister Teresa became principal of the school . Her work pleased her superiors, and presumably her students .
 During a train trip back to Darjeeling, the voice of God spoke to her, telling her to leave her convent to live among the poor and to minister to them directly . She had planned a retreat, where she had planned to retreat .
 Sister Teresa received permission from the Order of Loretto to live outside the community . Sister Teresa heeded the call and obtained permission to live elsewhere .
 Wanting to become part of the poor people with whom she wanted to live, she wrote a letter to Rome asking for permission to discard her nun's habit .
 Sister Teresa spent the next three months studying nursing with the American Medical Missionary Sisters . Sister Teresa studied nursing for three months .
 She decided to pursue her own order of sisters, a group of nuns who would eat, dress, and live like the poorest of India’s poor . The nuns would live in the poorest homes of India's poor .
 Britain granted India, its former colony, full independence in 1947 . The newly independent nation was rocked immediately by clashes between Hindus and Muslims .
 The rift between the Muslim League and the Hindu-dominated Congress intensified . The Muslim League’s demand for an autonomous state in Pakistan intensified with the demand for autonomous state .
 At midnight on August 15,1947, India and Pakistan became separate and sovereign nations . At midnight, India became a nation of Pakistan .
 Estimates place the death toll resulting from violence over the partitioning at more than 500,000 . The death toll is thought to be more than half the total death toll from violence .
 The world's most populous democracy, Indian society has been rocked by various religious clashes, mostly between Hindus and Muslims, which often turn violent . The world’s most populous country, India, has a history of religious clashes .
 Much of India’s fast-growing population is impoverished, with 36 percent of the population living below the national poverty line in 1994 .
 Sister Teresa believed that it was up to the church to offset the extreme poverty existing in India . She became convinced that only through hands-on work could the poverty be alleviated .
 In October 1950, Pope Paul VI gave his approval and the Congregation of the Missionaries of Charity was born . The Congregation was born in October 1950 . The Missionaries were the first women to become a Missionaries .
 Pope Paul VI gave Mother Teresa a limousine that had been donated by an American Catholic group for use by the pope at the Eucharistic Congress in Bombay, India .
 The raffle netted $64,000, money that Mother Teresa used to open a home for lepers . The money was used to help open a new home for the lepers in the U.S.
 The work of Mother Teresa and her community soon became known throughout the world . Mother Teresa's work was the work of her community in her home country .
 Several world leaders have bestowed honors upon her, including the John F Kennedy International Award, the Jawaharlal Nehru Award, and the Nobel Peace Prize .
 Biographers who interviewed Mother Teresa were continually struck by her reticence to share information about her own life . Mother Teresa would not reveal details of her life .
 She often answered personal questions briefly, then changed the subject to her work instead . She often answers personal questions about her work .
 Corazon Aquino was elected the first woman president of the Philippines in 1986 . After upsetting Marcos in 1986, she upset Marcos and became the first female president .
 By creating and instituting a new constitution, Aquino ended the long period of dictatorship in the island nation . But her government was unable to effect other social changes .
 Aquino’s rise to power is a complicated one, involving the history of the Philippines, a nation of 54 million people living on 7,000 islands in the Pacific Ocean . Aquino is a former President of Philippines .
 Like many female politicians, Corazon Aquino became involved in politics after her husband, Benigno Simeon Aquino, died in 1983 . She became involved into politics after his death .
 Both husband and wife opposed the regime of Ferdinand Marcos, president and dictator . Marcos' wife Imelda opposed the Marcos regime . Marcos controlled the armed forces, national finances, and press .
 For the duration of his rule, his opposition floundered, weak and divided . The opposition to his rule of power has been a problem for the past two decades .
 The Aquinos married in 1954, after Corazon finished her education at Mount St. Mary's . Corazon and her husband were born in 1945 .
 Benigno Aquino entered politics after their marriage . He was the youngest mayor, governor, and senator to serve in the Philippines . He is married to the current president of Philippines .
 Marcos declared martial law in 1972 and had Benigno Aquino arrested and imprisoned . In an attempt to quiet opposition, Marcos declared Martial Law in 1972 . Marcos declared the law in a bid to silence opposition .
 In 1983, Benigno Aquino returned to the Philippines, in order to support the opponents of Marcos . He returned in 1983 to support opposition to Marcos' regime .
 Corazon Aquino flew immediately to Manila to arrange his funeral and to continue his work in the next legislative election . The former President of the Philippines will be buried in his hometown .
 A group of Catholic business leaders and intellectuals gathered to find an opponent to Ferdinand Marcos in the next presidential election . Meanwhile, a group of business leaders gathered to look for an opponent .
 This group of conservative reformers knew that Cory Aquino was the only Marcos opponent with wide appeal . The Aquino administration knew that the Marcos opponent had wide appeal. This is not the first time the Aquino government has been criticized by conservatives .
 "As the widow of a political hero, and as a mother and a Catholic, she had a certain moral authority and personal integrity," says Hillary Clinton . "She had a moral authority," says Clinton .
 She had close ties to the United States, a nation that still maintained a military base in the Philippines . The Philippines still has a close relationship with the U.S.
 Because she was a woman, it was assumed that she lacked personal ambition . Finally, because she was . assumed that . she lacked . personal ambition, she was assumed . to lack personal ambition.
 In fact, she intended to lead a people’s revolution in the Philippines, in which conservative reforms would help strengthen democracy, she says . She says she wanted conservative reforms to strengthen democracy in the country . The Philippines is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Most Filipinos knew that much of the voting would not be legitimate, and they were right . Most of the Philippines knew that many Filipinos would not vote in the 2016 elections .
 Ferdinand Marcos declared himself the victor despite Corazon Aquino’s obvious immense popularity with the people . Ferdinand Marcos, in ill health, declared himself . Despite his ill-health, he declared himself a victor .
 Upon Marcos’s inauguration on February 25, 1986, the people reacted by taking to the streets, declaring a People's Power Revolution . Marcos was the first president of the Philippines to be elected to power .
 When the military threw its support to Aquino, Ferdinand Marcos fled to Hawaii, where he remained until his death in 1989 . Marcos remained in Hawaii until he died in 1989, when he was assassinated .
 Her goals were to restore democracy and free enterprise to the Philippines, she said . She said she wanted to restore free enterprise and democracy in the Philippines .
 She replaced Marcos’s appointees with popularly elected officials, put an end to martial law, and instituted a new constitution . To accomplish this, she replaced Marcos's appointees . She replaced many of his appointees, including those who were elected officials .
 The new constitution reaffirmed many of the principles of the Philippines’ first constitution written in 1935 . It was aimed at avoiding another Marcos. The constitution was written in the Philippines' first constitution .
 The Philippines limited the presidency to one six-year term and restricted the president’s powers to overrule Congress and impose martial law . The Philippines also limited the president's power to impose a state of martial law and impose a curfew .
 The Communist Parry no longer posed a threat to the government, and human rights abuses by the military and police declined . Human rights abuses have declined .
 Aquino barely survived six military coups—attempts to take down her presidency . Yet Aquino survived six coups and survived six attempts to topple her .
 Despite human rights gains, her term failed to effect any real change . And despite human rights, she was not able to achieve any real changes .
 The enormous problem of poverty, rooted, in part, in the extreme disparity between the wealthy and the poor, did not end during the Aquino presidency . The problem is rooted, part of the poverty, does not end in part .
 Lack of educational and economic opportunities also made poverty and social injustices worse in the Philippines . Lack of education and economic opportunity also contributed to poverty and injustices .
 Sadly, the high hopes of the People’s Power Revolution did not continue under President Corazon Aquino . Sadly, high hopes for the People's Power Revolution continued under President Aquino did not .
 Aquino did insure that military dictatorships in the Philippines could be successfully opposed, and defeated . But Aquino was not a dictator, but a dictator .
 Sri Lankan prime minister Bandaranaike became the first female prime minister in the world in 1960 . She was Sri Lanka's first woman prime minister .
 Sri Lanka rejected its colonial past and became a nation with a new name and a new political identity . During her term, she rejected her colonial past .
 Sri Lanka, an island nation located off the southern tip of the Indian subcontinent, had been a British crown colony called Ceylon since 1802 . The island nation is now Sri Lanka .
 Sri Lanka's two largest ethnic groups are the majority Sinhalese and the Tamil, who have ties to groups living in southern India . The two largest groups of people live in Sri Lanka and Sri Lanka .
 Ceylon became an independent dominion and member of the British Commonwealth in 1948 . Ceylon has a parliamentary system modeled after that of that of Great Britain, headed by a prime minister .
 Sirimavo Bandaranaike's husband formed the SLFP in 1951 . The SLFP championed traditional culture and the eradication of Western influences . The party was formed by her husband, a former local government official .
 The 1956 elections swept the SLFP into power, with Solomon Bandaranaike becoming prime minister . The SLFP was elected to power in 1956 .
 He replaced English with Sinhala as the official language; he terminated the British military presence on the island . He declared Ceylon to be neutral in the global power struggle between communist and capitalist nations .
 Bandaranaike was at home raising her children and avoiding direct political involvement . Meanwhile, Benazir Bhutto was avoiding direct involvement with the government .
 Sirimavo was born on April 17, 1916, in Ratnapura, Ceylon . He was born in 1916 to Barnes Ratwatte Dissawa and Mahawalatenna Kumarihamy .
 St. Bridget’s, in the capital city of Colombo, remained a practicing Buddhist .
 When Solomon Bandaranaike declared Sinhala the national language, the policy enraged the Tamils, and tensions between the two ethnic groups increased .
 Compromises enabled the Tamils to retain their language in areas in the north and east of the island, where they formed a majority .
 Sirimavo's leadership in the SLFP bore seed; the parry won a majority in Parliament, and Bandaranaike became the first woman prime minister .
 She mediated an end to the India/China border conflict of 1962, when China invaded India and occupied its northeast provinces . She was also involved in the 1962 border conflict between India and China .
 Bandaranaike credited with working out a solution with Indian prime minister Lai Bahadur Shastri regarding the political status of Indian-born plantation workers in Ceylon . Most of the workers had been disenfranchised after Ceylon’s independence from Britain .
 Sirimavo-Shastri Pact conferred either Ceylonese or Indian citizenship on workers on a proportionate basis . The pact was ratified by the Indian Council of States of India .
 Bandaranaike’s economic policy called for the nationalization of the American and British oil companies operating in Ceylon . Bandareanaike's economic policy was to nationalize the companies .
 Bandaranaike’s government fell, and in the 1965 elections she lost her position . She was forced to resign as a result of the fall .
 She retained her leadership within the SLFP, however, and in 1970, she regained the position of prime minister .
 Bandaranaike implemented other socialist measures, such as the nationalization of tea plantations, and restricted the amount of land held under private ownership .
 He set up a commission to investigate charges of nepotism against Sirimavo Bandaranaike when she was prime minister . The commission was set up to look into allegations of corruption against her .
 She had named herself minister of planning and economic affairs, and of defense and external affairs .
 Her nephew, sons, and daughter also held government posts during her term . Her nephews, sons and daughters were also in government posts .
 As a result of the inquiry, Bandaranaike lost her civic rights for seven years . The inquiry was conducted by the Sri Lankan government .
 Prime Minister Jayawardene had amended the constitution to create the new, more powerful office of president, to which he was elected . The constitution has been amended to create a more powerful presidency .
 In 1994, Chandrika Kumaratunge was elected president, and she appointed her mother prime minister . Chandrika was appointed prime minister in 1994 . Her daughter Chandrika appointed her as president .
 Sri Lanka hosted an appearance by the U.S. First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton . Kumaratunge purposely left Bandaranaike out of the formal reception for the event .
 Kumaratunge also moved the island toward privatization, rejecting the policies instituted by her mother .
 Sirimavo Bandaranaike died on October 10, 2000, moments after casting her vote in the 2000 parliamentary elections in Sri Lanka .
 In 1501, she instituted two new professorships of divinity at Oxford and Cambridge, and completed the endowment of Christ’s College at Cambridge .
 Margaret Beaufort was born on May 31, 1443 . She was the daughter of John Beaufort, first duke of Somerset and great grandson of King Edward III . Margaret was carefully educated by her mother, Margaret St. St. John .
 Rumors circulated that John Beaufort had died by his own hand, after disastrous military campaigns in France . Rumors of his death were circulated that he died by the death of his father .
 Margaret had a claim to the throne as long as King Henry VI remained childless . Margaret was born in 16th century England . She was the last monarch to be childless and ruled over for three decades .
 The duke of Suffolk knew this and had Margaret Beaufort married at the age of seven to his son (only a year older than she) to intertwine his family with a contender to the throne . Margaret was only seven when she was married to her son .
 Under law, Margaret could refuse to ratify the union, which she ultimately did . Margaret could also refuse to accept the union .
 When Margaret Beaufort turned 10, her mother was commanded to bring the girl to court . Margaret was ordered to bring her to court by her mother .
 King Henry VI ordered that his ‘well-beloved cousin Margaret’ be paid a hundred marks for dresses . The allowance was four times the income of a well-to-do squire . King Henry VIII must have been impressed by his generosity .
 On May 12, 1453, the king gave her as a ward to his half-brother Edmund Tudor, commanding that he marry her . The queen died in 1453 . She was given to Edmund's half-sister, who was in charge of Edmund's family .
 Margaret gave birth to their son, Henry Tudor, later Henry VII, in 1457 . Margaret was married to Henry VIII, Henry VII .
 Lord Stafford died in 1471, leaving Margaret Beaufort widowed once again . Lord Stafford was married to Lord Beaufort's wife .
 In 1472, Margaret married her fourth husband, Thomas, Lord Stanley . She was not yet 30 when she married him . She died in 1472 .
 Lord Stanley was instrumental in bringing about an end to the War of the Roses . Lord Stanley helped end the war of Roses in England .
 The Lancastrian monarch, Henry VI, was constantly challenged by the duke of York and his supporters in southern England . Henry VI's reign was ended by the death of his son, Henry VIII .
 Richard III's brother and successor was Richard III . His reign saw the growth of support for the exiled Lancastrian Henry Tudor, Margaret Beaufort .
 Henry Tudor ruled as Henry VII, the first of the new Tudor dynasty that would remain until 1603 . Henry VII was Henry VII of the Tudors, who ruled until 1602 .
 To end the fighting, Henry VII married Elizabeth of York, daughter of Edward IV, uniting the two former opponents . Henry VII's marriage to Elizabeth unifies the two ex-royalties .
 Parliament declared Margaret Beaufort a “femme sole,” giving her the right to hold property in her name and sue in the courts, regardless of her husband . No other married woman in England had that right .
 Johannes Gutenberg invented the printing press in mid-century, making the written word more readily available to a more literate population . Gutenberg invented printing presses in Germany in the 17th century . Gutenberg's printing press was the first machine to print the word .
 Upon Caxton's death, Wynkyn de Worde took over Caxton’s business, printing several devotional books for Margaret . The Mirroure ofGolde for the sinful soule was translated from the French .
 Margaret Beaufort took a vow of chastity in 1499, with her husband’s consent . A vigorously religious woman, she took the vow with the consent of her husband .
 She endowed Christ’s College with a master, 12 fellows, and 47 scholars . She gave the college a master .
 The Wars of the Roses Through the Lives of Five Men and Women of the Fifteenth Century . Through the lives of five men and women of the 15th Century .
 General Mohammad Zia ul-Haq deposed and hanged Zulfikar Ali Bhutto in 1979 . General Mohammad ul-haq was the president of Pakistan at the time, General Mohammad . Zia had been the prime minister of the country .
 After her father’s assassination, Benazir Bhutto took over the leadership position of the PPP and struggled to reinstate a democratic government in Pakistan . She struggled to re-establish the democratic government after her father's assassination .
 Bhutto illustrates the difficulty of maintaining an official state religion --Islam—while insisting on reinstituting the human rights that Muslim extremists have tried to eliminate . Bhuttto: "Islam is the religion of Pakistan, but it is not the religion to be a state religion"
 Pakistan emerged when India was partitioned amid conflicts between Hindus and Muslims in 1947 . The nation of Pakistan emerged from India when it was split in 1947 amid religious conflicts .
 Pakistan’s government vacillates between nationalization of economy and free enterprise . Since then, Pakistan has vacillated between a secular state and religious fundamentalism .
 President Zia instituted shari’a, or the Islamic code of law, in Pakistan in the 1980s . Zia introduced shari'a to Pakistan in 1980s, including harsh punishments meted out for crimes .
 Theft, for example, resulted in the amputation of the perpetrator’s limb, and drinking alcohol brought 80 lashes with a whip . Drinking alcohol brought up to 80 lashes .
 Bhutto was born on June 21, 1953, in Karachi, Pakistan’s largest city . He was educated at Radcliffe College in the U.S. and was educated in Karachi .
 She became the first Asian woman elected to Oxford Union, a prestigious debating society . She was elected to the debating society by Oxford University .
 Her focus of study was comparative politics, a fitting course for a woman planning a career as a foreign diplomat . She studied comparative politics at the University of Cambridge .
 While Benazir Bhutto was growing up, she and her family had always assumed that she would eventually work in her father’s government . She had always hoped to work in the government .
 President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto’s widow and daughter were placed under martial law . Benazir and Begum Nusrat are placed under house arrest, and martial law was declared .
 Zia's actions only served to invigorate Benazir Bhutto's determination to redeem her father’s legacy . Zia was the prime minister of Pakistan in the 1970s and 1980s .
 In 1984, she underwent self-exile in Europe, where, like Cristina TRIVULZIO a century earlier, she began generating support for her cause by exposing the human rights abuses occurring in Zia's Pakistan .
 Zia ended martial law in 1985, and Bhutto returned to Pakistan a few months later . Zia's military rule was followed by a national referendum that seemed to support his policies .
 She took over the reins of leadership within the PPP, despite a continuing prohibition against any political party organization within Pakistan . She took control of the party in spite of a prohibition against political party organizations .
 Many within the PPP talked of mobilizing a violent overthrow of the Zia regime and instituting a call for new elections . The PPP has called for the overthrow of Zia's regime and the return of elections .
 Bhutto, however, counseled nonviolence, preferring to work through the political system instead of against it . He worked through political system rather than against it, he said . The former prime minister was assassinated in 1992 .
 Zia’s restriction on political organizations, of course, made this difficult to do . Zia's restrictions on political groups made it difficult to get involved in politics, he says .
 Bhutto wanted to institute a representative government in Pakistan, not just more elections, says Zulfar Hussain . He says the prime minister wanted to create a more representative government . Hussain: "Bhutto's government is not just elections, it's a democracy"
 Bhutto pushed the PPP to develop its own constituent base within Pakistani politics . Bhuttto pushed for the party to develop a constituent base in Pakistan politics .
 In 1988, President Zia died in a plane crash that was believed to have been caused by a bomb . Bhutto’s work paid off in 1988 when Zia's plane crash was thought to be an accident .
 In elections held that year, the PPP won more seats in Parliament, although not a clear majority . The PPP was elected to a majority in parliament, but did not win a majority .
 Bhutto established a goal of reducing the aspects of sharia that infringed upon basic human rights . Bhuttto established an end to sharia laws that infringe upon basic rights .
 She knew she must find a middle ground between religious reform and the secularization of Muslim society . She said she wanted to find the middle ground .
 She could not afford to alienate the religious elements within Pakistan society that had ensured her victory . However, she could not . afford to . alienate religious elements in Pakistan society . She was not alone in Pakistan's political divide .
 The Soviets invaded Afghanistan in an effort to save its communist government . The Soviets had invaded the country in a bid to save the communist government.
 The war created some two or three million refugees, who flooded into Pakistan and requested shelter and aid . The refugees are now living in Pakistan .
 In the increasingly harsh economic climate Bhutto struggled mightily to keep religious and military elements satisfied . In the 1980s, Bhuttto struggled to find a way to keep the religious elements happy .
 In the end, she was able to pass few of the reforms that she had hoped to institute . The end of her bid to pass the reforms was in vain .
 However, Bhutto succeeded in restoring fundamental human rights in Pakistan . However, he failed to restore fundamental rights .
 She released political prisoners, lifted restrictions on the press, and reinstated the right to organize and assemble for political causes . She also lifted the restrictions on political prisoners and lifted the press restrictions .
 She argued for greater privatization of the economy . Departing from her socialist father’s policies, she argued for more privatization . Her father's policies include greater privatization .
 In August 1990, President Khan accused Bhutto of corruption and nepotism and dismissed her from office . President Khan, with the support of the military, accused her of corruption .
 In October elections, Nawaz Sharif, leader of the Islamic Democratic Alliance, a coalition that included the fundamentalist Pakistan Muslim League, and an industrialist, became the next PM .
 In 1996, President Farooq Leghari accused her government of corruption, and she was again removed from office . However, in 1996, she was accused of corruption and removed again in 1996 .
 Asif Ali Zadari, whom she had married in 1987, was imprisoned for allegedly arranging the murder of Benazir’s brother Murtaza . He was imprisoned in 1987 for allegedly arranged to arrange the murder .
 Benazir told reporters that election fraud explained the PPP’s defeat . Meanwhile, still convinced of her and her party's popularity, she said election fraud was a factor .
 Bhutto’s political fortunes depend on the religious climate in Pakistan as much as on the political climate . While the charge may be true, it seems that it may not be true . It seems that religious climate is more important than political climate in the country as well .
 Most women could not participate in the advances of the Renaissance period, for European culture remained, in general, intensely patriarchal, as well as elitist . Most women were not allowed to participate in European culture .
 During the Renaissance, Italy was still an amalgam of papal states, duchies, kingdoms, and republics . During the 16th century, the nation we know today as Italy was a state that was still a papal state .
 Each political unit had its urban center with surrounding productive farmland . The urban center was the urban center of each political unit's urban center .
 Rivalries between heads of states intensified when one prince or duke created an alliance with another ruler, sometimes foreign ruler . The alliance was created in an effort to best his foes .
 Conflicts between ruling families at times ended in murder, a method of undercutting one’s enemy not unfamiliar to the Borgia family . The Borgia had a history of using murder as a means of cutting off enemies .
 Political assassination ended the competition between two rivals, but new alliances were often created through marriage .
 Lucrezia Borgia became a pawn in her family’s power politics . By succumbing to the unions arranged by her father, Rodrigo Borgia, she became a political pawn .
 Rodrigo Borgia never considered who might make a good husband for his daughter . The purpose of the marriage was political, not economic, and certainly not romantic . Borgia's marriage was not romantic, Borgia says .
 Rodrigo Borgia’s cousin, the widow Adriana DaMila, raised Borgia's children . The widow of Borgia and her children were raised by her cousin . Borgia died in 2011 at the age of 92 .
 Lucrezia, born on April 18, 1480, in Rome, lived in a palace in Rome and was educated at the convent of St. St. Mary's . She was born in 1480 .
 Rodrigo Borgia began using his daughter to create alliances when she was 11 years old . Borgia's daughter was 11 when she began using her father's power to gain alliances .
 Rodrigo Borgia arranged a marriage between Lucrezia and the lord of Val d’Argora of Valencia, Spain, across the Mediterranean Sea from Italy . Rodrigo and his son, Cesare Borgia, arranged the marriage . Rodrigo was the son of the Spanish lord of the Val
 Rodrigo decided that an alliance with the 15-year-old Don Gaspare, son of Count Averse in the Kingdom of Naples, would better suit his needs . The contract that was drawn up between the two families was annulled two months later .
 Rodrigo's contract was also annulled when he got a better offer from the Sforza family of Milan . Rodrigo signed a three-year contract with AC Milan, but his contract was cancelled . The former AC Milan star has been linked with a move to AC Milan from Inter Milan
 Giovanni Sforza was lord of Pesaro, a small, insignificant fishing village along the Adriatic Sea, was 27 at the time . He was 27 when he died .
 Borgias hoped to increase their influence by building a relationship with the growing power of the Milanese Sforzas . The Borgias wanted to build a stronger influence in Italy . Borgias were assassinated by the assassination of the Sforza in 1777 .
 Lucrezia Anally approached the altar in 1493 . This time, the agreement went forward, and the deal went forward . Lucrezian Anally was assassinated in 1492 .
 During the Renaissance, the papacy ceased to be the universal center of Christianity and had become, instead, a grand prize to be won by aristocratic Italian families . During the 16th century, papacy was a prize for aristocratic families .
 The popes of the Renaissance, being political heads of states, were deeply involved in secular affairs . Popes were involved in the secular affairs of their statesmen .
 The Catholic Church acknowledged the need for reform within the church, but it would take the Protestant Reformation to put actual reforms in motion .
 The wedding between Lucrezia Borgia and Giovanni Sforza, a bawdy affair, illustrated the material excesses of the Renaissance papacy . Borgia's wedding between the Borgia-Sforza wedding illustrated the Material excesses .
 During the wedding feast, the pope and other religious leaders were seen throwing food down the low-cut bodices of the bride’s attendees . The pope and others were seen tossing food at the wedding .
 Not long after the wedding, Gesare Borgia began plotting to rid the family of Giovanni Sforza, having become captivated once again by Naples’ power and prestige .
 Gesare Borgia claimed that Sforza was impotent, and that the marriage had not been consummated . Borgia also claimed that Borgia had been impotent . The marriage did not consummate .
 In the end, in exchange for keeping his wife’s dowry, Sforza signed a confession to the charge of impotence . In the case, he kept the dowry .
 Lucrezia’s next husband was 17-year-old Alfonso of Aragon, the illegitimate son of the king of Naples . Alfonso was Alfonso's illegitimate son, the son of Naples king of the Naples .
 Cesare fled his marital bed when rumors circulated that Cesare was plotting his demise . He fled the marital bed after rumors of Cesare being plotting his own demise . Cesare had fled his wife of more than a decade .
 Alfonso Alfonso was strangled by Cesare’s hired assassin . Cesare was killed by Alfonso's assassin before he could escape . Alfonso died at the hands of Cesare's assassin .
 A period of relative tranquillity ensued when Lucrezia became her father’s secretary, until a new alliance could be arranged . The Queen's daughter is now her father's secretary, and her son is the heir to the throne .
 Lucrezia's next husband turned out to be her best and longest lasting partner . The couple were married for more than 20 years . Lucrezie's husband was her best friend .
 Cesare Borgia wanted to conquer the Romagna region, in north central Italy . He needed an alliance with the duke of Ferrara, whose lands lay adjacent to the coveted territory . Borgia was assassinated in 14th century .
 Lucrezia, for her part, wanted this marriage hadly because it would keep her far away from her brother and her father . She wanted it to keep her close to her brother .
 Today, a lock of hair, given to Lucrezia by Bembo, is displayed at the Ambrosian Library in Milan .
 Alfonso d’Este and Lucrezia Borgia became the duke and duchess of Ferrara in 1505 . After Ercole’s death, Alfonso became Alfonso’este and the Borgia duke . Lucreza Borg
 She became one of Europe’s hrst enlightened despots, using her ability to reason to become a wise ruler of her people .
 She is best known for the cultural improvements she instituted during her reign . She is also known for her efforts to improve the country's economy .
 Her hopes of improving social conditions for peasants were dashed by a revolt . She convinced that power should remain in the hands of the nobility and not be transferred to the peasants .
 Princess Sophie Friederike Auguste was born on May 2, 1729, in Stettin, Prussia (now Szczecin, Poland), to a minor German prince . She was born in 1729 and is believed to have been a princess .
 Her fate was altered when, in 1744, she received an invitation from Empress Elizabeth of Russia to visit the Imperial Court in St. Peterborough .
 Elizabeth made a shrewd calculation when she requested Sophie’s presence . Elizabeth made the decision to invite Sophie to her home .
 Elizabeth wanted to insure that a member of her family remained ruler of Russia . Unmarried, with no heirs, she wanted to ensure that a family member remained ruler . Elizabeth died in 1777 .
 Sophie was Sophie’s cousin and heir to the Russian throne . Her eldest sister had been married to a German duke and given birth to a son, Peter, who was Peter . Sophie's eldest sister was Sophie's sister, Sophie's mother, Sophie .
 Sophie adhered to the Lutheran faith, but Elizabeth sensed that Sophie might be amenable to a conversion to the Russian Orthodox Church . Sophie's mother, Elizabeth, was a Lutheran convert to the Orthodox Church, but Sophie was a Catholic .
 Sophie was related to the Prussian King Frederick the Great . Sophie's family would help Russia cement ties to the powerful Prussian state . Sophie was also related to King Frederick, who died in 1915 .
 Crowned Emperor of Russia, Peter III remained aloof from his rule, preferring to live in his beloved Holstein, a province of Germany . Peter III lived in the Holstein province of Holstein .
 He aroused hostility among his government and religious leaders when he refused to convert to the Orthodox church . This is more evidence of his indifference toward his position .
 Sophie and her lover, Orlov, plotted to remove Peter III from the throne . Sophie and Orlov plotted to take over the throne from Peter III . Orlov was the son of Sophie's lover .
 Other government officials and church leaders also conspired against Peter III, planning to place son Paul on the throne with Sophie acting as regent until Paul reached adulthood . Sophie acted as a regent for the prince until he reached adulthood, according to reports .
 Catherine II placed Peter under house arrest, changed her name to Catherine II, and declared herself empress of Russia . With the help of Orlov, she rallied the military to her support . Catherine II was the first female Russian empress to become empress .
 Catherine II made plans to reform the Russian government, enhance Russia’s status in the world, and gain more territory for her adopted country . Catherine II secured her position after securing her position in Russia .
 She had already been learning the Russian language, which enabled her to communicate with government officials . Fortunately, she had already learned the language .
 Unlike her husband, she took her position seriously, and began to study what the great minds of the day had to say about governing a nation . She began studying what the French philosophers Denis Diderot and Francois Voltaire had said .
 Catherine II believed that by using her ability to reason, a wise and benevolent ruler could ensure the well-being of the people . Taking cues from her relative Frederick the Great of Prussia, Catherine II became an “enlightened despot”
 Enlightenment ideas influenced later governments, including the U.S. and France . Enlightenment ideas were influential in later governments .
 Inspired by Montesquieu, a French philosopher, she composed a pamphlet called “The Instruction” intended to guide lawmakers as they reformed the legal system . She composed ‘The Instruction,’ a pamphlet intended to help lawmakers .
 "The Instruction" called for changes that would not take place until centuries later . Distributed throughout Europe, “The Instruction’s” call for changes .
 Catherine II wanted the law to provide equal protection for all people, not just those of the upper classes . Catherine II also wanted to protect the poor from discrimination . The law was passed by Catherine II in 1903 .
 She emphasized prevention of criminal acts instead of harsh punishments . Her idea was well ahead of her time, and she was ahead of herself .
 The lawmakers responsible for making changes to the legal system, however, took few of her suggestions . Lawmakers responsible for changing the law passed few changes .
 During the time of Catherine II’s reign, Russia was a feudal society in which peasants, or serfs, were forced to farm lands owned by the nobility . Catherine II's reign was the beginning of the Russian Revolution .
 She had plans to grant the serfs more freedoms, but a revolt by the peasants soon changed her mind . She had planned to grant serfs greater freedoms but the peasants revolted .
 A military man named Yemelyan Pugachov instigated a rebellion in the remote southern territory of Russia . The rebellion took place in the southern part of Russia's southern region .
 Pugachov led the peasants to believe that he would depose Catherine II and help them gain their own land and more freedoms . The peasants were led to believe he was deposed Catherine II .
 Several imperial expeditions were required to quell the rebellion . Pugachov was finally captured in 1774 .
 Catherine concluded that the best safeguard against rebellion was to strengthen the hand of the nobility, rather than take measures to improve conditions for the serfs .
 Freedom for the serfs was one reform that the empress failed to implement . Freedom for serfs is one reform . The empress's failure to implement the reform was one of many reforms .
 Catherine II also wanted to improve Russia’s reputation elsewhere in the world . Catherine II wanted Russia to improve its reputation abroad . She wanted to make Russia's reputation abroad better .
 Russia boosted its economic standing by lifting restrictions on commerce and encouraging trade with other nations . The move is aimed at boosting Russia’s status .
 The empress also encouraged the settlement of remoter parts of Russia, thereby improving trade conditions in those areas . She encouraged settlement of remote areas to improve trade conditions .
 While she reigned, Catherine II claimed parts of Poland and Turkey as Russian territory . While she was in power, she claimed the territory of Poland, Turkey and Poland .
 The Turkish warm-water port on the Black Sea was an especially significant acquisition, because ships from Mediterranean ports could bring trade goods to Russian markets all year round .
 Catherine II was named Catherine the Great for her ability to increase Russia’s land, and for her improvements in Russian culture, Catherine II . Catherine II is now known as Catherine of Great .
 The Egyptian Queen Cleopatra has intrigued centuries of poets, playwrights, and filmmakers with her cunning ability to use her sexuality as a weapon in her campaign to establish her adopted homeland as the center of power in the Mediterranean .
 Cleopatra had spent her life gaining the confidence of her people and trying to fortify her position as Egyptian ruler . The tragic way her life ended is the tragic way she died, after she had spent a life gaining confidence .
 Cleopatra’s ancestors hailed from Macedon, a powerful but small nation north of Greece . The queen's ancestors are believed to have been from the small nation of Macedon .
 She ruled Egypt jointly with her father, Ptolemy XII Auletes, and, after his death, with her brother Ptolemmy XIII, whom she also married, .
 After her brothers died, she began to seek other men who could help her retain, and strengthen, her hold on the throne .
 Cleopatra knew that she would also need the loyalty of the people she ruled . The Egyptian queen knew she would need loyalty to her people .
 She declared herself to be the daughter of the Sun God Re, and learned the Egyptian language . She was the only one of the Ptolemaic rulers to speak Egyptian .
 Cleopatra’s reign continued to grow in strength and influence in the Mediterranean world . Egypt continued to be the most powerful state in the region . Cleopsatra ruled Egypt until her death in 2003 .
 The Roman Empire, which had been the cultural center of the world, began losing power . Roman Empire was losing power in the early years .
 Cleopatra became involved in power struggles between Roman and Egyptian rulers . She was trying to maintain her own strength as Egypt’s ruler . She became involved with the Roman rulers, while at the same time trying to keep herself strong .
 Julius Caesar consolidated his mastery of the Mediterranean by claiming Egypt as part of his Roman Empire . With his rival dead, Julius Caesar claimed Egypt as a Roman Empire in Egypt .
 When Caesar came to Alexandria, Egypt, in 48 B.C.E., Cleopatra persuaded him to support her cause . She was able to retain her position on the Egyptian throne . When Caesar was in Alexandria, he supported her .
 She accompanied Caesar to Rome later that year, though he spent little time with her there . With her consort Ptolemy XIV maintaining rule at home, she accompanied him .
 Her presence in Rome irritated Roman officials, which may have contributed to his assassination in 44 B.C.E. by a group of Roman senators . She may have angered Roman officials and contributed to the resentment against him .
 Cleopatra became involved with Mark Antony for the same reason that she allied with Julius Caesar . She wanted to maintain her leadership position in Egypt, and needed a powerful man to help her accomplish this goal . She allied with Antony because she wanted to remain in Egypt .
 She also wanted control over other parts of the Roman Empire, for herself and for her children, to ensure continuation of Ptolemaic rule of Egypt . She wanted control of Egypt and other areas of Roman Empire .
 Cleopatra financed Mark Antony’s ambitious campaigns to conquer eastern territories for Rome, most of which failed . Cleopsatra financed the campaigns that failed, including those which failed to reach eastern territories .
 In 34 B.C.E., she and Mark Antony handed over eastern provinces, as well as portions of the east that Rome expected to conquer . She and Antony held a ceremony in which he handed over the provinces .
 Antony replied that he was simply sharing Rome’s conquests with its clients . Antony: "I'm sharing Rome's conquests and its clients"
 In truth, he was hoping to establish Egypt as the new seat of power in the Roman Empire . The Egyptian king wanted Egypt to become the new centre of power . Egypt was the birthplace of the Roman empire .
 Augustus Caesar regarded Antony's growing power within Egypt as a threat to his own position and to the ascendancy of Rome . Antony was married to Augustus’s sister .
 He waged a successful propaganda campaign against Mark Antony and the Egyptian queen . He persuaded the Roman Senate that Antony spent his time in Egypt in idle frivolity .
 Augustus Caesar defeated Antony’s army at the Battle of Actium in western Greece . The battle took place in Actium, the birthplace of the Roman Roman Empire .
 Antony and Cleopatra fled back to Alexandria, but Augustus Caesar followed them . Augustus Caesar was Augustus Caesar, who followed them back .
 On August 30, 30 B.C.E.E., the two committed suicide, she by snakebite . Rather than face humiliation, the pair committed suicide .
 Cleopatra’s name is synonymous with sexual allure, intrigue, and opportunism . Perhaps more than any other woman in the ancient world, her name has been synonymous with sex allure .
 William Shakespeare depicted Cleopatra as a tragic woman with personal and nationalist ambitions that had ultimately failed . William Shakespeare’s play Antony and Cleopatatra depicted the tragic woman . The play is set to be shown in London next week on BBC2 .
 Cleopatra is a historical figure who was also a powerful figure in the Roman Empire . But the legend of the historical figure must also be contrasted with the historical character, says the historian .
 The legends about Cleopatra, spread by her enemies, served to raise questions about her ability to rule . The Egyptians themselves never doubted her competence or her loyalty to them .
 This more favorable view of Cleopatra must be tempered by the fact that throughout history women’s sexuality was often the only means by which they could achieve their goals . Throughout history, women's sexuality often was the only way by way of achieving their goals.
 Elizabeth I was one of the few European women who ruled effectively without help from either a father or a husband . Elizabeth I ruled without the help of either father or husband .
 When Anne gave birth to a daughter, Elizabeth, the king accused her of adultery . They were secretly married but Anne was accused of adultery by the king . Anne and Elizabeth were later married .
 Anne Boleyn faced the chopping block herself when her daughter was only three years old . A court declared the marriage void, and a court declared it void . The queen faced the chop block herself herself when she was just three .
 Parliament reinstated her legitimacy, and Elizabeth’s place in line for the throne was restored . Elizabeth was restored to the throne in March 2012 .
 Elizabeth's Catholic half sister, Queen Mary I, accused Protestant Elizabeth of rallying to the Protestant cause . Soon, however, her Catholic half-sister Mary I accused Protestant Queen Elizabeth of supporting the Catholic cause . Elizabeth's Protestant half sister Mary I was also accused of supporting her Protestant cause
 Only the excellent education she received brightened Elizabeth’s otherwise dismal childhood . Elizabeth was only the child to brighten her childhood .
 She learned French, Greek, Latin, and Italian . She also had instruction in math and science .
 The languages served her well in foreign policy matters when she did ascend the throne upon the death ofMary I in 1558 .
 The religious differences that had caused rifts between sisters Elizabeth and Mary I mirrored those of the rest of English society . Elizabeth's religious differences with Mary's sister Elizabeth and Elizabeth's sister Mary I .
 England experienced a dramatic swing toward Protestantism under Edward VI and an equally strong backlash during Mary’s reign . England had experienced a strong backlash against Mary's reign .
 Elizabeth found middle ground between the two faiths, becoming the only English ruler capable of resolving the religious issue . Elizabeth was the only monarch capable of solving religious issues .
 First, she needed to convince Parliament that compromise was the only solution . She had to convince them that compromise is the only way to get around .
 Elizabeth faced a Parliament that was equally divided between the Catholic House of Lords and the Protestant House of Commons . Elizabeth faced an equally divided Parliament in the 16th century .
 Negotiations between crown and Parliament resulted in the Church of England . The Church combined a hierarchical Catholic structure with a Protestant creed .
 By law, all Englishmen were required to attend the Church of England . But by law, they were not required to do so .
 Despite the apparent victory, religious squabbles continued to plague Elizabeth’s reign . Elizabeth's reign ended in 16th century .
 In foreign policy matters, Elizabeth’s councillors had little else in their minds but the question of whom the queen would marry .
 She refused to marry because she simply would not share power with anyone . She refused marriage because she would not be able to share power .
 Marrying any of her royal suitors would have created a perception of favoritism . Marrying a royal spouse would have been seen as a sign of favorititism .
 By remaining the sole wearer of the crown, she could further her policy of balancing the continental powers against one another .
 This strategy worked fairly well; she kept peace with both France and Spain . This strategy kept her peace with Spain and France .
 Religious problems compromised her position in 1568, when another Mary, this time Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots, brought the Catholic/Protestant conflict again to the fore . In 1568 she became the queen of Scotland .
 Mary, queen of Scots, had been forced to give up the throne in 1568 . The bold and brash Mary was embroiled in a number of love affairs . She was forced to step down from the throne after a series of unsuccessful marriages .
 The following year, a band of Catholic lords led an attempt on Mary’s behalf in northern England . The attempt was led by Catholic lords in the following year .
 The 1570s and ’80s were marked by a series of Catholic plots to overthrow Elizabeth and place Mary of Scotland on the English throne . Elizabeth was overthrown by the Catholic conspirators to overthrow her .
 Spy accused Mary of complicity in assassination plot in 1587, Mary, too, was executed . Mary was also accused of being complicit in an assassination plot by a spy .
 Philip of Spain invaded England in 1588 . The uncertainty of Elizabeth’s reign, in the face of several attempts to unseat her, encouraged the invasion . A series of revolts in Ireland left British nobles richer and Irish natives impoverished .
 The Spanish Armada was defeated offshore, but not before Elizabeth, leading her army and promising to live or die with her soldiers, experienced the most triumphant moment of her reign . Elizabeth's reign ended with a victory in the Battle of the Azerigo .
 Elizabeth presided over her beloved England during its cultural renaissance . Humanist playwrights such as William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe almost enabled the English to forget religious differences .
 The English explorers Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Hawkins expanded English minds . The English explorer was inspired by the work of Sir John Drake .
 The English defeat of the Spanish Armada ensured that Spain would never again rule the seas . The Armada was defeated by the English in 1783 .
 Religious tensions and succession squabbles left Elizabeth’s rule troubled at best at best . On balance, however, religious tensions left her rule at best, though .
 Indira Gandhi held office from 1966 to 1977 and from 1980 until her death . She was the first female prime minister of India . Indira was also the first woman prime minister .
 Two of her bodyguards assassinated her in 1984 . They were members of the Sikh secessionist movement active in the Punjab in northwest India .
 Gandhi brought a fresh perspective to Indian politics, increasing women’s participation in the political process and in government . Gandhi was a democrat and socialist and a socialist .
 Gandhi was born on November 19, 1917, in Allahabad, India . Gandhi was the only child born to Jawaharlal and Kamala Nehru .
 When she was two years old, Mohandas Gandhi visited her family . Gandhi was the pacifist leader of the Indian independence movement .
 Mohandas Gandhi converted Jawaharlal and Kamala Nehru, and their daughter Indira, to the cause of Indian independence from Great Britain . Indira was Indira Gandhi's daughter, Indira Nehru .
 Indira's parents were frequently jailed because of their activism . Their home became the headquarters of the struggle, and Indira’s parents were often jailed . Indira was frequently jailed for her activism .
 Indira attended school in Poona, taking time out to visit her parents, and Mohandas Gandhi, while they were in prison . Indira's parents were in jail .
 Feroze belonged to a small religious group called Parsee that had left Persia centuries earlier to escape Muslim persecution . The group had left the country centuries earlier .
 The Nehrus, members of the Hindu religion and the priestly Brahmin class, looked down upon the Parsees as culturally inferior . The Parsee were considered culturally inferior by the Brahmin caste .
 The couple married, despite protests from Indira’s parents and the public, in 1942 . Indira's parents and public protested against the marriage .
 Indira and Feroze were jailed for 13 months for their participation in the Indian independence movement . Shortly after their wedding, Indira was married to a man who died of a heart attack .
 Indira gave birth to two sons, Rajiv and Sanjay after her release from prison . After her release, Indira became a TV star .
 Nehru's policies focused on establishing democracy and improving living standards in the impoverished nation . Nehru’s policies were aimed at establishing democracy, improving living conditions .
 He gained international recognition for promoting Indian neutrality during the cold war . He advocated nonaggression and an end to atomic weaponry . He was also known for his role in the Indian Civil War .
 His administration was criticized when Indian forces seized Goa and other Portuguese colonial holdings in India . However, he was criticized for his administration during the 18th century .
 Nehru chose Indira to act as a hostess at government functions . Nehru was a widower . Indira was a popular hostess for government functions in India .
 Indira lived in her father’s shadow during his years as prime minister . Indira gradually began forming a political identity of her own .
 Indira and Feroze grew apart during their marriage . Indira never divorced, and they lived separately until Feroz’s death in 1960 .
 When Jawaharlal Nehru died in 1964, Lai Bahadur Shastri succeeded him as prime minister . Jawahar Nehru was prime minister of India from 1964 to 1964 .
 Her victory over Desai was so narrow that she was forced to accept Desai as deputy prime minister . In the 1967 election, she won the election by a narrow margin . Her victory in 1967 election was so close that she accepted Desai's nomination as deputy PM .
 Between 1967 and the next election, when Gandhi beat her opponent by a substantial margin, Gandhi won over the electorate . The next election was the first time she won over her opponent .
 In the realm of foreign policy, however, her achievements came at the cost of a great deal of heartache . In the world of diplomacy, Obama's success came at a great cost .
 Gandhi gave reluctant support to East Bengal’s successful attempt to secede from Pakistan . In 1971, the nonviolent Gandhi supported the East Bengal's successful secession . Gandhi was assassinated in the wake of his assassination in 1971 .
 By 1973, Delhi and North India reeled under demonstrations over high inflation, rampant government corruption, and India’s poor standard of living . Delhi and N. India were reeling under demonstrations .
 The high court of Allahabad ruled against her in 1975, raising the specter of removal from office and being barred from politics . She was then banned from politics and barred from entering politics .
 She then passed a number of unpopular measures, including a program of sterilization as a form of birth control . She also mandated vasectomies for men with families with families of two or more children .
 She planned a gradual political comeback, concentrating her support locally, then nationally . She planned to focus her support on local issues, then national .
 In 1980, she and new party she formed, the Congress I Parry, won the elections for the Lok Sabha (House of the People), the lower house of Parliament, by a large margin .
 During the early 1980s, Gandhi staved off challenges from several Indian states seeking independence from the central government . During the 1970s, the Indian states sought independence from India .
 The most violent threat came from Sikh extremists in the province of Punjab, Punjab, in northern India . Sikh extremists are known for their violent tendencies in Punjab province .
 In June 1984, Gandhi sent the Indian army to the province to drive Sikh guerrillas out . The Indian army was deployed to drive the Sikh guerillas out of the province . Gandhi sent troops to the area in June 1984 .
 On October 31, 1984, while strolling through her garden, Indira Gandhi crumpled from the bullets shot by her Sikh bodyguards . The incident took place in her garden in her native India .
 Indira Gandhi served as an inspiration for women in a culture in which women are generally subservient to men . Indira was a leader of the most populous democracy in the world .
 Egyptian queen Hatshepsut was the second female king in Egyptian history . She was the first female queen in Egypt's history .
 Her reign as Egypt’s king occurred during the New Kingdom . The New Kingdom was during the reunification of the ancient Egyptian empire through the expulsion of foreign invaders .
 Hatshepsut’s rule coincided with a general peace, prosperity, and extended trade throughout the Middle East . The king's rule was one of the most successful monarchs in the region .
 Based on the work of Egypt’s first historian Manetho, modern historians have divided Egyptian history into three major periods known as the Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom, and New Kingdom . The New Kingdom is the third period of Egyptian history .
 Each period was characterized by long-term stability, strong monarchical authority, and impressive intellectual, cultural, and architectural activity . Each period is characterized by strong monarchial authority .
 Lower Egypt includes the Nile Delta at the mouth of the Mediterranean Sea . Upper Egypt includes first and second cataracts (or waterfalls) of the Nile River, the boundaries that mark Egypt’s border with Sudan today .
 From around 1640 B.C.E. much of Egypt was ruled by the Hyksos, a Semitic people from the Levant . They gradually took control of Lower Egypt, which they ruled from their capital at Avaris .
 Upper Egypt remained independent, ruled by the royal dynasty at the city of Thebes . Upper Egypt was ruled by Thebes and ruled by a royal dynasty .
 Hyksos rule made Egypt more open to foreign influences, such as the use of bronze, war chariots, and weapons including the composite bow and scale armor . Egypt was the first to use bronze, chariots and composite bows .
 The Hyksos introduced new crops, new fashions, and new musical instruments . Hykos introduce new crops and musical instruments to the world .
 Lower and Upper Nubia, in presentday Sudan, came under Egyptian control as well, becoming a great source of wealth . Upper and Lower Nubya was also a source of great wealth .
 At the time, a female king, that is, a woman who ruled in her own right, without the help of a man, was practically unheard of in Egyptian history . A female king was virtually unheard of .
 Women's ability to rule Egypt was limited to passing the throne to the next king through marriage . Egypt's women were able to pass on the throne through marriage to the king .
 The royal blood could only be passed down through marriage and procreation by the oldest princess . The oldest princess could pass down the royal blood through marriage .
 A few princesses ruled Egypt through regencies when their sons were too young to rule . Ni-Maat-Heb (3rd dynasty, 2650-2575 B.C.E.), Ankh-Meri-Ra (6th dynasty, 2325-21
 Hatshepsut married her half-brother, Tuthmosis II, son of the son of Tuthtmosis I and a common woman . She ruled jointly with him; she ruled jointly .
 When Tuthmose II died around 1490 B.C.E., after ruling only three years, she became regent . She ruled three years of the reign . She was a common woman and ruled only as a regent of the son of the same king .
 Hatshepsut became an active regent, ruling Egypt as though she were king . She ruled Egypt as she ruled Egypt for more than a decade .
 In fact, she proclaimed herself queen by declaring that the great Egyptian god, Amon-re, had sanctified her and given her divine approval to rule . She declared that she had been sanctified by the god .
 She also ordered expeditions to Punt, a territory in present-day Somalia, southeast of Egypt . She also reinforced her sovereignty by ordering expeditions .
 Courtiers documented the trip by adorning the walls of her temple with hieroglyphic inscriptions depicting images of the Puntites and their queen .
 She had her crew add on to Amon-re’s temple, on which she erected four pink granite obelisks . She had stonecutters carve inscriptions bearing the events of her life .
 She also had a huge memorial temple built at west Thebes in honor of her reign, known as Deir el-Bahri, still considered one of Egypt’s architectural wonders .
 The walls of the walls of her tomb were inscribed with a story detailing the night Amon-re visited the bed of her mother . She had a story written on the walls to tell her story of the night she visited her mother's bed .
 When Hatshepsut died, Tuthmosis III attempted to obliterate her reign as Egypt’s queen . The Egyptian queen died in 2011 .
 He defaced her obelisks by having masons cover them with stone, although he allowed the gilded tops to remain . He allowed masons to cover them up, but allowed them to leave the top .
 Hatshepsut was Egypt’s female ruler . The inscriptions have since been recovered, testimony to her reign . They are part of a series of inscriptions found in Egypt .
 Historians blur the fact that these two Spanish rulers may well exemplify the first equal royal partnership in European history . By referring to the pair as masculine ‘kings,’ however, historians blur the idea .
 King Ferdinand attempted to create a Christian kingdom by expelling all non-Christians from their realm . King Ferdinand tried to create the Christian kingdom . He was forced to leave the kingdom of Ferdinand .
 The queen asked the pope to introduce the Inquisition into Spain in 1478 and waged war against the Spanish Muslims in Granada .
 Spain's financing of the voyage of Christopher Columbus cemented Spain’s preeminence even further . The Spanish royal pair’�s financing of Columbus's voyage cemented their preeminency even further.
 Her father, Juan II of Castile, died when Isabella was three years old . Isabella's father died when she was just three . Her father Juan II died when he was three .
 Her mother, Isabella of Portugal, took her daughter to the court of her halfbrother, Enrique IV, when the young girl reached the age of 13 . Isabella was taken to court by her half-brother Enrique IV when she was 13 .
 When Enrique IV had a daughter, Juana, in 1463, noblemen began squabbling over the question of royal succession . Enrique IV's daughter Juana was the first to be born in Spain .
 Some supported Isabella’s claims on the throne, while others argued that Juana should succeed the king .
 Catholic archbishop Alfonso Carrillo arranged marriage between Isabella and Ferdinand, son of King Juan II of Aragon, to encourage Isabella’s supporters . Ferdinand was located on the French border in the northeast corner of the Iberian Peninsula .
 Some courtiers questioned whether Juana’s father was really Enrique IV . Enrique IV died in 1474, and Isabella wore the Castilian crown upon his death . With the pope's blessing, powerful Castilian nobles backed her claim .
 A civil war erupted between Juana’s supporter, the king of Portugal, Alfonso V, and the Castilian army . Juana was killed in the battle between her supporters and the king .
 Alfonso’s army surrendered at the battle of Toro in 1476, making peace with the royal couple . Alfonso made peace with Alfonso's army at the end of 1476 after the battle .
 Ferdinand succeeded to the throne in Aragon in 1481, formally associating Queen Isabella with his realm . Isabella formally associated with Ferdinand's Aragon kingdom . Ferdinand succeeded in the same year, becoming the king of Aragon .
 With Juana silenced in a convent, Ferdinand and Isabella ruled a united Spain . Juana died in 16th century, Isabella died in 17th century .
 Spain was little more than a union of two crowns represented by a marriage . In truth, "Spain" was little less than a marriage between Spain and Spain .
 Certain events that took place during the reign of Isabella and Ferdinand did, however, serve to create the perception of a unified Spain that would ultimately become reality .
 The first event was the military reconquest of Granada, in the southern part of the Iberian Peninsula, from the Moors, who had conquered the area in the eighth century . Granada was conquered by the Muslims in the 8th century .
 In 1477, Isabella sent a demand to the Moorish king of Granada for renewal of tribute . A sort of fee was paid by the Moors for the privilege of living in the Iberian Peninsula .
 Moorish king sent the ominous message that “we no longer mine gold, only steel,” which, of course, meant weapons . In response to the threat, the king sent an ominous message, the Moorish King sent the message .
 Spanish victory over the Moors was complete as the Spanish victory was complete .
 If they chose to emigrate, vessels would be provided to them free of charge . Vessels would also be provided free to them from the UK .
 Isabella did not give up so easily on the notion of religious unity in the Iberian Peninsula . Isabella was a strong believer in the idea of a religious unity .
 Isabella deferred to her confessor, Jimenez Cisneros, who forced mass conversions . Instead of accepting the advice of the archbishop of Granada, Hernando de Talavera, to try to convert the Muslims through education .
 Muslims began rebelling and seeking help abroad . The move backfired, however, and Muslims began looking for help abroad. Muslims began seeking help overseas .
 Isabella considered herself free from religious freedoms she had earlier guaranteed . Predictably, the Moors rebelled and tried to reclaim their territory again in 1502 .
 After 1502, adult Muslims who refused to accept Christian baptism were expelled . Adult Muslims refused to be baptised after 1502 .
 Isabella and Ferdinand’s intolerance of nonChristians had other, bloodier consequences as well . Ferdinand and Isabella were known for their intolerance to non-Christians as well as their intolerance of Christians .
 In September 1480, with the consent of the pope, Isabella ordered the Inquisition to begin its work . The Inquisition was established in 1480 .
 The Spanish Inquisition was an attempt to create a united, racially and religiously homogenous society . The Inquisition was a Spanish attempt to make a racially and racially homogenous country .
 Judges were granted power by the crown to investigate the sincerity of Jews and Moors who had converted to Christianity . Sanctioned by Rome and staffed by clergy, the judges were granted the power to investigate conversions .
 Wealthy converts attempted an armed resistance to the Inquisition; they were betrayed and burned at the stake . Wealthy conversations attempted to resist the Inquisition; were betrayed and burned at stake .
 The crown’s attempt to create a pure Christian state failed, because in Spain there were few true Christians or true Jews . The line between the two cultures had blurred over time. In Spain, the line between Christians and Jews blurred over the centuries .
 Jews had lived in Spain since the first century C.E.E., but discrimination against them commenced in 303 . Discrimination against Jews began in Spain in the early years of the century .
 Inquisitors expelled 150,000 Jews from the Iberian Peninsula, resulting in a loss of skill and commerce in Spain . The Inquisitors expounded on the loss of trade and skill in Spain.
 The second event solidifying the united Spanish crowns was the financing of Christopher Columbus’s voyage to India in 1492 . The financing of the voyage to the Indian Ocean was the first event to solidify the united Spain .
 Columbus arrived at Isabella's and Ferdinand’s court in a last ditch attempt to secure passage to Spain .
 Isabella and Ferdinand were last on Columbus’s list . The Spanish were not a seafaring people in the 15th century, so they were last .
 Isabella favored the patronage because she wanted to spread Christianity abroad . Isabella wanted to use the patronage to promote Christianity overseas .
 He set out for a second voyage in 1493 after reporting his discovery of what came to the New World .
 The crew he had left behind on the island of Hispaniola (today divided into Haiti and the Dominican Republic) had vanished . The new colony proved unsuccessful, too, and the colony proved to be unsuccessful .
 Columbus made two more voyages to the West Indies, never reaching Asia . Columbus never reached Asia and never reached the continent .
 Both Ferdinand and Isabella took great care to perfect their partnership . Ferdinand Ferdinand is married to Isabella, who has been married for more than 20 years . Ferdinand is the son of Ferdinand Ferdinand Ferdinand, who was born Ferdinand Ferdinand .
 All their decisions were made in full agreement with each other, the pair said . The pair cultivated an impression they cultivated among their subjects . All their actions were made with the help of their subjects.
 Isabella instructed court historians to report all state acts as being performed by both the king and the queen jointly, even if the two were not present . She instructed them to report every state act performed jointly by the queen and king .
 Mughal empress Nur Jahan is buried in Agra, near the famous Taj Mahal . Her tomb is a reminder of her talents and abilities .
 It is not her tomb, however; the monument houses the body of Jahan’s father, Itimad-ud-Daula, chief minister to the Emperor Jahangir . The monument is located in the heart of the capital city of Al-Ahmad-
 A patron of the arts, she attracted Persian poets and artists, architects, and musicians to the royal court at Agra . She presided as India’s empress during its peak years of power .
 Nur Jahan became an empress through marriage . Like many other women with political power, such as Corazon AQUINO, CATHERINE 11, and CLEOPATRA, she became empress .
 Her husband’s status put her in a powerful position, she knew how to make the most of her opportunity to enhance the power she had been given .
 Nur Jahan began her career a foreigner in a strange land . Like Catherine II and Cleopatra, she began her life as a foreigner .
 Imagine a caravan making its way across the rolling, shifting sand hills of the Great Indian desert that separates present-day Pakistan and India . The Great Indian Desert is one of the most remote parts of the world's ancient deserts .
 Mihr-un-Nissa was born to parents of noble lineage who fled their home in the Persian Empire to seek fortunes at the royal court of the Emperor Akbar in India .
 India’s greatest empire, the Mughal empire, was established by the warrior Babur , a relative of the Mongol Ghengis Khan, in 1526 . Babur was a relative to the Mongols Ghengi Khan, a relative .
 Mughal rulers brought India to its peak of political power and cultural achievement . They were Muslim invaders from Central Asia .
 Mughal territory expanded from Kabul, present-day Afghanistan, to the Bengal region near Calcutta, south to the Kaveri River near Bangalore . At its height, during Nur Jahan’s life, the territory extended from Kabul to Bengal region .
 Only Delhi was left to Bahadur Shah II, who was deposed and exiled by the British in the 19th century . In later years, Sikhs and the Dutch East India Company invaded its territory .
 Nur Jahan presided over numerous military defensive and offensive wars designed to keep the Mughal dynasty intact . He presided over several military defence and offensive war against Mughal injuries .
 Nur Jahan's father, Itimad-ud-Daula, attained high rank in the Emperor Akbar’s court . Nur Jahah was born in a family of high-ranking men .
 Nur Jahan married an army officer, Sher Afkan, with whom she had one daughter, Laadlee Begum . She had a daughter with her husband, a soldier .
 Emperor Akbar’s son Jahangir became emperor in 1605 . His daughter found a position for his daughter as a servant of his stepmother . She was the daughter of Emperor Jahangira .
 Nur Jahan escaped a fate that would have left her life dissolved in the anonymity of the harem . Her life would have been dissolved in anonymity in the anonymous harem, but she escaped . Her death would have led her to a life in anonymity .
 She met the Emperor Jahangir at a street fair in 1611 . She married him in 1612 . She was later married to the Emperor of Iran .
 Jahangir fell in love with her; she became his favorite wife (he had 19 others) and he made her his queen .
 Like many women in powerful positions, she upheld traditions related to women and represented forces of change . Like many other powerful women, she both upheld tradition and represented change .
 Women lived in separate quarters from men and remained shrouded whenever they appeared in public places . Women were shrouded in secrecy and kept out of the public eye .
 Nur Jahan advocated this custom for women, but she herself did not practice it . She maintained an active life at court, maintaining a healthy lifestyle .
 Nur Jahan quickly installed family members in powerful positions at the royal court . The royal court was dominated by the family of the late king .
 Her father became the imperial diwan, or chief minister . Her brother, Asaf Khan, rose to become one of the most influential noblemen at court .
 Nur Jahan cemented an alliance with Jahangir’s second son, Khurram, heirapparent to the throne . Nur Jahah cemented his alliance with the second son of Jahagir . The king's son is heir to the kingdom .
 In 1612, Khurram married Arjumand Banu, later Mumtaz Mahal, Nur Jahan’s niece and the daughter of Asaf Khan . The couple were married in 1612 .
 Nur Jahan, Itimad-ud-Daula, Asaf Khan, and Khurram all exerted significant influence upon Jahangir . Nur Jahah had influence over his reign .
 Nur Jahan issued edicts in her own name, not in Jahangir’s, sometimes in her name .
 Silver rupees were minted bearing Nur Jahan’s titles on one side and the legend “struck in the name of the Queen Begum” on the opposite . In another development that historian John F Richards describes as ‘startling,’
 Richards explains that this issuance was a public proclamation of power sharing between Jahangir and his queen . Richards says it was a sign of a shared power between the king and his wife .
 Factions arose in opposition, headed by Mahabat Khan, an Iranian amir, who backed Prince Khusrau's claims to the throne . Nur Jahan, her father, her brother, and Khurram, were all in control of the throne at the time .
 During his 23-year reign, Jahangir strengthened central control over his vast empire . He was succeeded by his father, who ruled the country for 23 years .
 Jahangir appointed his son Khurram to command a military expedition in the Deccan plateau in southern India . In an effort to unify the subcontinent, he appointed Khuram to command the expedition .
 Nur Jahan sought an alliance with Shah Jahan, but she grew wary of his growing power . She now grew wary and wary of him, and his growing influence .
 She suggested to Jahangir that he send his son back to the south to resume his military command . She suggested that she send him back to his homeland .
 Shah Jahan had Khusrau secretly killed, and in January, her father died unexpectedly . Her father was also killed, but she was not killed .
 Shah Jahan marched toward Agra in open rebellion against Nur Jahan’s policy of keeping him out of Agra . Then, Jahangir fell seriously ill, and Shah Jahangir was forced to retreat . Shah Jahn died of his illness .
 An imperial army set out to track down the Shah’s forces, but he avoided a military conflict . The Shah avoided military conflict with an imperial army .
 For three years, the army chased the rebellious prince around southeast India . The army chased him around the country for three years . The prince was killed by the Indian army .
 Mahabat Khan captured Jahangir and took him prisoner . Nur Jahan was captured in the capture of Jahangar .
 The emperor escaped, but his actions insured an alliance between Shah Jahan and Mahabat Khan . The emperor's actions insured the alliance between the two sides .
 Nur Jahan attempted to marry her daughter Laadlee Begum to Jahangir’s third son . As a last-ditch effort to retain her prestige at court and prevent Shah Jahan from wearing the crown, she tried to keep her prestige .
 Khurram was declared emperor upon the death of Jahangir in 1628 . Prince Shahryar tried to become emperor, but she lost the bid to become king .
 Khurram, then called Shah Jahan, gave Nur Jahan a generous pension and she retired to private life . She was the first woman to be married to the king .
 As regent during her son Alexander Severus’s reign as emperor of Rome, it may have seemed that Mamaea was the mother of the Roman Empire .
 Syria, a nation located in the Middle East, was then part of the Roman Empire . Syria, now Syria, is located in Syria, was part of Rome's Roman Empire in the early Roman era .
 Caracalla murdered his brother and ruled alone, while Julia Domna retained control of imperial administration . The king's brother was murdered in the death of his brother .
 The mantle then passed to his cousin, Mamaea’s son Alexander Severus . Alexander Severus was a lad of 13 at the time . Mamaea's son Alexander was 13 when he died .
 Alexander, a studious, thoughtful boy, would prove a pliable statesman and shabby warrior . Alexander would prove to be pliable statemen and a shabby warman . Alexander, Alexander, would be a brilliant statesman .
 His reign cannot be fully understood without considering the power wielded by his mother, Julia Mamaea . His reign can be explained by the power of his mother's influence, she says .
 Alexander’s reign began as a joint regency between Mamaea and her mother, Julia Maesa . Alexander's reign was a joint reign between the two women .
 Mamaea carefully constructed her and her son’s identity as Roman, not Syrian . Like CLEOPATRA had done before her, Mamaea constructed her own identity . Mamaea: "I’m not Syrian. I’ll be Syrian."
 She stifled the religious excesses of Elagabalus’s rule . She restored the Roman gods to their rightful temples .
 Religion in the third century was, and would continue to be, problematic for Roman rulers .
 The Christian message of individual freedom and the fervor of Christian martyrs were attracting converts and threatening the supremacy of the panoply of Rome’s secular gods . The message was attracting converts .
 Mamaea had witnessed the sexual indiscretions plaguing Elagabalus’s reign, so she married Alexander, at age 16, to a respectable patrician’�s daughter, Sallustia Orbiana .
 Mamaea’s good intentions got the better of her, however, because she soon grew jealous of the status conferred upon her young wife . Mamaea became jealous of her husband's status as the emperor's wife .
 Alexander elevated Orbiana’s father to the level of Caesar . Adding salt to the wound, Alexander elevated his father to Caesar . Orbiana's father was a Roman general .
 In 227, Orbiana and her father grew tired of Mamaea’s piqued rages and vanished from Rome . They sought refuge with the praetorians, the empire's military bodyguards, in Rome . Orbiana's father died in childbirth .
 Orbiana had Orbiana’s father executed and banished her daughter-in-law to Africa . Orbiana's father was executed and she was banished from Africa .
 The Roman legions, particularly those stationed on the frontiers of the empire, grew restless and insubordinate . Meanwhile, the Roman legions grew restless . The legions, especially those stationed in the empire's frontiers, became restless .
 Power was shifting within the Mediterranean area, and new challenges loomed just over the horizon . New challenges loom just over a horizon .
 Alexander began to amass an army for an eastern campaign . Only then did the reluctant warrior Alexander begin to begin amassing an army . Alexander then began to build an army in eastern Syria .
 Alexander drove his army into battle at Palmyra and Hatra, and on to the Persian Gulf . The advance was only partly successful, as Alexander was forced to retreat to Antioch by the end of the summer to prevent further losses . In 232, Alexander finally drove his forces to Antioch,
 Alexander had stymied Persian acquisitiveness, at best, at least for the time being . At best, Alexander had been able to defeat the Persians at best .
 Alexander returned to the west, but the Germans threatened in the west . They had breached the Rhine River and destroyed Roman farms and villages . Alexander returned, however, as soon as he returned, the Germans attacked .
 Julius Maximinus was a Thracian soldier who led the Roman legions in Rome . He was the first Roman general to lead the legions in the Roman empire .
 Maximinus was declared emperor of Rome by the Romans at the end of the first century . He was the first Roman emperor to be crowned .
 A cadre of centurions burst into the royal tent, slaughtering both mother and son . Mother and son were both killed in the tent .
 More than 16,000 Cherokee were forced by the U.S. government’s Indian Removal Act to leave ancestral lands and relocate in Oklahoma . Wilma Pearl Mankiller: Trail of Tears continues to shape many Native Americans' lives .
 Chief Wilma Mankiller’s great-grandfather traversed the Trail of Tears . She describes her own personal and political odyssey as a modern-day "Traffin of Tears" Chief Mankill says her own life is a modern day of the "Tra
 Born and raised in Tahlequah, Oklahoma, she experienced the U.S. government’s relocation program in the 1950s, helped renew Native American activism in the 1960s and 1970s . She became the first woman deputy chief and first female principal chief in Cherokee and
 By the 1950s, the United States government’s policy toward its Native American population had reversed courses once again . The U.S. government's policy toward Native Americans in the 1930s was reversed .
 In the early 20th century, the government had tried to “kill the Indian, save the man” by forcing Native American boys and girls to dress like European Americans and speak only English .
 In the 1930s, the government had given up assimilation policies in favor of tribal sovereignty . After World War II, policy-makers reversed gears again and pursued a program designed to encourage Native Americans to be like city-dwelling Euro-Americans .
 The Bureau of Indian Affairs produced hundreds of “relocation” propaganda posters . They promised American Indians jobs and happy homes in America’s urban centers in exchange for leaving reservation .
 The term relocation embraced several policies, including termination of tribal organizations, greater U.S. legal jurisdiction over tribal organizations . Relocation of Indian families from reservations to United States cities was a key policy .
 The policy only served to bring Native Americans from diverse reservations and tribes together in protest . Yet, the protest only served as a form of protest .
 Poverty pushed Mankiller’s father out of the Cherokee Nation in 1956 westward to San Francisco, California . Poverty pushed his father to the city of San Francisco in 1956 .
 Wilma Mankiller's father accepted the government’s offer to relocate, but the family quickly became disillusioned . Wilma's mother, Irene, was Dutch-Irish, and Wilma was born in the U.S.
 The white children at the school Mankiller attended snickered and taunted her when the teacher called out her last name during roll call . The white students at the white school snickering and taunting her .
 She attended Skyline Junior College and then San Francisco State College . She persevered, however, and went straight to college .
 At San Francisco State College, Mankiller met a Mohawk Indian, Richard Oakes, who gathered American Indians from a variety of tribes to form an organization called Indians of All Tribes . Oakes was Oakes' leader of the group .
 In 1969 the group launched a takeover of Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay . The group negotiated with the federal government to transform the old abandoned penitentiary on the island into a Center for Native American Studies .
 Talks between occupants and government broke down, and many of the protesters were arrested . Talks between the occupants and the government eventually broke down .
 The event sparked a cultural awareness and a new activism, particularly among younger Native Americans like Mankiller .
 After the event, Mankiller began working with the Pit River Tribe of California’s children and adult educational programs .
 Between 1970 and 1980, Mankiller suffered from a variety of personal and health problems . Between the 1970s and 1980 he suffered from various health problems including personal and personal problems .
 Her father died of kidney disease in 1971 . Her father also had kidney disease, which struck her as well .
 An oncoming car attempted to pass in a blind curve and smashed head-on into Mankiller’s car . On a drive home one morning one morning, an oncoming vehicle smashed into the car . The accident was the first of its kind .
 The following year, doctors diagnosed her with a neuromuscular disease called myasthenia gravis . She was diagnosed with the disease, which is a form of paralysis, in 2012 .
 In spite of her condition, Mankiller refused to let her problems get in the way of service to her tribe . She refused to give up on her illness to help her tribe members .
 In 1983, the principal chief of the Cherokee Nation, bank president Ross Swimmer, asked her to be his running mate in upcoming elections . She says she was asked to be the running mate by Swimmer in 1983 .
 Swimmer accepted an appointment as head of the Bureau of Indian Affairs and resigned his position with the tribe . Swimmer accepts appointment and resigns from position with tribe to head of bureau .
 Mankiller took his place in the 1987 elections . She announced she would run for the first time in 1987 . She ran for the second time .
 Many people opposed her candidacy on the grounds that she was female (despite the fact that the Cherokee were once a matrilineal tribe) Her tires were slashed and there were even death threats .
 Mankiller worked with an enrolled tribal population of 140,000 with a $75 million budget and 1,200 employees . The tribe has an enrolled tribe with a budget of $75million .
 Mankiller has lobbied the federal government on behalf of children and women’s issues for all Americans . In addition to improving health care, education, and attracting higher-paying industries to the Cherokee Nation, he has also lobbied the government .
 She has won awards both within and without Indian country . She was awarded the Oklahoma Federation of Tribal Women’s Woman of the Year award in 1987 .
 Harris, Jo D A Brief Interview with ChiefWilma Mankiller. Harris,Jo D . Harris was Chief Chief of the Chief of Staff at the Department of Justice. Harris was elected to the U.S. Senate last year. Harris died at the age of 92 at the
 In 1956, Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion declared that Golda Meir was “the best man” in his cabinet . Meir is a founder of the state of Israel and a founder .
 During her tenure as prime minister, Israel's losses during the Yom Kippur War forced her resignation . Israel’s losses in the war forced her to resign from her post .
 Meir's political ideology, Zionism, is a national movement whose goal is to create and perpetuate a Jewish national state in Palestine, the biblical homeland of the Hebrew people . Meir’s political ideology is the goal of creating and perpetuating a Jewish state in .
 Russian pogroms, or organized persecutions of Jewish people, resulted in waves of Jewish emigration to England and the U.S. in the late 19th and early 20th centuries .
 The Holocaust led many American Jews to embrace Zionism as well . The Holocaust was the systematic extermination of Jewish people .
 Golda Meir was born on May 3, 1898, in Kiev, Ukraine, to Moshe and Bluma Mabovitch . She was born in 1898 . Meir is one of the world's leading leaders .
 In 1906, the Mabovitch family immigrated to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where they expected to improve their living conditions . The family moved to Milwaukee in order to improve the living conditions of the family .
 Golda Golda attended elementary and high school in Milwaukee, Wisconsin . Golda was a teacher at the Teachers’ Training College in Milwaukee in 1917 .
 She taught school for several years, during which time she met and married Morris Myerson . She was married to Myerson, who she met in the 1970s .
 The city of Tel Aviv was then part of British Mandate Palestine, established in 1922 after World War I by the League of Nations to create a Jewish homeland .
 Meir and Myerson lived in a kibbutz, where Meir took charge of a chicken farm . Meir was married to Myerson, who later died in the Holocaust .
 Kibbutzim are collective communities of Jewish setders that are based upon collective ownership of all means of production and consumption, and also the religious and educational needs of the community . KibButzim is based on collective ownership .
 Theoretically, each member of the kibbutz contributes to the community his or her talents and takes from the community based upon need . Each member of a kib butz contributes a part of the community to a community .
 Due to illness in her family, Meir left the kibbutz and moved to Tel Aviv in 1921 . She became the treasurer of the Histadrut Ofhce of Public Works .
 Histadrut was founded in 1920 as a federation of Jewish trade unions . It evolved into a kind of Jewish cultural center that included a mutual aid society and an educational and sports center . It was founded by the Jewish community in 1920, and was later a cultural center .
 Meir Meir also served as manager of Histadrut’s construction corporation, Solel Boneh . Meir was also manager of the construction corporation Solelboneh .
 In 1928, Meir became the secretary of the Hechalutz Working Women’s Council in Palestine . Meir entered politics on the national and international level, becoming a member of Palestine's Working Women's Council .
 She represented the organization on the executive council of the Histadrut, and at a number of international labor convocations . She became the emissary to Hechalutz’s sister organization in the U.S.
 In 1929, she was elected a delegate to the World Zionist Organization, which had been founded in 1877 in Basel, Switzerland .
 Histadrut then made her the head of its political department . She became a member of the Jewish National Council in Palestine . Histadrutt made her head of the political department, and she was a member .
 When labor leader Moshe Sharett was arrested in 1946, Meir was appointed to take his place . He was head of the Jewish Agency, the bureaucracy charged with establishing a Jewish homeland in Palestine .
 Nazi Germany’s persecution of Jews increased Jewish migration to British-ruled Palestine during the 1930s and early 1940s .
 After World War II, Great Britain voluntarily relinquished its mandate over Palestine . The U.N. voted to partition the region into separate Jewish and Arab states .
 Meir traveled to the U.S. to raise money for the war that was expected to begin as soon as independence was declared . Syria, Lebanon, and Iraq promptly declared war on Israel, but the new state was victorious .
 In 1948, David BenGurion sent Meir disguised as an Arab to persuade King Abdullah of Jordan not to attack the new nation . Meir was a member of the provisional government of the new Israel .
 Meir was among those who signed the Declaration of Independence on May 4, 1948 . Meir is a former president of the United States .
 The war lasted until early 1949, when Israel signed agreements with each of its bordering states that established the boundaries of the new nation . The war ended in 1949, with Israel's borders being established .
 She also served as minister of labor and became foreign minister until 1966 . She served as foreign minister and labor minister between 1961 and 1966 .
 In this post, she created bridges between Israel and African states that had just gained independence from European control . She created bridges with various states in Africa .
 Golda Meir, then 71, became the world’s second woman prime minister in 1969 . She was then 71 years old when Prime Minister Levi Eshkol died suddenly .
 As prime minister, Meir took a hard-line position against the Arab world . She refused to limit the expansion of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories . Meir became Israel's first prime minister .
 The aftermath of the Yom Kippur War in which an Egyptian and Syrian attack surprised Israeli forces, spelled the end of her political career .
 Meir achieved folk hero status in the nation of Israel as one of the first women to lead a modern nation . Meir had achieved folk-hero status in Israel as a woman .
 As the second wife of Argentine President Juan Domingo Peron, she politicized organized labor . She initiated social welfare programs and economic reforms on behalf of Argentina’s lower classes .
 No woman in Argentina before or since has garnered the love—and the hatred—of so many Argentine citizens . Argentina's most famous woman, Cristina del Toro, was killed in 1994 in a car crash in Buenos Aires .
 After her father’s death, the family relocated to a larger town called Junin, where her mother ran a boardinghouse . Her father's death prompted the family to relocate to Junin .
 Eva Duarte quit school at the age of 16 and moved to Buenos Aires to become a film star . She quit school to pursue her dream of becoming a film actress .
 She got a few bit parts in films, but then took a permanent job at one of the larger radio stations in Buenos Aires . She got her first job at a radio station in Argentina .
 In the meantime, a producer asked her to audition for a role in a radio broadcast . She says she has auditioned for the role in the show .
 She won the part and soon became known for her role as the patriotic heroine in a historical radio drama series .
 Eva Duarte met Colonel Juan Peron, a widower and the newly appointed secretary of Labor and Social Welfare in President Pedro Ramirez’s military regime . Duarte was the secretary of labor and social welfare in the military regime of the late President Ramirez .
 A generally peaceful civilian government had ruled Argentina, one of the richest nations in the Americas, until Pedro Ramirez seized power in a military coup in 1930 . Pedro Ramirez took control of Argentina in 1930, ending a generally peaceful military rule .
 As secretary of Labor and Social Welfare, Peron’s imperative was to gain a popular footing for the military regime, he says . Peron: Peron wanted to gain public support for military regime .
 Eva Duarte helped the secretary organize and win the allegiance of Argentine workers . She helped organize the secretary of the Argentine Workers' Party in Buenos Aires .
 Juan Peron himself emerged as a political leader, thanks largely to the behind-the-scenes work of Duarte . After another coup in 1943, he became the leader of Argentina's Second World War .
 In October 1945, a group of military men who opposed Peron’s leadership arrested and imprisoned him . Peron was released from prison in 1945 .
 The police made no effort to stop the demonstration, and the incident forced Peron’s release . Peron was forced to be released by police .
 Peron declared his candidacy for the 1946 election as the leader of the Argentine Labour Parry . Peron was a member of the Argentina's Labour Party . He was elected to the Argentine Parliament in 1946 .
 Argentina's President Ronald Reagan has been in Argentina since 1982 . He has been involved in the country's political crisis since then .
 Eva Peron became an active member of Juan Peron's government after his election victory . Eva became a member of the Peron government in Argentina .
 Argentine women voted for the first time in a national election in 1951 . In 1951, Argentine women were allowed to vote in national elections . Argentina's first national election was held in Buenos Aires .
 Peron’s second political move was to consolidate the power of the working class, especially organized labor . Peron won the allegiance of the chief labor party in Argentina, the Confederation of Labor .
 Eva Peron became the secretary of Labor in all but name, supporting workers’ claims for higher wages and social welfare measures . Peron fought for social welfare and supported higher wages .
 In addition, she supervised the newly created Ministry of Health, designed to eliminate tuberculosis and malaria, diseases that disproportionately affected Argentina's poor population .
 Taking advantage of inflation and threatened strikes, the army began to express long-standing grievances . The army has threatened to strike against inflation and take advantage of strikes .
 First, they insisted that Eva Peron be shut out of government . First, foremost, they wanted to shut her out of the government .
 They viewed “Evita,” as she was called, as an exshowgirl with undue political influence, and as a destroyer of patriarchy . They viewed "Evita" as a disempowering ex-showgirl, they said . Evita was an ex-
 They despised her bald promotion of class interests over social order . Furthermore, they despised her promoting class interests .
 The army demanded an end to the ‘industrial oligarchy’ that advised Peron’s economic policies . Finally, they ordered Peron to choose between supporting labor or the military .
 The world will never know how the Peron-Peron ticket would have played out in Argentine politics . Eva Peron was forced to decline the offer because she was too shy to run for president .
 Few Argentine celebrities were as intensely or as publicly mourned as Eva Peron . Peron's death marked the end of her life in Buenos Aires .
 Juan Peron was elected to another presidential term, but a revolt by the army and navy forced his resignation and exile in 1955 . Peron died in 1953, but was forced to leave the country in exile .
 President Peron was reelected in 1973; his third wife, Isabel Martinez de Peron, was his vice president . He was elected to office in 1972; he died in 1973 .
 Peron died in 1974, and Isabel Peron became the first female president in the Western Hemisphere . Peron was the first woman president of the world in Latin America .
 British prime minister Margaret Thatcher boasts a long list of political firsts . Margaret Thatcher was the first lady of Kesteven to become a British Prime Minister .
 She was Europe’s first female prime minister and longest-serving prime minister . She was the only prime minister to win three consecutive terms . Her regime, as she calls it, lasted from 1979 to 1990 .
 Margaret Thatcher’s conservative politics became known as Thatcherism . Thatcherism is defined as an emphasis on monetarist policies and privatization of national industries .
 For her determination and resolve,politicos dubbed her the Iron Lady . Because women are typically thought to be soft and reticent, she was dubbed 'Iron Lady' by politicians .
 A supporter of President Ronald Reagan , Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan shared a background of humble beginnings and conservative ideology . Margaret Thatcher was a supporter of Ronald Reagan .
 Her thrifty parents lived over their store and took separate vacations so that the store could always stay open for business . The store owner lived over her parents' home and took vacations to keep the store open .
 Her father cofounded Grantham’s Rotary Glub, presided over the Grocers’ Association, served 25 years on the Borough Gouncil, and was mayor . Her father is also a Rotary leader and served on the borough council, and the town�
 Margaret attended Grantham Girls’ School and Somerville College, Oxford, where she studied chemistry . Margaret attended Somerville and Granthams Girls' School .
 Upon graduation, she worked as a research chemist from 1947 to 1951, but her real ambition lay in the realm of politics . Her real ambition was to become a politician .
 In 1951 she ran an unsuccessful campaign for a Parliament seat as a conservative candidate in Dartford, North Kent . She studied law in the evenings after work, and ran a successful campaign for Parliament seat in 1951 .
 During her visits with local business leaders, she met Denis Thatcher; the two married later that year . She met Thatcher during her visits to London .
 In the next two years, she gave birth to twins, Mark and Carol, and passed her bar exam . She also passed the bar exam and had twins, Carol and Mark, in the same time .
 Thatcher was the youngest woman ever to serve in the House of Commons, at the age of 34 . Thatcher won her first election to Parliament in 1959, representing Finchley, North London . Thatcher became the first woman to win a seat in the Commons in 1959 .
 Thatcher developed a reputation for sticking to her deeply held, though at times unpopular ideas . Thatcher's long tenure in Parliament saw her stick to unpopular ideas throughout her life . Thatcher was a strong advocate for women's equality and women's rights .
 She served as minister of pensions and national insurance from 1961 to 1964 . She also served as secretary of state for education and science from 1970 to 1974 .
 The party having the greatest number of representatives elected to Parliament determines which party will form the government . Under the British system of government, the party has the greatest majority of representatives in Parliament .
 When the majority is set, the leader of that party becomes prime minister . The leader of the party becomes the prime minister of the country's parliament .
 In 1979, when the Conservatives won a majority of Parliament seats, Thatcher became the new prime minister . Thatcher was the new Prime Minister of the UK in 1979 .
 Thatcher’s brand of conservativism included dismantling of state controls over industry, commerce, and education, and the promotion of individualism . Her policies were also pursued by her counterpart in the United States, Ronald Reagan, in the 1980s .
 Thatcher called privatization a “property-owning democracy,” which she called ‘property-owned democracy” Thatcher said . Thatcher said privatization had the double benefit of providing the government with revenue through taxation . Thatcher: Privatization was a double benefit to the government,
 Thatcher gave schools the option of freeing themselves from local school board control and instituting their own budgets . In the area of education, schools were given the option to institute their own budget budgets .
 Thatcher abandoned state-supported higher education in favor of private support of universities and American-style system of student loans . Thatcher abandoned the principle of state support for higher education . Thatcher's student loans were introduced in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The sequence of disturbances that occurred between white police officers and predominantly black youths in London and Birmingham in the summer and autumn of 1985 marred Thatcher’s popularity by the mid-1980s .
 Her firm position on the invasion of the Falkland Islands, however, stood her in good stead with patriotic Britons . Her firm stance on the Falklands Islands has stood her good stead .
 Britain had consistently rejected Argentina’s counterclaims to the Falklands . The Falklands were claimed by Argentina in the 1960s and 1980s .
 In April 1982, Argentina’s military government suddenly invaded and took control of the islands . In the end it suffered a tremendous defeat at the hands of the British, resulting in the restoration of civilian rule of the Argentina .
 This revenue-generating measure levied a flat tax on all individuals, regardless of the district they lived in . Rebates were available to poorer Britons, although rebates were made to poorer people .
 Thatcher intended for the poll tax to replace property taxes, but the public reaction to the measure was swift, and violent demonstrations were held in several British cities . Thatcher intended to replace the property tax with a poll tax .
 Thatcher suggested attacking inflation by maintaining high interest rates, and therefore higher mortgage rates . The vast number of homeowners her policies had created began to rebel . Thatcher's policies were designed to encourage homeowners to buy mortgages .
 Thatcher spurned the notion of a formal European union, because she viewed individual sovereignty as preferable to what she feared would be a huge bureaucratic federated Europe .
 She preferred to ally herself and Great Britain with the Reagan administration rather than a greater Europe . She preferred a greater European unity .
 When she rejected all movements toward a federated Europe, many of her party loyalists began to bolt . Many of the party's most loyalists are now defecting .
 Queen Elizabeth II appointed Thatcher a Member of the Order of Merit, and Denis Thatcher received a baronetcy . Denis Thatcher was also awarded a posthumous honour .
 U.S. President George Bush awarded her the United States Medal of Freedom in 1991 .
 Thatcher continues her conservative agenda through the Thatcher Foundation . Thatcher Foundation promotes free enterprise and democracy . Thatcher continues to push conservative agenda .
 Hannah Arendt’s original thinking and ability to reach nonacademic audiences make her one of the most important philosophers of the 20th century . Her original thinking was original thinking .
 She was primarily concerned with totalitarianism, the nature of evil and violence in society, and the erosion of public participation in the political process . She was concerned about totalitarianism .
 Arendt was born on October 14, 1906, in Hanover, Germany, in 1906 .
 Hannah's father died of syphilis when Hannah was seven; her mother remarried Martin Beerwald in 1920 . Hannah's mother died of the disease in 1920; her father died when she was seven . Hannah was born Hannah's first daughter, Hannah, and her mother died in 1920
 Arendt was a child prodigy who read German and French literature and philosophy voraciously during her teens . She was also an avid student of philosophy and philosophy .
 Arendt began researching the life of an 18th-century Jewish woman, Rahel Varnhagen . She was inspired by her research into Rahel's life .
 Varnhagen was an early 19th-century Jewish salon hostess in Berlin who had converted to Christianity . She converted to Christianism after converting to Judaism .
 In 1933, Arendt spent a week in jail following her arrest by the Gestapo for doing library research on anti-Semitic propaganda . In 1933 she was arrested for researching anti-Semitism in a library .
 Arendt, her mother, and Heinrich Blucher immigrated to the U.S. in 1940 . After her marriage to art historian Heinrich . Heinrich. Bluchers died in 1945 .
 Arendt traces Nazi and communist state theories to the 19th-century ideologies of nationalism, imperialism, and racism . In it she examines the similarities between Nazism and Soviet communism under Joseph Stalin .
 She focused on the plight of Jews amid the decline of human rights under totalitarian regimes . She focused particularly on the Jewish plight .
 In her report on the trial of a leading Nazi war criminal, Adolph Eichmann, she describes how bureaucratic efficiency can mask an underlying evil .
 In 1960, Israeli security forces had captured the Nazi SS lieutenant colonel Eichmann . He was responsible for organizing the transportation of Jews from all over Europe to Auschwitz and other concentration camps .
 The book’s central tenet is that moral thought regarding human rights cannot be separated from political action . The book is based on the belief that human rights must be treated as human rights .
 Arendt: The American Revolution balanced each component in ways that differed from the others . The Revolution, she says, balanced each part of the revolution in a unique way .
 Arendt: The differences account for the success of the American Revolution, and the problematic outcomes of the other two . The differences, she says, account for why the Revolution was successful and why it failed .
 The purpose of the American Revolution was to restore order and law, rather than create social chaos, the Revolution leader says . The purpose is to restore law and order, not to create chaos, he says .
 In contrast, the French and Russian revolutions attempted to overthrow existing regimes but resulted instead of chaos and disorderliness . In contrast to the French, Russian revolutions, they resulted in greater chaos .
 As an educator, she developed experimental educational techniques based on her theory of mutual response . Teachers respond to the initiatives of the student, she says .
 She was appointed professor of education at Aspen Community School Teaching Center, in Aspen, Colorado . She was also appointed professor at the community school in Colorado .
 Ashton-Warner was born in Stratford, New Zealand, and graduated with a degree in education from Auckland Teacher’s College . He is the son of former President George Adams .
 The couple opened a twoteacher school in a remote part of the North Island . The school included both Caucasian and Maori students . The couple's school was opened in the same part of New Zealand .
 Most of the material for her fiction and nonfiction works is derived from her experiences teaching Maori children . She encountered cultural differences between Caucasians and Maoris, and racial tension .
 Among her first written works was a new reader for her Maori students, replacing the old Janet and John series, which she felt was inappropriate for her students . She felt that the old series was inappropriate .
 AshtonWarner proposed the concept of organic teaching . After 20 years of teaching experience, he proposed the idea .
 Organic teaching meant that the teacher taught the student by entering the child’s personal experiences . Simply put, organic teaching meant . The teacher entered the child's personal experiences to teach her students .
 Her techniques became important for teachers struggling with classrooms composed of students whose cultural backgrounds differ from their own . Her techniques help teachers struggling to teach students with cultural backgrounds .
 As an offshoot of organic teaching, AshtonWarner designed organic reading to help students read and write based on his or her own experiences . The company hopes organic reading will help students learn more about themselves .
 Organic reading method is organic in that the student’s vocabulary grows naturally and not by memorizing lists of vocabulary words . The organic reading method was developed in the 1970s .
 These are words that the student articulates as words he or she wants to learn . These words are the words that students want to learn to use . Students can use these words to express their desire to learn.
 The teacher acts as scribe by writing the words down and then helping the student to spell and to learn different forms of the words .
 In the second movement, the student forms sentences based on his or her key vocabulary . In the first movement, a student forms phrases based on key words .
 The teacher writes the sentences down initially, using correct spelling, but copying the student’s grammar as he or she verbalizes the sentence . The teacher uses correct spelling and correct grammar to help students understand their sentences .
 The third movement has students exchanging sentences, adding words that they like from other students' key vocabularies . Students exchange sentences with words they like to hear from others .
 Teachers assign students to make up stories using the words in their key vocabularies . Teachers also assign stories to students who use their key words in key stories .
 Taken as a whole, the four-movement process can be used at any grade level . It can also be used with students who are learning a second language .
 Ashton-Warner’s ideas have radically altered the way in which a teacher imparts knowledge to students . He has radically changed the way teachers teach students .
 Educator John Holt, for example, applauds her notion that teachers should integrate a child's inner and outer life . Holt: "Teachers should integrate their lives so that they can be at peace"
 To expect teachers to accomplish this by themselves in a classroom setting is untenable, he says . But to expect this is not the case, he asserts. It's a good thing for teachers to be able to do this alone .
 Ashton-Warner contributed short stories and poetry to a number of New Zealand publications, including the New Zealand Listener and New Zealand Monthly Review .
 Her book Spinster as made into a film called Two Loves starring Shirley MacLaine, in 1961 .
 In 1982, the British crown bestowed upon her a high honor, making her a Member of the Order of the British Empire . In 1982 she was awarded the Order by the British Crown .
 British educator and suffragist Dorothea Beale dedicated her life to changing the scope and nature of education for women in England . Beale was a pioneer of education and women's rights .
 The purpose of schooling for girls had traditionally been to prepare them for marriage and motherhood by teaching them music, art, and housekeeping and child-care skills .
 As head teacher of Cheltenham Ladies’ College, Beale provided female students, and women teachers, with a sound academic education .
 Dorothea Beale was born in London to Miles Beale, a surgeon, and Dorota Complin . She grew up in a household that emphasized learning . Beale is best known for her role in the television series "Dora"
 The Beales interviewed several governesses who would oversee the education of their 11 children, but found too many spelling errors in their written applications . All were dismissed after they found spelling errors .
 Children's workbooks contained errors that the governess had not corrected . Finally, a suitable candidate was found, but she was let go when the children’s workbooks had errors .
 Beale wrote about her dissatisfaction with the education she received at Mrs. Mrs. Beale . In her autobiographical Treasure That Faileth Not, published posthumously in 1907 .
 Beale left Paris when the 1848 revolution created chaos in the streets . Beale was born in 1848 and left Paris in 1847 .
 Industrial Revolution had shaken social and demographic patterns, which led to a general questioning of existing political orders . The Industrial Revolution was shaken social, demographic patterns and led to the question of existing social structures .
 In Paris, groups of liberal reformers held mass rallies in support of voting rights . In France, the French capital has seen a surge in support for voting rights rights .
 When officials sought to ban the rallies, riots broke out and barricades went up . Rioting broke out when officials tried to ban rallies, but barricades were erected .
 Workers broke into the Chamber of Deputies, forced the proclamation of a republic . Louis-Philippe was sent into exile in exile in London . He was the "citizen king"
 Beale was one of the first students to attend the newly opened Queen’s College for Women in London . Beale is now a senior lecturer at the newly-opened Queen's College .
 She excelled as a student and, upon graduation, was appointed as the first woman mathematics instructor . She was appointed by the University of Cambridge as a mathematics teacher .
 In 1854, she became head mistress, but she resigned her position two years later . She was dissatisfied with the school’s administration, leaving her unhappy .
 She accepted the headship of the Clergy Daughters’ School at Casterton but was dismissed the following year . She was dismissed from the school following her dismissal from the post .
 In 1858, she became principal of Cheltenham Ladies’ College, a position she held for the rest of her career . She was principal of the college for the first time .
 Beale was engaged to a clergyman from 1856 to 1857 . During this period, Beale met and became engaged to Beale's first wife .
 She broke off her engagement, however, wishing to devote all her energies to women’s education .
 Cupid's darts do not feel Miss Beale and Miss Buss . Cupid’s darts don’t feel like the two women . How unlike us. Cupid. How unusual us.
 At Cheltenham, Beale could finally address the shortcomings of women’s education and rectify them .
 She introduced a more rigorous curriculum, which elevated the reputation of the institution . She introduced more rigorous education to students .
 Beale was invited to present evidence before the Bryce Commission on Secondary Education in 1864 and edit the report on girls’ education in 1869 . The school flourished and, as a result, Beale’s school flourished . Beale edited the report in the Bryce report on
 Beale became convinced that teachers who educated girls needed adequate training themselves . Beale was convinced that girls need adequate training for teachers .
 St. Hilda’s training college for secondary teachers opened at Cheltenham in 1885 (Oxford opened an extension of St.Hilda's training college) in the 1885 .
 Her work in women's education led to Beale’s involvement in the related issue of suffrage . Beale was also involved in the issue of women's suffrage in the 1920s .
 Women's education prepared them for much more than simply to help their husband's career and their children's education . It seemed obvious that their contributions should reach beyond the home and into the realm of society and politics .
 Beale, Emily Davies, Elizabeth Garrett, and eight other women formed a discussion group called the Kensington Society . The group drafted a petition asking Parliament to grant women the vote in 1867 . Beale was the first woman to be granted the right to the vote .
 John Stuart Mill added an amendment to the 1867 Reform Act that would have given women the same political rights as men . The amendment was added to the Reform Act in 1867 . It would have allowed women to have equal political rights .
 Dorothea Beale became vice president of the Central Society for Women’s Suffrage . Beale was the founder of the London Society for Woman Suffrage. Beale died at the age of 92 in 1918 . The women's suffrage sufferer was a member of the
 Britain granted women over the age of 30 the right to vote in 1918 . Twelve years later, in 1928, the age was lowered to 21 . The age of voting was lowered in 1928 .
 French philosopher and writer Simone de Beauvoir's existentialist and feminist ideas became the battle cry of the women’s rights movement of the late 20th century .
 In The Second Sex, she undermines the notion that women’s lives are tied irrevocably to their maternal function . She says society has made women think so .
 Beauvoir was born January 9, 1908, in Paris . She was the daughter of a lawyer and a homemaker . She looked upon her parents' marriage with apprehension .
 As the family’s income dwindled during World War I, Beauvoir noticed that the unpleasant housework performed by her mother kept her from earning money . The unpleasant work prevented her from being able to earn money .
 In any case, Beauvoir vowed never to marry or have children; she pursued an education instead . She pursued a career in politics instead .
 At 15, she fell in love with her cousin, Jacques Champigneulles . Her parents had sent her to a Catholic school where she was at 15 . She fell into love with him .
 He introduced her to French novels, books that caught her mother’s attention and her immediate disapproval . Her mother's approval of the French novels caught her attention .
 Madame Beauvoir pinned together pages in the books that she did not want her daughters to read . The pages were pinned together by the French author .
 When Jacques Champigneulles married a wealthy young woman, Beauvoir’s obsession with him ended . The French writer was obsessed with the Frenchman .
 She went on to study philosophy at the Sorbonne, an elite university in Paris . She met her lifelong companion, the philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre, in 1929 . She was married to the philosopher, who she met in 1929, in France .
 Sartre’s ideas about human freedom, explained in his book Being and Nothingness, influenced her life and her work . The French philosopher's work influenced her work and her life .
 The two remained lifelong companions until Sartre’s death in 1980, although they never married and only briefly shared an apartment . The two never married .
 Beauvoir taught philosophy at Marseilles, Rouen, and Paris, but her philosophy is best understood through her written work .
 Beauvoir and Sartre helped to popularize a school of philosophy known as existentialism . The term encompasses ideas about individual choice, the absence of rational understanding of the universe which limits rational choice, and the resulting sense of the absurdity of human life .
 Existentialists resist the notion that there is any intelligible system of meaning in life . They say that there are no intelligible systems of meaning .
 In the meaningless, irrational universe in which we live, we have only our freedom of choice . In the face of the irrational universe, we are only free to choose our choices . We have no choice but to choose what we want.
 If a woman says she cannot choose to work because she has to care for children, a Beauvoirian existentialist might respond by saying that the woman chooses to think of her situation in that way, not in a way that might help her discover other options .
 Beauvoir’s feminist position, as found in The Second Sex, is existentialist, in that she argues against biological determinism and in favor of individual choice . Beauvois argues that individual choice is individual choice, not biological determined .
 Beauvoir wrote The Second Sex in part to discover the extent to which the course of her own life was determined by the fact that she was born female instead of male . She wrote the book to discover how her life was affected by being born a woman .
 Using her life as a springboard, she goes on to analyze women’s roles in society through mythology, political theory, history, and psychology . She also analyzes mythology and political theory .
 She advises women to pursue interests beyond the home and family . She says marriage and motherhood render women into ‘relative beings’; that is, individuals whose lives are dependent upon their relationship to others .
 In the latter, Beauvoir speculates on how her life might have been different had she not met Jean-Paul Sartre or made certain other choices .
 By the time of her own death on April 14, 1986, Beauvoir had become a symbol for women’s equality . She had become an icon for women's equality .
 She had also been president of the League for the Rights of Women, a group that helped battered wives, working women and single mothers .
 While traveling with her husband in Europe, Bose toured girls’ schools and then took the pedagogical methods she observed, especially those created by Maria MONTESSORl, to India .
 From 1908 to 1951, Bose established several educational institutions for girls and women throughout India . Bose died in 1951 .
 Traditionally, the education of girls and women in India lagged far behind that of boys . The education of women and girls lags far behind boys .
 Efforts were made prior to and after independence from Britain to advance learning opportunities for girls at the primary, secondary, and college levels .
 Enrollment for girls almost doubled after independence, but retention still lagged . Many Indian girls were married off at a young age, since many were married .
 Special programs were instituted by the Indian government to prevent the high dropout rates among girls . Special programs have been instituted to prevent girls dropping out of the school .
 For girls and women residing in remote areas, the government provided transportation and hostels . The government provided transport, hostels and transport to remote areas for girls .
 Lawyer and Indian nationalist Madhusudan Das adopted Abala and brought her to his family home in Orissa, India, in the northeastern corner of the Indian subcontinent . Abala was adopted by Das and later adopted by his family .
 Das advocated several social reforms during his life, including abolishment of the caste system . Das advocated the notion of educating girls and women in India .
 His reformist ideas, however, were always predicated on the advancement of Indian nationalism .
 Das supported Western-style education for Indian children . Das was an advocate of Western education for children in India .
 Abala Bose grew up in a household of radical ideas, including those promoted by the Brahmo Samaj, to which her father belonged . Her father was a member of the Samaj and her mother was an activist .
 The Brahmo Samaj was founded in 1828 as a reformist Hindu organization . The organization changed its course to devote its resources to social service and educational activities by the 1870s .
 Instead of matriculating, she married the famous physicist Jagadishchandra Bose in 1887 . She married Bose's wife, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist .
 After extensive travels in Europe, the couple lived in Calcutta, where Bose began his career at the Presidency College . Bose and his wife died at the age of 92 .
 Abala Bose founded a high school for girls in her hometown of Orissa, India, in 1908 . She founded the school in 1908, and it is now a national school .
 The school offered nontraditional subjects for girls, including physical exercises, for girls . The school was founded in 1973 .
 In this particular area, Bose followed the preachings of the nationalist Pulin Das . Das decried the pacifist approach to independence practiced by Gandhi .
 Das promoted selfdefense for Indians persecuted by the British . Instead, he promoted self-defense for Indian Indians . Das: "Self-defense was not self-defence"
 Bose decided that girls needed to know self-defense in order to participate in the nationalist movement and to defend themselves against other perpetrators of violence .
 Abala Bose introduced the Montessori method of education to India in 1919 . She introduced the method to India .
 Maria Montessori believed that children are born learners, and that the essential task of the teacher is to guide—not dictate—learning in their students by creating a stimulating environment .
 Bose launched a teachers’ institute designed to enlighten and train teachers in the Montessori method . The institute is based in Mumbai, India .
 In 1925, Bose established a home for widows . In 1935, she founded a Women’s Industrial Co-operative Home in Calcutta .
 Italian/French writer and intellectual Christine de Pizan was one of the most important contributors to learning during the Renaissance period . She was an important contributor to learning in Italy and France .
 During this period of European history, scientific and philosophical inquiry had reached its peak . During this time, scientific inquiry was at its peak in Europe .
 Historians often use the phrase “Renaissance Man” to mean a learned man who dabbles in every type of cultural and intellectual endeavor . The phrase is often used to describe Renaissance Man as a learned and intellectual man .
 Christine de Pizan wrote books, including poems, collections of allegorical tales, histories, an autobiography, and a biography .
 France's first woman of letters, de Pizan offered an important critique of the Renaissance Man’s way of thinking about women . Her critique of Renaissance Man's view of women is published in the New York Review .
 Top-notch education enabled her to analyze her experiences so that she could formulate a critique . Second, she said, she received a top-notching education that enabled her analysis .
 Christine de Pizan’s father, Thomas, provided favorable circumstances for her intellectual endeavors . Christine dePizan is the daughter of former President George W. Bush Bush .
 Charles V invited Thomas de Pizan to work at his court . Charles V , king of France, invited him to court .
 Pizan accepted, and he moved his family from Venice, where Christine was born, to Paris, France, in 1368 . Christine's mother was born in Venice, Italy, and she was later married in Paris . She died in Paris in 1468 .
 Thomas de Pizan developed a good reputation at the French court, and the young Christine flourished from his position .
 Christine studied Latin, literature, sciences, and philosophy . Despite her mother's objections, Christine chose to study Latin and literature . Christine is now a successful model of her own .
 Despite her father’s resolve about her education, he allowed her education to end when she married Etienne du Castel, a 24-year-old scholar .
 All four parents arranged the marriage, and Christine had no say in the matter . The marriage was a happy one, although Christine was not allowed to say .
 Charles V died in 1380, ending his happy, secure life with his wife . Soon the happy life Christine had been leading came to an end when Charles died .
 Charles VI still employed Thomas de Pizan, but he no longer enjoyed the privileges of favored status at court . His successor, Charles VI, still employed him . Charles VI .
 Christine de Pizan died between 1385 and 1389, followed by Etienne’s death . Christine had to fend for her mother and her three children .
 Christine de Pizan was a woman of her time . She faced many hardships during her life . The hardships she faced were familiar to other women of the time .
 Christine was left with no inheritance and little means of scraping together a living . Her two brothers could simply leave Paris and return to Italy, where they inherited property . Christine's two brothers were able to leave Paris to Italy and inherited properties .
 Christine de Pizan turned to her ability to write as a means of support . She turned to writing as a way of support for her family .
 At first, she composed poems about courtly love and sent them to French princes . At first she wrote them to courtly princes . Her poems were sent to princes .
 As her work became more popular, Christine began to write poems that conveyed her real ideas about issues . She kept those ideas hidden beneath the surface of the poem, she said .
 She thought that it was necessary to hide her true meaning, because what she had to say would be considered very controversial, she said .
 She wrote an autobiographical poem called “La Vision de Christine” in which she described three allegorical, or mythological, female figures . She described three mythological female figures.
 One was called the Crowned Dame, who governed the political ideas of France; another . Another was called The Crowned Dame, who ruled out the French Revolution .
 Dame Opinion, directed the intellectual life of the country, and finally Dame Philosophy lived in the spiritual world . Dame Opinion directed the country's intellectual life, and then Dame Philosophy, directed its own life in spiritual world.
 The Crowned Dame represented political struggles in France . She was described as a weeping, nursing woman .
 Christine herself presided as the heroine of the tale . She visited each of the three women and discovered that she was the happiest of all the three .
 Christine connected bad fortune with the vulnerable female body and happiness with chastity and spirituality . Christine said happiness is happiness with the woman's body and chastity, spirituality .
 In 1429, de Pizan wrote “The Tale of JOAN OF ARC,” a poem celebrating her hero . The poem celebrates her hero, Joan of Arc .
 Christine de Pizan began to attack what other writers wrote about women . Next, she attacked what other women wrote about them .
 Composed in 1399, “Epistre du Dieu D’amours” (letter on the end of romance) criticized another French author, Jean de Meun, for writing about women in vulgar terms .
 In this poem, she described a debate being held among aristocrats and intellectuals about the status of women in French society .
 de Pizan wrote Cite des Dames in 1405 to further attack de Meun's writings . To further attack the writings of De Meun, de De Pizans wrote the Cite de Dames .
 This poem used the structure of a poem de Meun had written, but instead of presenting women as sex objects or servants for men, de Pizan presented women who transcended the social limitations placed on women by living as virgins, outside marriage .
 Cite des Dames was translated into English and published by William Caxton, England’s first printer . Cite de Dames is published in France and France .
 Christine de Pizan’s criticisms of the treatment of women in France suggest that beneath the glory of the Renaissance Man lay the injustices done to the Renaissance Woman .
 Johnnetta Cole was the first African-American woman president of Spelman College . Spelman is the oldest institution of higher education for African-Americans in the United States .
 During Cole’s term, Spelman became the first black school to be rated number one in U.S. News and World Reporh .
 Cole is also a former president of the Association of Black Anthropologists and the International Women’s Anthropology Conference . Cole is a member of the American Anthropologist Association .
 In 1901, Abraham Lincoln Lewis cofounded the Afro-American Life Insurance Company of Jacksonville, Florida . Cole was born on October 19, 1936, in 1936 .
 Cole’s parents, both graduates of black colleges, were also employed at the company . Cole's mother, Mary Frances Lewis Betsch, eventually became the firm's vice president . The company was founded by the same woman who later became a prominent black businessman .
 Cole is a member of one of the most prominent and wealthiest black families in Jacksonville, Florida . Cole says he experienced discrimination as a child . He says he is proud of his family's wealth and privilege .
 The black library in town bore her great-grandfather’s name, but she knew that the white library had better and newer books . The library was black, but the library was white, she said .
 Cole earned high grades in high school and graduated early, at the age of 15 . Cole graduated early from high school at 15 .
 In 1953, Cole transferred to Oberlin College in Ohio to be closer to her older sister, a music major at Oberlin . Cole transferred from Oberlin in 1953 to be close to her sister .
 Cole had planned a career in medicine, but an anthropology course taught by George E Simpson changed her mind . Cole had hoped to be a doctor .
 Simpson played Jamaican cult music and began dancing during class . He lectured about the retention of African culture in the New World . Simpson played cult music as he lectured .
 Cultural anthropologist David Herskovits is best known for his advocacy of cultural relativism . He advocates the notion that all standards of judgment are based on and vary with a society’s culture .
 Cole met and married economics graduate student Robert Cole, the white son of an Iowa dairy farmer, in 1960 . Cole was the son of a white dairy farmer .
 The couple traveled to Jacksonville, Florida, and were married there, despite threats in the community that the family’s insurance company would be bombed if they went ahead with the ceremony . The family's insurance company was bombed by the community .
 The two honeymooned in Liberia, Africa, working on research that would form the bases of their respective Ph.D. dissertations . The two are currently working on their respective research projects .
 She completed her dissertation, “Traditional and Wage Earning Labor in Liberia,” in 1967 . She completed the dissertation in 1967.
 Johnnetta Cole taught parttime but was named Outstanding Faculty Member of the Year in 1965 . Cole was part-time faculty member of the year at the University of Columbia University .
 The book focused on the ways in which race, class, and gender intersect to affect women’s lives . The book focuses on how these factors affect women's lives .
 Cole left blunter College to assume the presidency of Spelman in 1987 . Until then, Spelman had never had a female African-American president .
 In 1999, the Radcliffe College Alumnae Association awarded her its Medal of Honor . She was awarded the award in 1999 .
 The story of Archimedes, mercilessly killed by a Roman soldier as he stewed over a math problem, inspired Sophie Germain to pursue the same discipline .
 She reasoned that any mental endeavor so engrossing would be worth her while . She reasoned she would make the effort worth the effort .
 St. Germain hoarded a stash of candles and some quilts and continued reading by candlelight . Germain defiantly hoarded some of the candles and quilts .
 Sophie Germain is one of the founders of mathematical physics . Germain contributed to the theory of numbers and the study of acoustics and elasticity .
 Germain reached the age of 13 when the French Revolution overturned French society in 1789 . Germain was 13 at the time of the revolution .
 She was born on April 1, 1776, in Paris to the wealthy silk merchant Ambrose Francois Germain and Marie Madeleine Gruguelu .
 Ambrose Francois Germain defended the third estate, and it was the merchant class that benefited most from the French Revolution . The merchant class benefited from the revolution in France .
 Sophie Germain learned of Joseph Lagrange’s lectures at the Ecole Polytechnique in Paris . As a woman, Germain could not attend classes there .
 Germain decided to turn in the paper that Professor Lagrange required of his “real” students, identifying herself as Monsieur Leblanc . As the academic year drew to a close, Germain turned in her paper .
 Germain revealed her true identity to Lagrange after receiving high public praise from Lagrange for her work . Lagrange revealed her identity to him .
 Germain asked Lagrange not to indicate to Gaufi that she was a woman . Leblanc's correspondence with Gaufi continued for several years before he discovered her gender .
 Germain shared her work with Gaufi and Adrian Marie Legendre, author of the 1798 Theory of Numbers . In her pursuit of pure math, Germain shares her work .
 Germain and Legendre collaborated on several theorems . He included her work in the second edition of Theory of Numbers . Germain's work was included in Theory Of Numbers .
 In pure math, Germain’s most fruitful contribution was her proof of part of an equation known as Fermat's Last Theorem . Germain arrived at Fermat’�s last Theorem in 1801, arriving at the age of 17 .
 The English mathematician Andrew Wiles proved the theorem for all cases in 1996 . He proved it to all cases .
 F Chladni conducted experiments on vibrating plates to trace the movement of sand particles that had been placed upon them . He used the vibrator plates to study sand particles .
 The lines formed by the vibrating sand were known as Chladni’s figures . But no one had been able to explain the movements of the sand mathematically .
 The Academy of Sciences offered a prize for the theory of the elasticity of surfaces in 1811 . The prize was offered for the formulation of the theory .
 When she died of breast cancer in Paris on June 27, 1831, her death certificate noted only that she owned property . Her death certificate ignored entirely her contributions to math and physics . She died in 1831 of a breast cancer .
 A History of Women in Science From Antiquity Through the Nineteenth Century. A History . of Women . in Science from Antiquity through the Nineteen Century. The History of . Women in . Science From . Antiquity .
 ITani created an alternative to the traditional educational system that reinforced the superior position of men over women in Japanese society . ITani was created by ITani to create an alternative education system .
 Flani founded a system that took into account the individual talents and interests of each girl student . Flani was inspired by Western schools, Flani says .
 Fler goal was to prepare each student to contribute equally to family life, alongside her male partner, rather than as his subordinate . Fler: "Each student was prepared for a family life with a partner"
 Girls should complement husbands' prerogatives in raising of a family, says Hani Hani . Girls should not necessarily strive to assume the same roles as men, he says . Instead, they should complement their husbands' role in raising a family .
 Though her ideas about women’s education may seem quite conservative today, in the early 20th-century Japan they were viewed as extremely progressive .
 Hani grew up in the rural, backward region of Aomori Prefecture, in Japan’s northeastern region . Hani was born in a rural region in Japan's northeast .
 The Meiji government was trying to tear down the old feudal system and replace it with a modern, unified nation . It had recently lifted the ban on Christianity and allowed women to petition for divorce .
 In further reform efforts, the government began requiring girls to attend school beyond the primary grades .
 The largest city in Japan, Tokyo offered its young newcomer a variety of possibilities and opportunities unknown in her home region . Tokyo is the capital of the country and is the most populous city in the world .
 She explored nearby Christian churches, began attending a Sunday School, and was baptized soon after . She began attending Sunday School .
 In 1891, Hani graduated from the high school and then went to Meiji Women’s School, a private three-year Christian mission college . Hani was born in Tokyo, Japan .
 The principal of the school was also the editor of a periodical called the Journal of Womens Studies . The principal was also editor of the journal .
 No longer able to rely on her family to finance her education, Hani pleaded with her principal to give her a part-time job at the magazine . Hani is now hoping to raise money to pay for her education .
 Hani’s assignment was to translate Chinese articles into the Japanese language . Hani was assigned to translate articles from Chinese to Japanese .
 The early phase of her career was cut short, however, for reasons that are not clear . Her career was also cut short for reasons not clear, however .
 She suddenly returned to her home village to teach elementary school and then met and married a railroad employee . She then returned to the village and moved to her native village .
 She kept her romantic traumas secret from her family, lest they require her to move back to the family home . She kept it secret from them, fearing they would require her move back .
 She returned to Tokyo, hoping to jump-start her abandoned writing career . Instead, she returned to her native Tokyo, Japan, to try and write again .
 When she saw a couple of openings at newspapers, she quickly wrote up job applications . But when she saw some openings at newspaper jobs, she wrote up applications .
 When she approached the reception desk at the first paper, she was told that the job had already been filled . She was told the job was already being filled .
 Hani told the next receptionist that she was handing in the application for someone else . Suspicious that they simply didn’t want to hire a woman, Hani said she was going to give in .
 While on the job, Hani heard about a column that was planned to launch about the lives of famous Japanese women .
 Hani quickly gathered her writing materials and arranged some interviews herself, even though reporters had already been assigned to the task . She quickly gathered some of the interviews and arranged them herself .
 She carefully sculpted the pieces to emphasize how her subjects had contributed to their husband’s successes, while at the same time presenting the women as individuals .
 Hani reported on previously neglected issues such as child care and orphanages in Japan . In addition to her column, Hani also reported on child care, orphanage and orphanage .
 Her work lit the fires of jealousy and spite in her male colleagues, with one important exception . Her work was warmly received by her readers, but she was not happy with her colleagues .
 Hani Yoshikazazu, seven years younger than Motoko, joined the staff of the newspaper, and the two journalists became fast friends . Motoko and Hani joined the newspaper together after Motoko's death .
 After they married in 1901, they were forced to relinquish one of their jobs . Couples were not allowed to work at the same location, so they relinquished one job .
 Yoshikazazu and Motoko both handed in their resignations . They decided to work for the Women’s Education Association where they could work in separate offices .
 Social change in Japan had to begin in the home, says Hani . Hani believes social change must begin in Japan .
 Hani still harbored dreams of founding a new school for girls, and in 1921, she opened the doors of the Freedom School .
 Hani saw the Japanese Ministry of Education as stifling and conformist . This private school operated independently of the restrictions of the Japanese government . Hani: Public schools in Japan were stifling, conformist.
 The public schools tend to reinforce the notion of male superiority, the author says . Furthermore, the public schools tended to reinforce male superiority .
 Girl students at the Freedom School wore colorful dresses of their own choosing and played outside during breaks . There was no marching in unison or stiff recitation during classes .
 The campus mimicked a cohesive family unit, where students learned to live, play, work, and pray together . Students learned to play, pray, live, and work together .
 Hani insisted on teaching Christian ethics of self-reliance, hard work, and love . Hani's Christian ethics were taught by Hani .
 She continued to reinforce Christian ethics even after she stopped attending church in 1925 . She continued her Christian beliefs even after stopping attending church .
 Freedom School by no means tore down the “good wife, wise mother” maxim . It did encourage students to begin thinking on their own, instead of blindly following authority .
 She is the earliest woman scientist whose life is fairly well documented . Her life is well documented and she is the first woman scientist to have her own name .
 We know very little about the lives of MARIA THE JEWESS and AGNODIKE, for example . We know little about their lives .
 Hypatia was the last pagan scientist to practice in Alexandria . Scientists came under persecution by Christians in the early days of Christianity .
 Hypatia, who taught math and philosophy at Alexandria’s university, invented the astrolabe, a precursor of the sextant, and an aerometer, used for measuring the weight of specific liquids .
 Hypatia’s life unfolded during a time of fundamental change in the Mediterranean world that would significantly impact world history . Her life unfolded in a time that would have significant impact on the world .
 Alexandria, Egypt, on the eastern edge of the Roman empire, was in the process of converting to Christianity when Hypatia was born in 370 . Alexandria was in process of conversion to Christianity at the time .
 Many Christians viewed math and science as heretical activities antithetical to the worship of Christ . Math and science was considered heretical by many Christians, though not all .
 Hypatia was reared with an emphasis on education, to think for herself, and to question authority, particularly in regard to religious doctrine . She was also reared to be critical of religious doctrine, particularly of the doctrine of the Bible .
 Hypatia may not have been perfect, but she certainly proved to be exceptional . She was one of the world's most famous women .
 She traveled to Athens and Italy to study under Plutarch the Younger’s daughter, Asclepigenia . She studied in Greece and Italy .
 She found Alexandria had changed during her absence, due to the increased power of Christians . She found, however, that Alexandria had . changed .
 The museum, with which her father had been associated, had lost its preeminence . Separate schools for pagans, Jews, and Christians were now separate schools for Christians .
 Hypatia taught the classical Greek philosophy of Plato and Aristotle to people of all religions . According to the encyclopedist Suidas . Suidas , Hypatias taught the ancient Greek philosophy to all religions.
 Alexandria's home became a kind of intellectual salon, where philosophical points were discussed and debated . Students reportedly converged on Alexandria to hear her lectures .
 Most of Hypatia’s writing is lost; what we do know of her texts comes to us from the writings of subsequent scholars . Most of the writing is known to have been lost .
 Information on her inventions is available through the letters of one of her pupils, Synesius of Gyrene, who became the wealthy Bishop of Ptolemais .
 Synesius’s letters to Hypatia include questions and requests for scientific advice . The letters include questions, requests for medical advice and requests from Hypatius .
 Hypatia is perhaps best known for her astrolabe, an astrological instrument designed to aid astronomers in finding the positions of the stars . Hypatian was born in Rome and died in 1883 .
 Astrologists used astrolabes to see how the sky looked at a specific place, at a given time . Astrolabees were used by astrologists to see the sky look at specific places at a certain time .
 Astrolabes brought to Europe from Islamic Spain in the early 12th century . Astrolabees were brought to the continent by Islamic Spain from the Islamic world .
 Scientific rationalism, to most Christians, ran counter to the Christian belief in a God-centered universe . Most Christians believe scientific rationalism runs counter to their belief in God's centered universe .
 Hypatia was pulled from her chariot by a mob who stripped her naked, burnt her flesh, quartered her body, and then burnt the remains to ashes . The incident cannot be directly traced to him .
 Miriam Cooney, Miriam P Celebrates Women in Mathematics and Science . Cooney has published a book on women in mathematics and science .
 In 1822, Greek insurgents had wrested control of the Peloponnese from its Turkish overlords . They had boldly declared victory in their quest to proclaim Greece independent from the Ottoman Empire .
 Three years later, however, with help from Egypt, the Turks toppled the insurgents’ foothold, and all was lost . The Turks toppled them three years later .
 A nearly bare-breasted Greek woman with outstretched arms kneels atop a stone tablet that has crushed her countrymen and women . She kneels in front of the stone tablet . The woman kneels on top of the tablet to show support for her country .
 A Turkish soldier, claiming the territory with his planted flag, stands triumphantly in the background . The Turkish soldier claims the territory in a photo taken in the area .
 The woman represents Greek nationalism crushed, albeit only temporarily, by Turkish brutality . She represents a Greek woman who represents her national pride .
 Evanthia Kairi penned her play Nikiratos after the fall of Missolonghi, dedicating it to the Greek heroines who had sacrificed their lives in the struggle .
 She taught classics and history at the school for girls in Kydonies in Greek Asia Minor . She translated French Enlightenment works into Greek and translated works from the Enlightenment .
 She helped encourage European support for Greece’s bid for independence . She also helped to encourage support for the country's independence bid .
 Little information is available on either Kairi or her work . History writing in English on Greek history and literature has largely ignored her .
 Kairi was born to a wealthy family on the Greek island of Andros, just east of the Greek mainland . She was born in Andros and grew up in a wealthy, wealthy family in Greece .
 Evanthia grew up studying philosophy, Latin, and ancient Greek language alongside her brother . Evanthia is now studying philosophy and Latin at the University of Cambridge .
 She taught Latin and Greek literature at the girls school in Kydonies, where she later became principal . She was principal at the school where she was later principal .
 She implemented many European Enlightenment ideas in her school . She was a reform-minded teacher and principal .
 The Greek Orthodox Church defended Greek nationalism after Greece fell to the Ottoman Turks in the 15th century . The church defended Greek nationalism after the fall of Greece to the Turks .
 Ottoman occupation of Greece was harsh, but the church was left intact . Ottoman occupation left the church intact . The church was destroyed by the Ottoman invasion of Greece .
 Revolt against the Ottoman Empire commenced in the early 19th century . Revolt was buoyed by religious and nationalist sentiment, Western Enlightenment ideals and cooperation .
 The struggle for Greek independence was long and protracted, marred by internal dissension and culminating in the Greek War for Independence . The struggle was long, protracted and protracted .
 Through her personal contacts and her charisma, she created a strong pro-Greece sentiment in Europe among women intellectuals and activists, according to The Bloomsbury Guide to Women’s Literature .
 The Greeks gained control of the Peloponnese, the peninsula that juts into the Mediterranean Sea off the west side of the Greek mainland, by 1822 . With the help of women warriors such as Laskarina BOUBOULINA, the Greeks won control
 The rebels had also regained Missolonghi, a village just north of the Gulf of Corinth that separates the Peloponnese from the mainland . The rebels also regained the village of Missolongi, which is located on the island of Corinth .
 Unable to stem the nationalist tide that erupted all over Greece, the Turkish government solicited aid from the Egyptian army . The Turkish government had to rely on Egypt's help to stop the uprising .
 Egyptian and Turkish troops finally defeated the last of their opponents in April 1826 . The city managed to resist the attack for nearly a year .
 The play used Enlightenment ideas about individual liberty in contrast to the existing culture and politics of exclusion .
 A Greco-Turkish peace finally concluded in London, and the Turkish Sultan recognized Greek independence in 1832 . The Sultan recognized the independence of Greece in Greece .
 After the war ended, Evanthia Kairi returned to her native island of Andros and established a home and school for war orphans . Evanthia established the school for orphans .
 The Bloomsbury Guide to Womens Literature, Claire Buck, ed. Claire Buck is the author of Claire Buck's first edition of the book .
 Much of what we know about Adjeng Kartini comes from letters she wrote to friends and family in Java and Holland . She was a Javanese princess and educator .
 The letters reveal a young Javanese woman influenced by her connections to the Western world . She longing for an education and the right of women to obtain one, she writes .
 The only way possible for this high-born Javanese woman to create the kind of world she wanted was to surrender her independence and marry . Ironically, this is the only way she could achieve her dream of being independent .
 Adjeng Kartini started a school for girls in Jakarta, Java’s capital . Toward the end of her short life, she started a Jakarta school .
 Kartini came of age just as Java’s interactions with Western ideas and values grew more and more unsettling . Kartini was born in Java, Indonesia, and his family moved to Indonesia .
 By the 17th century, most of the Indonesian archipelago was under Dutch control . It remained so until the Japanese invaded Indonesia in 1942 in 1942 .
 After Japan’s defeat in 1945, Indonesian nationalists organized under the leadership of Sukarno . He proclaimed independence from Holland and became president of Indonesia .
 Several years of negotiations and warfare followed, with the Dutch granting independence in 1949 .
 The colonial system came under sharp criticism around the end of the 19 th century from its officers stationed in Indonesia and humanitarian reformers in Holland .
 This program emphasized increased education for Indonesians, fuller participation in local government, and efforts to raise indigenous standards of living . It also emphasized increased participation in the local government .
 Although Adjeng’s title was “princess,” she was not actually one in the true sense of the word, in that her father was not sovereign over a royal domain . Her father did not have a sovereign domain .
 He served at the discretion of the Dutch, who put him in charge of an administrative district . He served in the Dutch .
 A Dutch adviser, the assistant resident, ensured that all decisions made coincided with Dutch interests . The Dutch adviser was a Dutch adviser .
 Kartini’s father spoke Dutch fluently, which is unusual among Javanese regents . Kartini's father was an Indonesian regent, who spoke fluent Dutch .
 Kartini's father and uncles had been educated by Dutch tutors . Her brother, Kartono, graduated with honors from a colonial Dutch high school and continued with his higher education .
 She attended a Dutch elementary school, established in Japara for the children of Dutch colonists . She attended the school from the age of six until she was 12 years old .
 A handful of Javanese children were allowed to attend, if they could learn the Dutch language . The Dutch language is spoken in the Netherlands .
 Kartini learned the differences between Western and Eastern cultures at a Dutch school . Kartini says he learned the difference between cultures in both cultures . The Dutch school is based in Amsterdam .
 Dutch children exhibited a strong sense of independence and choice absent from Javanese culture . What impressed her most was the fact that the Dutch children, from an early age, exhibited a sense of choice .
 Each child cultivated a sense of control over her personal future and of directing her future for herself . This idea was especially foreign to a Javanese girl .
 Upper-class girls were forbidden by law to leave their homes from the age of 12 through 14, or until they married . Girls were forbidden from leaving their homes until they were 14 years old .
 Kartini admired the Western notion of independence . She retained her respect and affinity for Javanese religion . Kartini was an advocate for the independence of the country .
 Javanese aristocratic culture mandated isolation for daughters before marriage . As a sign of the family’s high rank and pure blood, isolation was a sign .
 This Dutch woman, a fervent socialist and feminist, became a tutor to Kartini . She imparted much of her political ideas to her charge . Kartini was a member of the first generation of women in the Netherlands .
 Kartini vowed to Ovink-Soer that she would never marry, agreeing with her tutor that marriage crippled a woman’s autonomy . Kartini said marriage crippled women's autonomy .
 Kartini established a friendship with Stella Zeehandelaar, a radical thinker, through correspondence . Kartini also established another friendship with the radical thinker through correspondence.
 Kartini asked her father if she could join her brother in Holland for study . Ovink-Soer left Japara in 1899, and Kartini moved to Holland to study . Kartini was married to Ovink Soer's brother, who died in 1899 .
 Kartini’s father allowed her to study for a year in Batavia, the colonial capital, with the ultimate aim of becoming a teacher in a school for the daughters of regents, to be established by Abendanon . Kartini's aim was to become a teacher at
 Soon, however, it became clear that such a school would not be successful . The school was founded in 1881 .
 Nearly all of the Javanese regents reported that they would never send their daughters to such a school, or any school, for that matter . The school is located in Indonesia, Indonesia's largest city .
 Kartini was awarded a government grant for her education in Holland . Her ideas for a girls’s school inspired a Social Democrat politician to grant her grant .
 He had published an account of his travels in Java, in which he described Kartini .
 The publicity outraged both the Javanese and the Dutch in Japara, who began accusing Kartini of being sexually promiscuous . Kartini was accused of sexually promiscuous by both the Dutch and the Japanese .
 Her father arranged an alliance between Kartini and the regent of Rambang . Kartini's father arranged the alliance between her and the king .
 Kartini’s marriage turned out to be beneficial for her cause, since her husband supported her ideas . Kartini's marriage was beneficial for Kartini, since she had a husband who supported her idea .
 Several Kartini schools exist throughout Java, thanks to the initiative of Kartini’s old friend Abendanon . Kartini's old friend is now running a school in Indonesia .
 Kartini established the Kartini Foundation, a private organization dedicated to the funding of girls’ schools . Kartini is the founder of a private foundation dedicated to funding girls' schools . The foundation was founded by Kartini himself .
 Abendanon also had Kartini’s letters published in 1911, under the title Through Darkness Into Light . Kartini's letters were also published under the same title .
 Few have examined the nature of the human mind in greater detail than Langer . Langer's work on the subject of mind research has been published in the past .
 She might have added that she also wrote poems and short stories to amuse her younger siblings .
 Antonio Knauth did not favor the notion of educating girls beyond basic grades . After his death, Susanne enrolled in Radcliffe College, earning a B.A. in 1920 and a Ph.D. in philosophy .
 The Cruise of the Little Dipper and Other Fairy Tales is based on the stories that she had made up during her childhood . The cruise of the little Dipper is a collection of fairy tales .
 She began publishing scholarly articles in journals such as Journal of Philosophy and Mind . Soon after, she began publishing academic articles .
 An Introduction to Symbolic Logic soon became the leading textbook on the subject . The book was widely used in college-level philosophy courses .
 Philosophy in a New Key by Ernst Gassirer proved even more influential . Philosophy in the New Key was influenced by the German philosopher . The key to the key of philosophy is to use as a guide to understanding and understanding .
 In Philosophy in a New Key, Langer identifled the basis of 20th-century philosophy as a concern with the nature of symbolism . Langer: The basis of philosophy is concern with symbolism .
 She believed that humans order their experiences by making symbols to communicate abstract ideas to others . She said that this process occurs at all levels of life .
 The creative thinking that emerges while making a painting or playing a piano sonata, they believed, springs from nonrational thinking . Intellectual thinking is logical or rational, they said .
 Langer: Verbal language, too, involves the making of symbols and, according to Langer, leads to reason and abstract thought . Langer says language is a form of language that involves symbols and leads to abstract thought, he says .
 A Theory of Art hanger’s next major work, provides a detailed account of the principles of creative expression in art .
 Art is about an artist’s understanding of feeling, not an expression of how he or she felt while creating the work . Art is not about feeling, it's about understanding, not feeling, the artist says . Art should be about understanding of feelings, not expression of feeling .
 Langer postulates that art theory must depend on the theory of the mind . Langer drew on the tenets of Philosophy in a New Key to postulate that art .
 She examined various art forms, including painting, music, and dance, and concluded that art, like other life processes, is a symbolic transformation of experience . She said art is a symbol of transformation of life .
 Artists do not seek to arouse or convey their feelings, according to Langer, but rather to present the nature of emotions themselves . Langer: Artists aim to present themselves, rather than arouse, convey feelings .
 An Essay on Human Feeling is a three-volume work written between 1967 and 1982 . It is written in three volumes .
 The third volume of the set concludes in outline form, because hanger’s worsening eyesight and other health problems precluded its completion . The hanger is now retired .
 In this final odyssey into the mind, Langer relates her theories of language, aesthetics, and the mind to the evolution of the human being . Langer: The evolution of language and aesthetics is an important part of our evolution .
 Langer concluded that humans evolved into a higher life-form because our posture, hands, and central nervous systems enabled us to improve our abilities to create symbols to communicate to each other .
 Human evolution has been the process of improving our responses to each other and to our environment . Human evolution is the result of improving responses to the environment and the environment, says the author .
 She won the Radcliffe achievement medal in 1950, the Edgar Kaufmann Charitable Trust research grant in 1956 and several honorary doctorates .
 Langer was a small, suntanned “woman of iron will, impatient of laziness and self-indulgence” Langer preferred solitude in her colonial house in Old Lyme, Connecticut, to company .
 Sindiwe Magona's life convincingly illustrates the power of politics over an individual’s life and career . The South African teacher, human rights worker and writer is a former human rights activist .
 Her autobiography To My Childrens Children recounts her experiences as an African teacher in a nation darkened by apartheid .
 The book earned an honorable mention in the 1991 Noma Award for Publishing in Africa . The book was published in 1991 .
 Magona completed her teaching certificate in 1961 . She taught at Hlengisa Higher Primary School in Nyanga, a village just west of Cape Town . She is survived by her husband and three children .
 Magona expected to be able to implement skills she had been taught . But she found that the harsh reality of impoverished black African schools, intensified by apartheid, required much more of her than she had dreamed .
 Sindiwe Magona was born in the village of Tsolo but grew up in Cape Town’s black townships . She is the second of eight children and grew up with eight black children in Cape Cape Town . Sindiw Magono was born and raised in
 The South African national government began instituting apartheid in 1948 . To My Childrens Children was published by Magona in 1988 .
 Black Africans forced to relocate into segregated home283 SCHOLARS AND EDUCATORS lands in rural areas and black townships in urban centers . Black Africans were forced to move into segregated homes and schools in urban areas .
 Magona experienced the upheaval of relocation and then the consequent erosion of traditional tribal African life . The upheaval was the result of relocation .
 Magona’s father worked as a gas station attendant . The father-of-one worked as an attendant at a local gas station .
 She went to St. Matthews Training School in Nyanga and then completed her primary school teaching certificate .
 Unable to find work for several months, she worked at a fish market in the black township Guguletu, north of Cape Town .
 Magona was a teacher at Nyanga School in Nyanga, Tanzania, in 1961 . She was given a contract to teach in the second quarter .
 She marched confidently to the school building building the following week . Thrilled, she marched confidently into the building following week.
 Chipper and bright in beige skirt, blazer, and kid gloves, Magonas face fell when she saw her students .
 Seventy-two African pupils stared expectantly at her as she walked into the room . She was greeted by a group of African pupils .
 She had been expecting 11and 12-year-olds; instead, they ranged from age nine to 19 . She was expecting 11-12-years-old; instead she was expecting nine-to-19 . The children range from age 9 to 19.
 She reported that the skill levels of her students varied just as widely . She said she was surprised by the wide range of skill levels .
 On her first day, she resorted to remedial lessons when she discovered that most of the pupils could not do simple arithmetic .
 She divided the class into the capable and incapable, and she planned lessons off the top of her head accordingly . She planned lessons based on the fact that she was incapable and capable .
 She made up a story problem involving corrals and cattle to teach remedial students how to do addition and subtraction . Students already able to do math were asked to read their Xhosa language books quietly .
 Magona taught her 72 students Xhosa language, English, Afrikaans, health education, social studies, music, math, and religious education .
 South Africa’s currency) went to white students, while R28 was spent on blacks . South Africa's currency (R28) went for white students .
 The classrooms in which Magona taught were extremely overcrowded . Even though, the classrooms were overcrowded, they were extremely crowded .
 Magona lamented that she could only encourage above-average students to excel on their own . The time she spent trying to help remedial students was never enough, she said .
 In 1961, three things happened to Magona that impressed upon her the intertwining of the personal and the political . In 1961 she was inspired by the events of that year's events .
 Two students met their deaths at school when the floor covering the pit toilets collapsed and they drowned; and South Africa became a republic . She, like all other black South Africans, was forced to carry a pass with her wherever she went .
 In 1962, only three months after her second year of teaching began, Magona was forced to resign when she became pregnant . It was against department regulations for unmarried mothers to teach .
 In 1967, she returned to teaching primary school until 1980, and then she taught high school Xhosa until 1981 . In 1967 she taught primary school . She also taught primary and high school high school .
 Maria Montessori was the founder of the first school system for children . Her method of education is the chosen method of thousands of private schools throughout the world .
 Montessori's method is based on the notion that children exhibit creativity and an interest in learning during certain periods of childhood . Teachers should make the most of these periods by encouraging independent learning in each child .
 Maria was born on August 31, 1870, in Chiarivalle, Italy, in the province of Ancona on the central coast of the Adriatic Sea .
 Her father was an army officer who discouraged Maria’s interest in pursuing a career . Maria's father was a military officer who encouraged her to join the army .
 Maria's mother, however, disagreed with her father and supported Maria's dreams . Her mother also supported Maria’s dreams and supported her daughter's dream .
 When Maria was 12, the family relocated to Rome, where the young girl could take advantage of better schools . Maria's mother moved her to the city of Rome, Italy, when she was 12 years old . Maria is now in the middle of a career in journalism .
 She announced an interest in mechanical engineering and math when she was 14 . She sought out classes at a technical institute at age 14 .
 She soon switched her area of study to biology and then decided to study medicine . She then switched her interest to biology before deciding to become a doctor .
 Medical careers, except in the fledging occupation of nursing, were seen as inappropriate for women . Medical careers were also seen as unsuitable for women in the 1930s .
 In 1896, Montessori became the first woman to receive a medical degree in Italy . She specialized in pediatrics and psychiatry; she specialized in pediatriciatrics .
 She decided to view education as a science requiring observation and experimentation . She decided she wanted to focus on the science of education .
 She concluded that children build themselves from what they find in their learning environment . She said children learn from their own environment .
 Much of her work at the clinic involved retarded children . She became convinced that handling retarded children was more a question of instructional method than medical treatment .
 Montessori created methods for teaching retarded children and instructing employees in her method . The method was created to teach the retarded children .
 Montessori gained recognition for her methods when many of her retarded students passed the standard sixth-grade tests of Italian public schools . Her methods helped her students pass the standard 6th grade tests of public schools in Italy .
 The government had put her in charge of a state-supported school in a slum area of Rome . The school is really more of a day-care center for preschoolers .
 This gave her a chance to test what she had learned about child development, in her work with retarded children, on other children . It gave her an opportunity to test her knowledge of child development on other kids .
 Montessori called the center the Casa dei Bambini, or Children’s House . The center was the center for children in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Montessori purposely called it a house rather than a school, for she viewed education for young children as a process that could be done anywhere that children were free to act on their environment . She viewed education as an educational process, not a school .
 She found that education is not something that a teacher does, but rather, it is a process that develops spontaneously in all human beings . Education is not a teacher's job, but it's a process of developing spontaneously .
 The teacher's task is to arrange an environment that will stimulate and motivate learning . The teacher’s task, then, is to organise an environment where learning is stimulated .
 Montessori had carpenters build child-sized tables and desks . Carpenters were used to build the tables for children .
 She recognized that an adult-sized world frustrates children, which is not conducive to learning . An adult-size world is not a good environment for children, she said .
 Montessori designed child-sized toilets, lowered windows, and lowered bookshelves . In a sense, she became an environmental engineer designing child-size toilets and lowered windows .
 Montessori was also a womens rights activist . Her primary energies were devoted to education . She also campaigned for women's rights .
 In 1915, Montessori attracted the world’s attention with her Casa dei Bambini exhibit at the Panama-Pacific International Exhibition in San Francisco . The exhibit was the first of its kind in the world .
 The Spanish government asked her to open a research institute . Two years later, she was asked to open an institute in Spain .
 She continued her work worldwide until her death on May 6, 1952, lecturing and opening new teaching institutes . The Association Montessori Internationale, in 1929, still exists today .
 Montessori influenced Anna FREUD, Jean Piaget, Alfred Adler, Erik Erikson, and countless others involved in child psychology and education . Anna Freud is the founder of the Montessoria Foundation .
 She was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize three times, in 1949, 1950, and 1951 . She had been nominated three times for the Peace Prize, three times .
 She is credited with developing the open classroom, individualized education, teaching toys, and alternative instruction .
 The Greatest Educational Theorists from Across the Centuries and Around the World. The greatest educational theorists are from across the . Centuries .
 Olimpia Fulvia Morato thanks her tutor for encouraging her learning . Olympia Morata is a 14-year-old Italian .
 Morata was born nine years after the Protestant Reformation shook European society . Morata is born in Morata, Italy, in 17th century .
 In 1517, Martin Luther nailed his 95 theses to the church door in Wittenberg, Germany . The 95-theses were nailed to the door of the church in 1517 . Martin Luther had nailed the theses on the door to a church door . Luther's 95
 Theses were statements of protest against the Catholic Church’s practice of the selling of indulgences that supposedly granted a person pardon from sin . The theses were theses of protest .
 Luther proposed that each individual believer could be saved from sin only through her or his faith in Christ, not through a priest’s mediation . Luther: "Each individual believer can be saved only through their faith"
 Protestantism spread throughout Europe in the 16th century, aided by the printing press and translations of Protestant works from the Latin into vernacular languages . The printing press helped spread Protestantism throughout Europe .
 Olympia had learned two classical and one vernacular language by the age of 12 . Olympia had also learned two vernal and two classical languages by age of 11 .
 Her early life at court perpetuated her studies and introduced her to Protestantism . Additionally, she also introduced her Protestantism to her early life .
 Renee brought to the Italian court liberal ideas about religion . She welcomed a number of Protestant guests, including John Calvin and Clement Marot .
 Morata reveled in the spirited religious and philosophical debates she heard in court among Europe’s finest thinkers . Morata was invited by Renee to tutor her youngest daughter, Anne .
 In 1543, Morata’s world faced dark threats from the Counter, or Catholic, Reformation . Counter-Catholic Reformation defended the Catholic Church against the Protestant Reformation, while reforming the church's abuses . Morata's world was threatened by the Counter-Reformation
 Pope Paul III visited Ferrara in 1543 and established a Council of Inquisitors to ferret out heretics . The Council was established by the Pope in 1542 .
 Morata visited him in prison, and her friend Princess Lavinia della Rovere traveled to Rome to intervene on his behalf, but to no avail . Morata died in prison in 1944 .
 In 1554, Renee herself capitulated and attended Mass, probably to save her own neck . Renee attended Mass in 1554 .
 Olympia Morata was absent while the worst of the Inquisition swept through the court . Fortunately, she was absent from the court while it was under attack .
 She was ill much of the time and then left to attend to her sick father, who died in 1548 . The queen was ill during her time in England .
 Her former pupil Anne married the Duke de Guise and left Ferrara for France . Her pupil Anne was married to the Duke of Guise .
 After 1548, the Ferrara court no longer welcomed Olympia Morata, whereupon she began tutoring her younger siblings at home . The Ferrara Court no longer allowed her to attend court events .
 The following year, Olympia met Andreas Grundler, a scholar from Schweinfurt, Bavaria . Olympia met the scholar at the end of her trip to the University of Munich .
 While Grundler studied medicine in Ferrara, the two fell in love and married in a Protestant wedding ceremony in 1550 . The two were married in Protestant wedding ceremonies in 1549 .
 After Grundler finished his degree, he began looking for a position at a university in Germany . He left his bride behind to care for her brothers and sisters . Grundlers' wife was left to look after her siblings and her family .
 In June 1550, Grundler returned to Italy, and he and his wife and her brother Emilio left Italy forever . In 1550 he and her family were forced to leave Italy forever.
 Morata's family moved to Schweinfurt in the summer of 1551 . Grundler was hired as a physician and Morata could resume writing projects .
 Morata's Dialogue of Theophila and Philotina is Morata’s most significant work . Morata was born in Rome, Italy, and lived there with his wife and children in the 1930s .
 Morata’s work was shaped by the Protestant notion of personal salvation . Theophila and Philotina converse on matters of worldly pleasures, suffering, sin, and individual responsibility .
 Theophila urges her companion to expend her energies seeking God through scriptures, for only God, she promised, could sate her earthly desires . She promised, she also promised, that only God could satisfy her earthly needs .
 Germany experienced its own turbulence during the mid-16th century . Far from being a refuge from the Inquisition, Germany experienced turbulence .
 Schweinfurt was occupied for 14 months, during which time half of the city’s population expired from the Black Plague . About half of city's population died from the plague during that time .
 Occupying soldiers had not been paid, Morata reported in a letter written to her sister Victoria in Ferrara . The town’s resources were being depleted by the angry mobs of soldiers .
 For several weeks, Morata nursed her husband through a bout with the plague . She nursed him through several weeks of illness .
 During the waning months of the siege, the family hid in a wine cellar during the siege . The family was forced to hide in the wine cellar for months .
 Grundler, Morata, and her brother fled to Heidelberg, leaving behind all their possessions, including Morata’s substantial library . The family was forced to flee to the city, leaving all of their possessions behind .
 Morata and his team-mates made the journey on foot, the latter half of it with no shoes . They made their way to the Santiago Bernabeu with the help of Morata's wife .
 Morata set out to rebuild her library, but in the summer of 1555, she too fell victim to the plague as it swept through Heidelberg, her last refuge . Morata died of the plague in 1555 .
 Morata's house in Schweinfurt was later rebuilt, and a commemoration to Morata was set at its entrance . The house Morata occupied was later built, and was later set at the entrance .
 Bainton, Roland H Women of the Reformation in Germany and Italy . Bainton: The Reformation was a Protestant Protestant movement in the Netherlands .
 Indian womens rights advocate and educator Dhanvanthi Rama Rau was one of the first Indian women to attend college and to teach at an institution of higher learning in India . She was the first woman in India to be allowed to study in college .
 She became secretary of the All-India Child Marriage Abolition League . She became a member of the International Alliance for Suffrage and Equal Citizenship . She also became president of the Women's Conference .
 Her primary concern, however, was in the area of family planning and birth control . She said she was concerned about birth control and family planning .
 She worked for the Family Planning Association of India from 1949 to 1963 . She was president of the International Planned Parenthood Association from 1963 to 1971 .
 Rau was born on May 10, 1893, to Rup Krishna Handoo and Bhagbhari Shah, Kashmiri Brahmins from the northern region of India . He was born in Kashmiri Bhagbari Shah .
 The Brahmin class is the highest class, as the Brahmins were Hindu priests . Brahmin is a Brahmin Hindu priest .
 Dhanvanthi’s father was an official on the government-owned Southern Mratha Railway . He was a railway official .
 The railway was headquartered in Hubli, and the family lived in one of several modest homes in the new section of town known as the Railway Colony . The family was moved to the railway colony of Hubli .
 There was little interaction between the Indian population that lived and marketed their goods in the center of the village and the railroad officials who lived in the Railway Colony .
 St. Mary’s Catholic school was built by Catholic missionaries in the 1880s . It was the first Catholic school built by the missionaries .
 Her male colleagues protested Rau’s presence daily, calling her a traitor to her caste . Rau's male colleagues called her a 'traitor' to their caste .
 While at the university, Rau learned of the tremendous social changes brewing in India, and of the small professional class of women working as doctors, lawyers, and teachers .
 When she received her M.A. from the university, she began lecturing, in English, at Queen Mary’s College in Madras .
 Dhanvanthi’s parents were still strict Hindus and insisted that she marry . Although they encouraged her education, they still insisted on her marrying .
 Sir Benegal Narsing Rama Rau was a Cambridge-educated, liberal-minded official in the Indian Civil Service . His parents arranged a marriage between their daughter and Sir Bengal Narsi Rau . They arranged the marriage between them and a Cambridge educated official in India
 The two wed in 1919, relieving Dhanvanthi’s parents of the prospect of a spinster daughter . The two were able to live outside of the confines of a traditional Indian household .
 During the early years of her marriage, Rau kept her house and raised two daughters, Santha and Premila . She kept her home and raised her two daughters . Rau was married to Rau's first husband and died in 2003 .
 In a November 1953 interview with the American magazine Glamour, Rau explained the traditional Indian marriage . Rau was married to an Indian woman .
 Rau was elected secretary of the All-India Child Marriage Abolition League . Rau campaigned actively for the Sarda Act, which raised the legal age of marriage for girls to 14 .
 Her involvement in trying to abolish child marriages led to her interest in woman suffrage . Quite naturally, her involvement led to an interest in the issue .
 She and her family lived in England from 1929 to 1938, where she met other suffrage advocates . In 1932, she joined the International Alliance for Suffrage and Equal Citizenship .
 Both husband and wife desired independence for their homeland, but since Rama Rau was employed by the government, they could do nothing overtly to effect change .
 After Indian independence, Rau returned to India and launched her crusade for emancipating women through the use of birth control .
 Rau and her allies felt that women’s lives in India were crippled by incessant child-bearing . Rau said that women were crippled in India .
 Her goal was to introduce birth control methods to women living in the 550,000 villages . Her goal is to bring birth control to women in the villages . She says birth control is a vital part of the survival of the world's poorest people .
 From 1963 to 1971, Rau served as president of the International Planned Parenthood Association . Rau is credited with saving the lives of Planned Parenthood .
 Her daughter, Santha Rama Rau, became a novelist and writer . Her granddaughter, Aisha Wayle, became the first woman to own a London investment company .
 American political and social activist and educator Eleanor Roosevelt’s life spanned some of the most crucial decades in American social and political history . Eleanor Roosevelt was an educator and activist .
 Eleanor Roosevelt oversaw many of the programs designed to bring relief to millions of Americans during the Great Depression . Her husband, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, became president during the Depression .
 She lived to see the Kennedy administration’s Peace Corps program coalesce . She had been appointed to be an adviser to that organization when she died in 1962 .
 Roosevelt was an author, diplomat, and political activist whose name became synonymous with liberal causes such as social and racial equality .
 Eleanor Roosevelt promised some of the most neglected people within the United States—women and African Americans—that the federal government was their government, too .
 Roosevelt's political philosophy can be partly explained by her traumatic childhood . Roosevelt’s political philosophy is at least partly explained, she says . Roosevelt was a victim of a traumatic childhood, she writes .
 By the time she was 10 years old, all of her immediate family had died except one of her brothers . By the age of 10, she was at the center of her life .
 Eleanor Roosevelt's father was Elliot Roosevelt, brother of U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt . Eleanor's father, Elliot Roosevelt , loved her dearly but disappointed her repeatedly . Elliot Roosevelt was the brother of Theodore Roosevelt, who died in 1918 .
 Elliot Roosevelt made promises to spend time with his daughter, but instead he spent hours drinking in bars . Elliot Roosevelt was an alcoholic who spent hours in bars every night .
 Eleanor’s mother grew embarrassed by what she saw as her daughter's unattractive appearance . In the meantime, her mother was worried about her daughter’tattattattability .
 The children were sent to live with their grandmother, where Eleanor’s older brother died . The children are now living with her grandmother in the UK .
 When she turned 15, Eleanor’s grandmother sent her to a finishing school in England . She was sent to the finishing school when she was just 15 .
 The finishing school, operated by Mademoiselle Souvestre, imbued its charges with a sense of social responsibility . It is now a finishing school in Paris, France .
 Her cousin Franklin Roosevelt tried to woo her away from her work . Meanwhile, however, she was being wooed by her cousin .
 From 1906 until 1916, Eleanor Roosevelt gave birth to six children, one of whom did not survive infancy . One of her six children was not born alive .
 During World War I, Eleanor did relief work for the Red Cross and toured battlefields in Europe . She toured the battlefields and toured Europe during the war .
 After the war, an event occurred in her family that would change her private and public life forever . Her family was devastated by the loss of her life .
 Eleanor coaxed her husband back into public life after her mother-in-law wanted him to retire . Franklin Franklin's wife, Eleanor, was forced to give up politics and retire immediately .
 At the same time, she pursued social activism, working for the League of Women Voters, the National Consumer's League, and the Women’s Trade Union League .
 When FDR was elected president in 1932, Eleanor became the most loved and most hated first lady in U.S. history . She was also the most disliked first lady of all time . FDR's wife was the most hated and most loved first lady .
 Eleanor Roosevelt hated parties unless they served a larger political or social function . Eleanor Roosevelt, however, hated parties, unless they were for a larger purpose .
 Eleanor snagged the opportunity to make her posi290 SCHOLARS and EDUCATORS count politically . Eleanor snags the chance to make the education count .
 She continued her ‘ears and legs’ role for her husband, but more and more, she herself decided where she ought to go . She continued to be ‘ear and legs' role for him, but she decided where to go, she said .
 She became a frequent visitor to poor neighborhoods and towns where working women, African Americans, and tenant farmers were struggling to feed their families . She visited working women and African Americans in poor neighborhoods, towns .
 Eleanor Roosevelt wanted to secure equal opportunities for other neglected segments of American society . Eleanor Roosevelt was assassinated in 1944 .
 She promoted the cause of Arthurdale, a farming cooperative built by the government for unemployed miners in Appalachia . She helped organize the National Youth Administration in 1935, a program designed to provide work for unemployed youth .
 For the first time since Reconstruction, African Americans felt that the federal government was willing to assist them in their plight . African Americans feel that the government is willing to help them in the struggle .
 After FDR’s death in 1945, Eleanor Roosevelt shifted her focus to educating the nation in its new role within the newly organized United Nations .
 Frances Elizabeth Caroline Willard was an educator and international temperance leader . "DO EVERYTHING,” exhorted Frances Willard of students and fellow temperance advocates .
 The phrase became one of her favorite slogans during the years when she led the American movement against the excessive consumption of alcohol .
 The intellectual life of America’s foremost social activist is riddled with paradox, he says . The social activist's life has been filled with paradoxes .
 Willard argued that a woman’s primary duty was to devote herself to home and family . A skillful and charismatic leader and public speaker, Willard was known for his charismatic style .
 Never before in their history had American women left the house in so many numbers and with such alacrity . For while 19th-century Victorian women were steeped in ‘separate spheres’ ideology .
 Willard’s advocacy of women leaving the home to lobby for temperance resulted, in part, from her experiences as an educator . Willard's advocacy was based on experiences as a teacher .
 Willard advocated temperance because she felt that inebriated husbands and fathers threatened the firm moral and financial foundation upon which the home rested .
 When Frances Willard turned two, her father sold his large farm and business and moved the family to Ohio . Josiah and Mary Willard both attended Oberlin College .
 The Willards moved back to Janesville, Wisconsin, where they resumed farming . Five years later, the family relocated once again to the Willards' hometown .
 Mary Willard tutored Frances at home, except for a few years that she spent attending rural schools . Frances Willard was tutored at home by Willard until she died .
 Frances Willard was president of the National Women’s Christian Temperance Union for nearly 20 years . At the age of 18, Willard entered the Milwaukee Female Col. Col. Willard .
 During the decade following her graduation, Willard faced several important crossroads . Willard's life was at the center of her career .
 She became engaged in 1860 to Charles Fowler, a Methodist minister whom she admired and respected but did not love . She was engaged to Fowler in 1860 .
 For months she turned over the engagement in her mind and heart, finally deciding that she could not fulfill her own ambitions to lead American women in a political movement and be a proper wife to a husband .
 Frances Willard was deeply attached to and in love with Mary Bannister, who ultimately married Frances’s brother Oliver Willard .
 In the midst of this emotional turmoil, Willard began her teaching career . Willard is now a teacher in Texas .
 Willard is best known for her work in temperance . Willard's first career was in education .
 She taught school in rural Illinois and in an Illinois academy during the 1860s, during which time she also wrote her first book .
 She spent two years in Europe and the Near East, studying at the Sorbonne and the College de France in Paris .
 When she returned to the U.S. she accepted a post as president of Evanston College for Ladies . When she left, she became the president of the college .
 In her post, Willard began meeting women leaders of the suffrage and temperance movements, especially those living in the eastern part of the U.S. Willard met many women leaders in her post .
 She disagreed with Northwestern’s administration over the governance of the division . She resigned her position in 1874, but disagreed with the administration .
 Temperance had long been a concern among religious leaders in the United States . Frances Willard raised the movement into a vigorous political force by making it a women’s issue . Temperance was a women's issue .
 Willard felt that women’s views were needed in all aspects of society, but temperance struck a chord in her because of the pernicious effect alcoholism was having on the home .
 She wrote letters to newspapers, published pamphlets, made speeches, and organized locals . She soon transformed herself into the powerhouse behind the organization .
 In 1879 she became the WCTU’s president . Few questioned her talent and drive, and in 1879, she became president .
 Under Willard’s leadership, the WCTU grew in membership, expanded its interests to include suffrage . Willard supported the kindergarten movement, lobbied for federal aid to education, promoted vocational training .
 The WCTU lobbied successfully for compulsory temperance education and raising the age of consent . Well before women had won the right to vote in the United States .
 She began spending more and more of her time in England to be with her companion Isabel Somerset . The Queen spent most of her life in England, spending most of it in England .
 A law prohibiting women from practicing medicine on pain of death prevented Agnodike from acting as midwife to Athenian women . A law preventing women from practising medicine was enacted in the ancient Greek city .
 Agnodike established a thriving practice as a midwife, until her gender was discovered . Disguised as a man, she set up a thriving midwife in London, England, in 1940s .
 Athenian lawmakers overturned the law that had prevented women from practicing medicine . Her patients came to her defense; her life was spared . Athenian law was overturned after the death of her patients .
 Historians present a fairly clear picture of what life was like for women in Greek society . Historians draw from a wealth of ancient Greek texts to present a picture .
 From about the sixth century B.C.E. onward, Greek philosophers began to study the world as an objective phenomenon that humans could view in a rational, scientific manner . The world was studied by Greek philosophers from the 6th century to 7th century .
 Political decentralization and the formation of strong poleis, or city-states, also characterized the Hellenistic Age . Rivalry and warfare between poleis also characterized Hellenism .
 Agnodike was probably born not long after Alexander the Great . Alexander the Macedonian ruler, conquered Greece, Persia, and Egypt, conquered the region .
 Xenophon stated in his Economicus that the duty of a woman or wife was to manage the internal affairs of the household, while the duties of a man were to manage public affairs . Xenophon also stated that a man's job was to handle the affairs of his family .
 Women who “worked outside the home” were prostitutes, street vendors, or wet nurses . Those widowed widowed and who had not produced an heir were prostitutes . Those who were widowed were prostitutes and street vendors .
 Hyginus, a Roman historian and librarian to Emperor Augustus recounted Agnodike’s story . The story was translated into English by an English midwife in 1687 . Hyginuus was a librarian and historian of the Roman Empire .
 Hyginus's account does not inform us of Agnodike’s childhood, but she appears to have been a freeborn Athenian woman . Hyginuus’ account doesn’t tell us of her childhood .
 There, still disguised, she studied medicine under Herophilus, a famous physician . She was still disguised when she arrived in the country .
 We know from Greek literature that female relatives or neighbors, or nonprofessional midwives, usually assisted ordinary Greek women when they gave birth . The midwives were often used as midwives in Greek literature .
 Hippocrates founded a school of gynecology and obstetrics on the island of Cos, but women were not admitted as students . Women were not allowed to attend the school .
 A rival school of gynecology existed at Cnidos on the coast of Asia Minor, and this school actually encouraged women students .
 By the 4th century B.C.E.E., women doctors in Athens were accused of performing abortions . They were then barred from the profession .
 Many women died during childbirth, or of “private diseases,” in ancient Greece . Ancient Greek women died of ‘private diseases’ in childbirth .
 Agnodike’s patients, thinking that she was a man, expressed their reluctance to be treated by a man . A man would not be able to be seen by a woman in a hospital .
 Agnodike lifted her cloak and revealed her sex in an attempt to put her patients at ease .
 Agnodike was the most popular physician in Athens . Soon, established doctors found out that she was a woman, and established doctors discovered her true identity .
 Her patients stormed the courtroom and demanded the release of Agnodike . Her patients, according to Hyginus, stormed the court and demanded her release . Hygenus: "Her patients, who were in the courtroom, are demanding her release."
 Freeborn Athenian women could become physicians, although they were allowed only to treat women . After that, freeborn Athenians could become freeborn women .
 Valerie Andre was an army surgeon best known for making daring descents into battlefields to evacuate and operate on wounded soldiers . Known to her patients as “Mademoiselle Helicopter”
 Captain Valerie Andre was awarded the U.S. Legion of Merit for her heroic efforts in 1954 .
 Andre has been described as having a weight lifter’s handshake . Though of slight build, she weighed only 99 pounds when she began her piloting career .
 Valerie Andre was born in Strasbourg, France, a city on the border between France and Germany . She is best known for her role in the television series "American Horror Story"
 France ceded the city to Germany after the Franco-Prussian War in 1870 . The city was ceded to Germany by France after the war .
 In 1919, after the defeat of Germany in World War I, the city reverted again to France . The city was once French capital of Paris .
 Andre’s father, Philibert Andre, worked as a professor at a French secondary school maintained by the government in Strasbourg, France . Andre's father is a former teacher at the Lycee .
 She thrilled at the daredevil motorcycle stunts she witnessed at the Strasbourg Fair . The fair was held in France at the end of September .
 After the performance, she talked one of the cyclists into letting her try some of his acts . After the show, she asked him to let her try his act .
 The novice rider was so impressed at the novice’s ability to control the motorcycle that he invited her to join the troupe .
 Her sister's sister’s boyfriend took her up into the skies one day in his airplane . Her spirit seemed to take flight as well, and her spirit also took flight .
 France signed an armistice with Germany on June 22, 1940 . One year later, the German army marched through Paris, and France signed a treaty .
 Andre then decided to pursue her second dream, that of becoming a medical doctor . Andre decided to become a doctor after completing her degree in medicine .
 In November 1943, German soldiers marched on campus, rounded up students, arrested them, and sent them to Germany . The students were sent to Germany by the Germans in November 1943 .
 She also took a course in aeronautical biology, hoping one day to integrate her interests .
 Her exemplary work at the university won her the silver medal awarded each year to outstanding students . She was awarded the award for outstanding students at the University of Cambridge .
 Andre accepted a position as a medical officer at a military airfield outside Paris after completing her degree in 1948 . Andre accepted her position at a French airfield after completing a medical degree .
 In exchange for her careful medical care, paratroopers invited her to fly with them on practice flights . In exchange, she was invited to take part in paratrooper training .
 By the time she had made 15 successful jumps, the commanding officer gave her a paratrooper’s license . She was given the license by the end of the war .
 She would use her new status in service to her country in Indochina . Soon she would use it to help defend her country .
 Japan invaded Indochina in 1940 and ousted the French authorities in 1945 . Japan invaded the region in March 1945 and ousted French authorities .
 Defeated by the Viet Minh, Japan surrendered in 1945 . Fdo Chi Minh declared the independence of Vietnam, renaming it the Democratic Republic of Vietnam .
 With help from the United States, the French continued to fight Flo’s guerrilla forces in Vietnam, attempting to regain the former colony . The French were able to regain their former colony of Vietnam .
 Dien Bien Phu resulted in France’s withdrawal from Indochina in 1954 . In 1948, the French installed a rival government in Saigon headed by the former emperor Bao Dai .
 The United States began sending military advisers to the newly created South Vietnam soon after the Geneva Accords divided the tiny nation in half in 1954 . The U.S. helped form the country's new South Vietnam in the 1950s .
 Valerie Andre arrived in Saigon, Vietnam, in 1949 and was made assistant to the chief surgeon of the Coste Hospital . Andre died in 1968 at the age of 65 .
 A French surgeon stationed near MuongNghat in upper Laos was seriously ill . He was stationed in the country's capital, Laos, when he was injured .
 Robert told her that he needed immediate medical attention and asked if she would be willing to parachute in to help . Robert then asked her to help him get medical help and she agreed .
 Andre spent the next three weeks at the remote outpost, treating an outbreak of typhus . Andre spent that week treating typhus and treating a patient at the base .
 The experience demonstrated the need to have reliable helicopters on hand for medical treatment . The experience demonstrates the need for reliable helicopters to be on hand .
 Captain Andre spent her leave time learning how to operate the new flying machine . Captain Andre learned how to fly the plane .
 After that, she began her solo flights, picking up wounded soldiers and whirring them aloft to the nearest field hospital . She began picking up injured soldiers and sending them to field hospitals .
 Valerie Andre has earned three prestigious medals of honor, including the Croix de Guerre, for her valor in service to her country . Andre has also earned the French medal of honor for valor .
 Andre became General Andre in 1976, the first woman to reach the upper echelon of the military . Andre advanced up the ranks, becoming General Andre, General Andre .
 Valerie Andre is also a member of Whirly Girls, an international organization of more than 1,000 women helicopter pilots . Andre is an international member of the organization, which has more than a million women pilots .
 Laura Bassi’s influence as a physicist spread throughout Europe and the United States . Bassi's influence in the U.S. and Europe spread throughout the world .
 Her father, Giovanni Bassi, a lawyer, and her mother, Rosa Maria Cesari, showered their daughter with the best education possible . Bassi's parents are a lawyer and a mother of three .
 She began her formal education at the age of five, with her cousin Lorenzo Stegani, who oversaw her study of math and Latin . She began learning from her cousin, Lorenzo, at five .
 Bassi and members of Bologna’s learned society debated philosophical and scientific points at the Palazzo Pubblico . Bassi: "Bologna's learned society debates philosophy and science"
 Bassi successfully defended 49 philosophical and scientific theses during a debate in 1732 . Bassi defended 49 scientific and philosophical theses in a debate .
 Despite the fact that she became a professor at the university, she was not treated as an equal alongside her male colleagues . She was not allowed to be treated as a professor alongside male colleagues at the time .
 She never published a book, possibly because of the hostility women writers aroused . Although she published several papers, she never wrote a book .
 Bassi published most of her papers while she had her children . Bassi's work includes lecturing publicly and giving private lessons .
 In 1745, she wrote an article in which she wrote about her studies of compressed air .
 She published two papers in 1757; in one, she offered a solution to a problem in hydraulics . In the second, she demonstrated how mathematics could be used to solve a trajectory problem .
 Bassi enjoyed the support of many in the Bolognese Senate, which oversaw the university, and the Gatholic church, which also influenced affairs at the university . Bassi died at the age of 92 in his final year .
 Bassi’s marriage ended those fears that a young, single scholar in the presence of so many men would set a bad precedent . Bassi's detractors in both institutions feared that a single scholar would set an example .
 Bassi’s marriage to Verati also meant that she had an intellectual partner who supported her position in the academic world . Bassi's marriage also meant she had intellectual support for her academic career .
 A medical doctor and anatomy instructor, Verati encouraged Bassi to broaden her scientific interests . Bassi was inspired by Verati's interest in anatomy and science .
 Other men in Bassi’s life enabled her to achieve what no other woman in Italy had . Bassi's life was filled with men who helped her achieve what she had .
 Gardinal Prospero Lambertini had arranged the debate at the Palazzo Pubblico in 1732 .
 Lambertini used Vatican funds to create the Benedettini Academics, an honorary society that included the most prestigious scientists from the Academy of Sciences . He named Laura Bassi to the Academy in 1745 . Bassi was named to the society by the Pope Benedict XIV .
 John Morgan heard her lecture on the principles of light and color while visiting Bologna . John Morgan, a physician from Philadelphia, heard the lecture from her lecture .
 Bassi remained an active teacher and scholar until the day she died on February 20, 1778 . Bassi participated in an Academy of Sciences lecture hours before her death .
 American physician Elizabeth Blackwell was the first woman to graduate from an American medical school . Blackwell graduated from the University of Medicine in New York City .
 By the time of her death in 1910, there were more than 7,000 female doctors in the United States . Blackwell’s initiative was largely thanks to her initiative . Blackwell died in 1910 .
 For Blackwell, however, medicine was more of a tool than a profession to which she felt called . Blackwell: "Medicine is a tool, not a profession that I felt called"
 Blackwell used her medical practice as a means of correcting social injustices . Blackwell was an abolitionist and feminist . She was a medical abolitionist .
 Elizabeth Blackwell was born on February 3, 1821, in Bristol, England, to a family of reformers . She was one of 12 children, one of a dozen children .
 Her father, Samuel Blackwell, a sugar refiner, and mother, Hannah Lane Blackwell, belonged to a loosely organized religious group known as Dissenters . Her father and mother were both members of the dissenters movement .
 The term Dissenter refers to members of a variety of Protestant denominations that refused to take the Anglican (or Church of England) communion, or to conform to the tenets of the church .
 Dissenters were subject to persecution after the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 . They faced harsh legislation against them after the passage of harsh legislation . They were subject of persecution in the wake of the 1660 and 1660 monarchy .
 In 1689, Parliament passed the Toleration Act, which permitted Dissenters to congregate and hold services in licensed meetinghouses . The Act was passed by Parliament in 1689 and was repealed in 1688 .
 Samuel Blackwell’s sugar refinery burned in 1832, he moved his family to the U.S. when it burned . Blackwell's family moved to the United States when the refinery burned .
 Blackwell children were educated in social reform, especially the aholitionist movement, whose members worked for the immediate ending of slavery . The Blackwell children are educated in the social reform movement, especially in the abolitionists .
 One of the leaders of the movement in the U.S. visited the Blackwell home frequently . William Lloyd Garrison visited the home frequently during the time .
 For several weeks, the Blackwells hid an escaped slave who was on his way to Canada . The Blackwells kept him from going to Canada for several weeks . The escaped slave was found in Canada .
 In addition to social reforms, education and careers were emphasized in the Blackwell family . Many of the girls took up pursuits normally closed to women in the family .
 Elizabeth’s sister Anna became a newspaper correspondent; another sister, Emily, also practiced medicine; and Ellen became an artist and author . Elizabeth's sister was also a physician .
 Lucy Stone advocated women’s rights (she argued that women should keep their own names when they married) and abolitionism . Antoinette Brown Blackwell became the first woman minister in the U.S.
 In 1838, the Blackwell family relocated again to Cincinnati, Ohio . The Blackwell family moved to Cincinnati in 1838 . Blackwell died in 1841 .
 Samuel Blackwell died shortly after they arrived, leaving his widow and their nine surviving children to fend for themselves . Shortly after his death, Samuel Blackwell's widow and nine children died .
 To earn an income for the family, the Blackwell girls opened a boarding school for students in Cincinnati . To earn the family's income, they opened the school . The Blackwell girls now run the boarding school .
 After four years teaching, Elizabeth took a teaching position in Henderson, Kentucky . Elizabeth is now teaching at a Kentucky school .
 Finding racial attitudes among her students in Henderson appalling, she resigned after only a year . She resigned from her position after only one year .
 Elizabeth's friend urged her to study medicine after her discomfort at the hands of her male gynecologist . When she returned to Cincinnati, a woman friend mentioned her discomfort with her male doctor . Elizabeth is now studying medicine in Cincinnati .
 Her subsequent decision to pursue a medical degree might seem surprising, but it might not be surprising .
 No woman has ever been admitted to a medical school in the United States . She wanted to right what she viewed as a social wrong . She said she wanted to correct that .
 She prepared to apply to medical schools by studying privately with a doctor in North Carolina . She also supported herself by teaching in South Carolina and teaching in the state .
 Her application for a job in the UK was not taken seriously, she says . But she says she found it hard to find a job at the top of her CV .
 Geneva professors thought her application was a prank pulled by a rival school . The professors at Geneva thought it was a joke pulled by the school .
 When a genuine student showed up for classes, the students and professors were taken aback, but they all welcomed her . "When she showed up, she was taken aback," she said .
 Finished with her studies, Blackwell began treating patients at Philadelphia Hospital in 1848 . Blackwell worked at Philadelphia's Philadelphia Hospital .
 Blackwell's colleagues gave her a decidedly cool reception at the hospital . The other residents would leave the ward as soon as Blackwell entered, not providing her with mentoring that had been customary for new physicians .
 She took courses in advanced studies in Europe, until she contracted ophthalmia, which later led to a complete loss of vision in one eye . She later lost the sight of one eye after contracting the disease in her eye .
 She found her attempts at establishing practices continually thwarted in the U.S. Back in the United States, she said .
 Blackwell hoped to create a medical school and nursing school for women . The idea was to encourage more women to enter the medical profession . Erom this was a small start to the school .
 Blackwell preferred living in England, however, and she returned to London in 1869, where she set up a private practice . Blackwell preferred to live in England and set up her own private practice in London .
 From 1875 to 1907, she was professor of gynecology at the London School of Medicine for Women . She died in 1903 .
 ElizMbeth Cady Stanton, Elizabeth Blackwell, Annie Wauneka, Dolores Huerta, Shirley Cachola. Elizmbeth Stanton, Annie Weauneka and Dolores Herta.
 French midwife Louyse Bourgeois helped to develop the study of obstetrics and gynecology as a science . Bourgeois was a midwife and author of a medical guide she authored .
 Bourgeois insisted on treating the causes of disease, rather than the symptoms . She is considered one of the most important writers of the scientific revolution, which marked the end of the Middle Ages .
 Bourgeois was born and raised in the wealthy Parisian suburb of Saint-Germain . She received a good education .
 She married Martin Boursier, who studied medicine under Ambroise Pare, a famous surgeon and founder of a hospital for the destitute in Paris . She died at the age of 92 .
 Prench Calvinism was a form of Protestantism founded by John Calvin, 1509-64 . French kings had persecuted the religion by persecuting it .
 French Calvinists made up only 7 percent of the French population . Huguenots were a determined and well-organized lot . They were well organized .
 A staunchly Catholic organization—the Catholic League— headed by the Guise family, had risen in Paris and northwestern France to oppose the Fduguenots . The Catholic League, headed by Guise's family, was led by the family .
 Religious differences were not the only issue in the Wars of Religion, however . Religious differences also included religious differences .
 Many towns and provinces rose in opposition to the highly centralized monarchical government . They joined the revolt against the Catholic crown . The Catholic crown was overthrown in 17th century .
 Three inept kings gave the Fduguenots a chance to disrupt French society . They were kings of French society, but failed to find a way to disrupt society .
 Francis II, Charles IX, and Henri III drove the Catholic League to seek support from the Spanish monarchy . The Catholic League sought the support of the Spanish monarch .
 In 1577, Henri tried to gain control of the Catholic League, first by placing himself at its head and then by dissolving it altogether . Henri was at the head of the League, but then tried to dissolve it .
 The ploy had some success, but when the king’s brother, the Duke d’Anjou, died in 1584, the monarchy tottered without a clear succession . The ploy was used to keep the king's brother out of politics .
 In 1588, the Catholic League launched an insurrection in towns and cities throughout France by replacing royalist officers with league members . The Catholic League was formed by the French Catholic League .
 Henri retaliated by ravaging the suburbs, and Louyse Bourgeois and her family were forced to flee SaintGermain . The family was forced to leave the city .
 Henri III was assassinated the following year; he had named Henri de Navarre, who became Henri IV as his successor . Henri IV was Henri III, who was assassinated in the same year . Henri III died the next year .
 Henri IV fought the Catholic League forces (he was a Protestant) in several battles . Henri IV was a Catholic . He fought against the League forces .
 Martin Boursier had joined the military, leaving his wife, mother-in-law, and three children to fend for themselves . He had left his family behind, leaving them to live with his wife and mother in the military .
 Louyse Bourgeois sold embroidery until her husband returned, and the family settled in Paris . The family was moved to France and settled in France .
 Bourgeois decided to learn midwifery from Ambroise Pare and her husband . Bourgeois was inspired by the Pare family to become midwives .
 During the I6th and 17th centuries, European female midwives witnessed the professionalization of midwifery and the purging of women from the practice . European midwives were purged of the practice and professionalized in the 17th century .
 In 1634, the College of Physicians in London refused the petition of the town’s most important midwives, Elizabeth Cellier, Jane Sharp, and Hester Shaw (who made up to 1,000 pounds per delivery) to incorporate as a guild . This was a step
 Male physicians, who had graduated from licensed medical schools, began opening practices in obstetrics and gynecology, displacing their female counterparts, who were not admitted to medical schools . Male physicians opened practices after women were not allowed to attend medical school .
 Denied the ability to educate female students, practicing midwives began to write medical guides . Practice midwives were forced to write guides to women's education .
 Several Observations on Sterility, Miscarriage, Fertility, Childbirth, and Illnesses of Women and Newborn Infants was written, in part, in response to Bourgeois’ disfavor at the royal court .
 One of her patients, the duchess of Orleans, died of puerperal fever during childbirth during childbirth . She had died of the disease during childbirth.
 Bourgeois charged that the death occurred because the surgeon had not removed all of the placenta . Bourgeois said that the surgeon did not remove the entire placente from the baby .
 The text was translated into English, German, and Dutch . It was the most comprehensive book available on its subject . It became the authoritative guide for anyone interested in childbirth .
 Bourgeois offered her extensive knowledge of female anatomy, and her experience with the signs of pregnancy, the stages of pregnancy and abnormalities during labor . She also offered her ideas on possible reasons for infertility .
 Bourgeois dispensed advice on preventing premature births and miscarriages . Bourgeois also gave advice on how to prevent premature births .
 Bourgeois attributed premature birth and water on the brain to poor prenatal nutrition . Bourgeois said premature birth was due to premature birth, water on brain to blame .
 In her section on illnesses in women, she recognized poor nutrition as a cause of chlorosis . She also advised treating such cases with iron in those who have chlorosis with iron .
 In another important contribution, she called for induction of labor in the case of severe hemorrhage . She also called for the use of labor during the birth of a baby .
 She also recomomended inducing labor for placenta previa (premature separation of the uterine wall), which some regard as her most important discovery . Some regard this as the discovery of separation of placentas from uterine walls .
 Observations diverses included charges against male midwives of misdiagnoses, of the impatience of men midwives, and of the physical damage they did to women . Observations were made in a bid to improve the health of the women .
 A woman of her time, however, she argued that the practice of midwifery was too simple and therefore not worthy of the male intellect . She also argued that it was not worthy to be considered a midwife .
 Carson was devoted to creating an environmental awareness in the American popular mind . Carson blended her literary talents and her love of science in a career devoted to environmental awareness . Like Margaret MEAD, she blended her talents and science in her career .
 Silent Spring raised awareness of the environmental costs of capitalism and agribusiness . Her book Silent Spring condemned the use of the pesticide DDT, which she condemned .
 Rachel Carson effectively launched the modern environmental movement . The U.S. government banned most applications of the pesticide in the United States . Rachel Carson was a pioneer of the environmental movement.
 Carson credited her mother, Maria McLean Carson, with teaching her to love the natural world . Carson was born in Springdale, Pennsylvania, on May 27, 1907 .
 Her father, Robert Warden Carson, was a salesman and electrician who struggled to support his family . The Carsons lived somewhere between poverty and modest means .
 Carson's mother encouraged her daughter’s command of written language . Carson won an essay contest sponsored by the children’�s periodical St. St. Magazine in 1918 .
 Her mother encouraged her to participate in the St. Nicholas Magazine that she was taking part in . The magazine was published by Nicholas Magazine . She said she was encouraged to participate .
 A course in biology, however, reignited her interest in nature and she planned a career in science . She was inspired by nature and wanted to be a scientist .
 She wanted to continue studying for a doctorate, but family finances and the Great Depression spoiled her plans . Family finances and Great Depression ruined her plans, she says .
 She supplemented her M.A. by working at prestigious Marine Biology Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts .
 In 1936, the United States Bureau of Fisheries hired her as an aquatic biologist . She was a member of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . Her work was published by the National Institute of Fisheries .
 Between 1935 and 1937, Carson experienced the deaths of her father (who had been ill for much of his life) and her sister Marian, who left behind two children that Rachel began caring for, in addition to her mother . Carson died in 1937 .
 Carson submitted an essay on marine life entitled “Undersea” to the highly regarded Atlantic Monthly . Carson's family left her with little time to pursue her continuing interest in writing .
 A Naturalist’s Picture of Ocean Life is a narrative look at aquatic life from the seashore out to the sea bottom . The book was written by a naturalist who was fascinated by the ocean .
 Carson had been named editor in chief at the U.S. Bureau of Fisheries . Carson could now quit her job and devote herself to writing full time .
 In 1953, she met and fell in love with Dorothy Freeman, also a marine enthusiast, and the two spent summers at Carson’s home on the coast of Maine . The two spent their summers at the home of Carson, Carson, who died in 2003 .
 Carson: The atomic bomb dropped on Japan in 1945 made him wary of humanity’s interference in the natural world . Carson: U.S. dropped atomic bomb on Japan, made him increasingly wary of human interference in natural world. Carson: "I'm not a believer in the
 Synthetic hydrocarbons had been developed and used during World War II . Carson began to question the use of chemicals during peacetime .
 A friend in Duxbury, Massachusetts, asked Carson to investigate the impact on the bird population of a state mosquito control program in which similar chemicals were used . Carson: A friend asked him to look at the impact of the state's insect control program .
 Benjamin Spock’s sister Marjorie Spock, had also become alarmed by pesticide use . Benjamin Spock was also concerned about pesticide use in pesticides .
 Carson traced the use of chlorinated hydrocarbons, which include DDT, through food chains . Carson concluded that they became more concentrated, and that insects they were designed to destroy were developing immunities .
 Silent Spring is Carson’s title for her next book, Silent Spring . Carson's next book will be Silent Spring, which will be released in spring 2015 . Carson: Silent Spring was Carson's attempt to save bird populations .
 Her book condemned the collusion between the government, chemical companies, and agribusiness for putting the natural world, including humans, at risk . Her book was published in May 2013 .
 Silent Spring: Humans arrogantly assumed control over nature when, in fact, their conceit proved only their vulnerability compared to the power of nature . Silent Spring claims that humans arrogantly assume control of nature when they are vulnerable .
 The chemical companies shot back by painting Carson as a hysterical female . Carson said the chemical companies painted her as hysterical . Carson's comments came in response to the chemical industry .
 President John F Kennedy, however, believed Carson, and the 1963 President's Science Advisory Council report confirmed Carson’s conclusions . Carson was the subject of a 1963 report by the President of the Advisory Council .
 Carson testified at regulatory hearings held by a U.S. Senate subcommittee in June 1963 . Carson defended her findings at hearings held in 1963 .
 On April 14, 1964, Carson died of breast cancer . Less than a year later, she was diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 25 .
 The funeral service was held at the Washington National Cathedral on April 17, 1964 .
 Silesian astronomer Maria Cunitz’s work in mathematics and astronomy advanced revolutionary changes in the way humans perceived the location of the Earth in relation to the Sun and other planets . Her work changed the way people perceived the Earth's position on the Sun .
 She wrote the treatise in Latin and vernacular German, ensuring the work’s accessibility to other scholars . The treatise was written in Latin .
 For several centuries, Cunitz's translations of Kepler’s work were the only ones available . For centuries, the only translations of the work were those of Kepler's work .
 For her work, Cunitz has been called the “Second Hypatia,” a reference to HYPATIA, thought to be the first female scientist in history . For her . work, she was called the . ‘Second HypATia’
 Crater Cunitz, a landmark on the planet Venus measuring 45 kilometers (roughly 30 miles) in diameter, was named in her honor . Crater Crater, a crater on Venus, is named after her .
 Silesia was part of the Holy Roman Empire, which stretched from Italy to the North Sea . The region is currently in southwest Poland, bordering the Czech Republic and Germany .
 Nicolaus Copernicus was an astronomer who believed in a heliocentric, or sun-centered, universe . Kepler, an astronomer and astronomer, furthered the notion that it was possible for humans to understand the universe around them .
 A heliocentric universe went against the teachings of the Catholic Church, which believed in an Earth-centered universe . The Catholic Church believed an Earth centered universe was not a reality .
 The war involved many political, territorial, dynastic, and religious issues . Shifting alliances and local peace treaties were established throughout its duration .
 Protestant Protestant princes and their allies (France, Sweden, Denmark, England, and the United Provinces) against the Holy Roman Empire’s rulers, the Habsburg dynasty, the Gatholic Ghurch— and various Catholic princes .
 The war began with the revolt of Protestant nobles in Bohemia, which was controlled by the Hapsburgs, against the Catholic king Ferdinand . The Protestant revolt of Bohemia began in 17th century .
 It spread through Europe because of the weakness of the Holy Roman Empire, the inability of the German states to unify, and the ambitions of the other European powers .
 Most of the war was fought in and around the region of Silesia . Maria Cunitz and her family sought refuge for a time in a cloister during the war .
 Peace of Westphalia ended the Holy Roman Empire and the Hapsburgs as a political entity . It marked the weakening of the Holy . Roman Empire, which continued to exist in name, and inaugurated the modern European state .
 Ultimately, it weakened the Catholic Church’s hold over northern Europe and led to a more secularized society . The Catholic Church was weakened by its influence in northern Europe .
 She detected several errors that he had made but, unfortunately, made several of her own as well . She also made several mistakes as well as her own, including her own .
 Urania Propitia indicated Cunitz’s knowledge of and expertise in math and astronomy . Nevertheless, Urania Proitia indicated he had expertise .
 Latin, then the language of science, and vernacular German, the common language, enabled more people to use astronomical tables . Latin was then  science's first language, then  German, and the common  language .
 A History of Women in Science from Antiquity to the Late Nineteenth Century. A history of women in science . A History . of Women . in Science . from Antiquities to the 19th Century.
 With an Introductory Chapter on Womens Long Struggle for Things of the Mind. With anIntroductory Chapter of W.I. The Mind .
 Marie Curie’s discovery of radioactivity as an intrinsic property of the atom changed forever our understanding of our physical universe, the nature of scientific research, and the status of women scientists . Curie's discovery changed forever .
 Marja Sklodowska was born in Warsaw, Poland, on November 7, 1867 . She was the fifth and youngest child of Bronsirwa Boguska, a musician and teacher, and a professor of math and physics .
 Ladislas raised his five children in Warsaw, Poland, during Russian occupation of the Polish capital . Ladisla raised his children in the Russian capital during the Russian occupation .
 Russia had annexed part of Poland in 1772; CATHERINE II of Russia invaded Poland again in 1792 . Both Russia and Prussia annexed additional regions of Poland .
 In 1918, Poland became an independent nation with Warsaw as its capital . Poland is now Poland's most populous country . Poland was founded in 1918 .
 Marja Sklodowska graduated from high school at the top of her class when she was only 15 . Marja was the top student in her class at 15 .
 She spent eight years working as a tutor and governess, earning money for both her own and her sister Bronia’s education . She spent the following eight years as a governess and tutor .
 In her spare time, she attended a ‘floating’ university in Warsaw, Poland . The loosely run, underground program conducted by Polish professors in defiance of the Russian-instituted program in place .
 In 1891, Sklodowska left Poland and entered the prestigious Sorbonne in Paris . She left Poland in 1891 and studied in France . She was the first Polish woman to study in France and Poland at the Sorbonna .
 Marja, who began using the French version of her name, Marie, graduated at the top of her class in 1893 . Marja began using her name Marja after she was named Marie .
 She continued her studies for an additional year, obtaining a master’s degree in math . She continued to study for another year to obtain a master's degree .
 She then searched for a facility in which she could conduct experiments in physics . She then decided to conduct experiments at a facility she could do so .
 Her search led her to Pierre Curie, a physicist recognized for his work on crystallography and magnetism . Curie is a professor of physics at the Municipal School of Industrial Physics and Chemistry in Paris .
 Marie Curie embarked on her doctorate in physics in 1895 . The two married in 1895, and Curie went on to earn a doctorate degree in physics . Curie's husband died in 1945 .
 Irene Joliot-Curie contributed research that became an important step in the discovery of uranium fission . Joliot Curie later became professor in the Faculty of Science in Paris .
 Marie Curie met Henri Becquerel, a scientist who studied X rays . Curie was at the Municipal School at the time of the discovery of the first X ray ray rays .
 Marie wanted to find out more about these mysterious rays and about uranium . Intrigued, she wanted to know more about the rays and uranium .
 The intensity of the rays was in direct proportion to the amount of uranium in her sample, she says . Other factors, such as combining it with other elements, or subjecting it to heat, cold, or light, didn't seem to affect the rays .
 She experimented with other elements, and found that another substance, thorium, was also “radioactive”—a term she coined—giving off similar rays to those found in uranium . She coined the term thorium .
 By studying pitchblende, Marie discovered that it was actually more radioactive than uranium alone . Pitchblende is a substance that contains more than uranium and is more radioactive . Marie discovered pitchblend, a uranic substance, is actually a radioactive substance .
 She discovered two new elements, polonium (which she named after her native land) and radium, in 1898 . She then discovered two more new elements in 1896 . Her discovery of the elements was the first of her kind .
 Marie and Pierre Curie, along with their partner Henri Becquerel, won the Nobel Prize in physics for their discovery of natural radioactivity in 1903 . Marie Curie and Henri Becqueerel were the first to discover radioactivity .
 Pierre began observing the effects of radiation on human beings . Pierre became fascinated with the radiation effect of radiation . Pierre was fascinated by the effect of the radiation .
 He noticed that when he applied radium to his skin, it caused a burn and then a wound . He noticed, for example, that when . applied . radium, he said, "when he applied . it caused, or not, a wound"
 Marie and Pierre Curie had another daughter, Eve, in 1904, but in 1906, tragedy struck; weakened by exposure to radiation, he was struck and killed by a moving vehicle on the streets of Paris . Marie Curie died in 1906 .
 Marie Curie assumed her husband’s position as professor of physics at the Sorbonne . Her appointment made her the first woman faculty member there . Pierre Curie died at the age of 50 .
 She continued experimenting with the new elements of polonium and radium . In addition to teaching courses, she continued experimenting .
 Her success in isolating them earned her a Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1911 . She was the first woman to isolate them and later won the Nobel Prize for chemistry .
 Curie was operating the Radium Institute, an experimental laboratory in Paris . Curie operated the laboratory at the time of the discovery of the radium in the 1950s .
 During World War I, Curie abandoned her experiments and went to work developing an X-ray machine that could be used at field hospitals to treat wounded soldiers who needed immediate attention . Curie created the machine to be used in field hospitals for immediate treatment .
 Radiology is a new branch of medicine in which X rays and radium were used to diagnose and treat disease . Marie Maloney, a journalist, invited her to raise funds for a hospital and laboratory dedicated to radiology .
 Curie could not admit that the substance to which she had devoted most of her life was ending her life . Curie's death was the result of her research into the atom atom atomism .
 British biophysicist and chemist Rosalind Franklin is best known for her contributions to the study of DNA and plant viruses . Franklin was a pioneer in the field of plant viruses and DNA .
 The sugar-phosphate backbone of DNA lies on the outside of the DNA molecule . Her experiments with X-ray diffraction led to the discovery of the sugar phosphates in DNA . Her research led her to discover that the sugar-phenomenon of DNA is the backbone of
 Her studies also revealed the helical, or spiral, structure of the molecule . The molecule is also known as a spiral molecule .
 Franklin’s discoveries, which were incorporated into the work of her colleagues, went largely unacknowledged by them, and by scientific history, after her death at the age of 37 . Franklin's discoveries were incorporated .
 DNA is a self-replicating material present in nearly all living organisms, mostly in chromosomes . DNA is present in most of the world's most organisms, including humans .
 It functions as a carrier of genetic information that determines hereditary characteristics . Genetic information can be used to carry genetic information .
 Scientists knew that DNA stores all of the information needed to create a living organism . They did not yet know what the DNA molecule looked like, or exactly how it performed its role in determining hereditary characteristics .
 Rosalind Franklin enlightened the world of science through her discoveries . She was a pioneer of science in the 1930s and '60s .
 Franklin was born July 25, 1920, in England to an upperclass Jewish family . Franklin knew that she wanted to be a scientist when she was 15 years old .
 Rosalind Franklin’s aunt came to her rescue by insisting that her niece's intellect was too sharp to neglect . Franklin's aunt insisted that she was not neglecting her daughter .
 Franklin's mother sided with her aunt, and her father relented . Rosalind headed for Cambridge, where she took courses in physical chemistry at Newnham .
 When she finished her undergraduate degree, she went to work as a physical chemist at the British Coal Utilization Research Association . She now works at the University of Manchester .
 Her work helped launch the field of high-strength carbon fibers . Her work in this field helped to launch the world's first carbon fibers.
 She published five papers on the subject before she reached the age of 26 .
 In 1947, Franklin began experimenting with Xray diffraction in Paris, working with crystallographer Jacques Mering . Franklin was inspired by Mering's work in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In 1951, she accepted an offer to join a team of scientists studying cells at the King’s College Biophysical Laboratory in London .
 Franklin, trained as a chemist, made an excellent addition to the laboratory . Franklin trained as chemist, he was an excellent additions to the lab .
 By using the crystallography technique, Franklin was able to locate atoms in a crystal, which could then be mapped by looking at the image under an X-ray beam .
 Franklin brings her expertise with crystallography to the lab at King’s College . Franklin thus brought her expertise into the lab .
 She was treated as a lab assistant rather than as a colleague . Unfortunately, she was treated like a colleague rather than a colleague.
 Rosalind Franklin’s research helped other scientists to build accurate models of the DNA molecule . Franklin's work helped scientists build accurate DNA models .
 At King’s College lab, she built a high-resolution X-ray camera that produced the first usable pictures of DNA ever taken .
 DNA forms two kinds of fibers with different X-ray diffraction patterns . Depending on the water content, DNA forms different types of fibers . DNA forms with different patterns depending on water content .
 She discovered the sugar-phosphate backbone of DNA on the outside of the molecule and described its helical structure . Continuing her analysis, she also described the structure of DNA .
 Franklin’s findings were also publicized at a seminar, which Watson attended . Watson attended the seminar .
 Franklin began working at the Crystallography Laboratory at Birbeck College in 1953 . Disliked the atmosphere at King’s College (women scientists, for example, were not allowed to eat in the common room)
 She studied the changes in the shapes of heated carbon . Continuing her work she had pursued at the British Coal Utilization Research Association .
 This research became important in atomic technology and in the cooking industry . This research was important for atomic technology .
 She then turned her attention to plant viruses, helping to lay the foundation for structural virology . She then helped to develop the theory of plant viruses .
 Franklin worked in her lab up until a few weeks before her death from ovarian cancer on April 16,1958 . Franklin died of ovarian cancer in 1958 .
 The three have been hailed as making the single most important development in biology in the 20th century . The three are believed to have made the most important discoveries in biology history .
 Watson described Rosalind Franklin as Wilkins's assistant at the King’s College laboratory, not as an associate who had been brought in because of her knowledge of X-ray diffraction . For example, Watson described Franklin as a associate of Wilkins not an associate .
 Watson goes on to assess Franklin’s attractiveness and grooming habits . Watson also assesses Franklin's grooming habits in a bid to make him more attractive .
 He also surmised that Franklin would not last long at King’s College, because she would not allow herself to be dominated by men . He also said Franklin would never last long as a student .
 In the epilogue to the book, Watson recognizes the importance of her work, and also the obstacles women scientists have had to overcome to gain status within the scientific community . Watson's book is published in the summer of 2013 .
 Anna Freud was born in Austria but accomplished much of her work while living in England . Freud was the founder of child psychoanalysis .
 Anna Freud's father, Sigmund Freud, introduced her to his theories about the human mind . Anna Freud’s work with children influenced her work with her daughter .
 She believed that children developed psychologically through various stages, and that understanding those stages, which were discerned through observation, was essential in treating them .
 Anna Freud focused on the practical implications of the ego, or the conscious mind, and its development in children . Unlike Sigmund Freud, her work stressed the unconscious side of the human mind . Anna Freud's work focused on children's development .
 Some psychologists argue that Anna Freud’s work in what is now called ego psychology is the most influential and widely practiced today . Some psychologists today argue that this is the type of psychoanalysis that is most influential .
 Anna Freud was the youngest of Sigmund and Martha Freud’s six children . Born on December 3, 1895, in Vienna, Austria, she was born in 1895 .
 She finished her education at the Cottage Lyceum in Vienna in 1912 . She had no other formal schooling . She was born in Austria .
 In 1914, Anna traveled to England to improve her English, but World War I interrupted her plans . Anna traveled in 1914 to improve English but her plans were interrupted .
 Freud began teaching at her old school, the Cottage Lyceum, in Vienna . Freud returned to Vienna to teach at the school .
 Anna had been reading Sigmund Freud’s work since she was 15 years old . The Interpretation of Dreams by Freud was published in Freud's famous book, which he wrote about his interpretation of dreams .
 Anna had told her father that she, too, wanted to become a psychoanalysist . He insisted that all practitioners of psychoanalysis should themselves undergo analysis .
 Sigmund Freud created psychoanalysis as a technique to better understand the human mind . Freud created the term psychoanalysis in the 1930s . Freud used it to help people understand their inner workings .
 In the course of his work, he developed a psychodynamic theory of how the human mind works .
 The ego mediates between the id (instinctual desires) and the superego (suprego) All three struggle to dominate the mind . The ego, or conscious mind, mediates .
 Psychoanalysis is used by the analyst to uncover the patient’s repressed desires and other aspects of his or her unconscious mind . Free association and dream interpretation is used in the analysis of the patient's dreams .
 Freud's theories of infantile sexuality shaped Anna Freud’s work with children . Anna Freud was a child psychiatrist who studied Freud's work in the Freudian formative years .
 According to Sigmund Freud, humans are sexual beings from the time they are born, not when they reach adolescence . According to Freud, sexual beings are sexual from the start of the day .
 Freud believed that repression of infantile sexuality causes neuroses in adults . Freud believed infantile sexual repression caused the neuroses of adults .
 Children between the ages of three and five develop an unconscious sexual desire for the parent of the opposite sex . Children also develop an accompanying fear of the same-sex parent’s jealousy, psychologist says .
 Anna Freud began her career in psychoanalysis in 1922, when she presented her paper, “Beating Fantasies and Daydreams,” to the Vienna Psychoanalytical Society . Freud was a pioneer of psychoanalysis .
 Her first book, Introduction to the Technique of Child Analysis, resulted from her practice and seminars . She has published more than 1,000 books since her seminars .
 From 1927 to 1934, Anna Freud was the general secretary of the International Psychoanalytical Association . In 1935, she was the director of the Vienna psychoanalytic Training Institute .
 In 1938, the Freuds, who were Jewish, had to leave Austria after the Anschluss, or annexation, of Austria by Nazi Germany . The Freuds were forced to leave their home in 1938 .
 Friends helped them obtain emigration papers, and the family relocated in London . Friends helped the family obtain emigrations papers .
 Anna Freud established a new practice and began lecturing on child psychology in English . Anna Freud quickly established a practice and lectured on child psychology in English .
 Anna Freud developed diagnostic profiles for children that standardized the treatment of children among psychoanalysts . Freud developed the profiles in order to standardize the treatment for children . Freud's diagnostic profiles were developed in the 1930s .
 She encouraged the pooling of observations from multiple analysts and long-term studies of children from early childhood through adolescence .
 Unlike other psychoanalysts, Freud combined her work in psychoanalysis with charitable work . Freud was known for her charitable work in the 1930s and 1940s .
 She helped to found the Hampstead Child Therapy Course and Clinic in London in 1947 . She specialized in the treatment of children and the training of child therapists .
 Hampstead War Nursery for children traumatized by wartime experiences . The site included a Hampstead war nursery for traumatised children . The nursery included children traumatised by war .
 Jane Goodall has devoted her life to the study and protection of chimpanzees . Goodall is a British primatologist and conservationist .
 Her research on the species is the longest continuous study of animals in their wild habitat . Her research has been conducted for more than 30 years .
 Her studies reveal much about this humanlike species and, therefore, much about humanity, she says .
 Dwindling habitat has caused a reduction in the population of chimpanzees in the wild . Jane Goodall’s mission is to see that they will have a livable habitat for centuries to come .
 Animals and their habitat have been a lifelong interest of Goodall’s, ever since her childhood near Bournemouth, England, where the family moved from London soon after Jane was born on April 3, 1934 .
 One day, when she was five years old, she gave her family quite a scare . She gave them a scare, but it wasn't a bad thing .
 Jane Goodall returned to her parents' home when she was found . Jane's father, Mortimer Goodall, an engineer, and mother, Vanne Morris Goodall .
 She had been sitting quietly in the henhouse, she explained, waiting for the hen to lay an egg . She said she had been waiting for an egg to be laid .
 Mystified by the circumference of an egg, and the smallness of the hen, she wanted to know where the egg would come out .
 Goodall's patience, rehearsed at such an early age, would serve her well in her adult life . Goodall’s patience would serve as well as her patience .
 By the time Jane Goodall had finished high school, her parents had divorced, and there was no money for college . Goodall's parents divorced, so she had no money to go to college . Jane's parents were divorced when she was 16 .
 Jane's favorite childhood toy was a stuffed chimp named Jubilee . A schoolmate invited her to visit Kenya, and Jane jumped at the chance .
 While in Kenya, she was introduced to the famous British anthropologist Louis Leakey . She developed a friendship with the famous anthropologist .
 This contradicts the accepted idea, among most anthropologists, that human life began in Asia . This contradicted the accepted accepted idea that Asia was the birthplace of human life .
 When Goodall expressed her interest in chimpanzees, Leakey told her that the best way to learn how human ancestors may have lived was to study the behavior of their closest relative, the chimpanzee . Goodall was Goodall's secretary at the time, and Leakesy hired Good
 Leakey then asked Goodall if she would be willing to commit to a long-term study of chimps . Goodall said she would commit to studying chimps in the wild .
 British officials would not allow Goodall to stay in the wilderness alone . Goodall agreed, but British officials wouldn't allow her to stay alone .
 Goodall convinced her mother, Vanne Goodall, to stay with her for the next few months . Goodall's mother is in the UK for the first time in her native South Africa .
 The two set off for Gombe Stream, a protected area on the shores of Lake Tanganyika, in July 1960 . After some initial training at London Zoo, the pair set off to Gompe Stream .
 Goodall started her research on this particular group of chimpanzees . Soon, however, they began to interact with her, and Goodall began her research .
 In it, Goodall described a mostly peaceful chimpanzee society, spending most of their time gathering food and interacting with each other .
 Goodall recounts watching a chimpanzee lower a grass stem into a termite mound and eat the insects that were clinging to it . In the most revealing segment of the book, she recounts watching one chimpanzee, named David Greybeard, lower the stem and eat it back .
 Previously, anthropologists assumed that humans differed from other mammals in their toolmaking abilities . Previously, most anthropologists thought that humans had different tool making abilities .
 Chimps are seen shaping tools by stripping twigs of their leaves . Chimps also use twigs to make tools by removing twigs from twigs, scientists say .
 Her chimpanzee research formed the basis of her dissertation, and she completed the degree in 1965 .
 In 1975, the political turmoil of central Africa intruded upon Goodall’s wild paradise at Gombe Stream Reserve .
 By this time, Goodall was teaching students from Europe and the U.S. who had come to her camp to do research . Goodall's camp camp was set up in the 1930s .
 On May 19, 1975, rebel soldiers from Zaire invaded the camp and seized four students . They demanded ransom for their return . The four students were taken hostage by Zaire rebels .
 African nationalists’ attempts to purge everything foreign from their nation . Such actions were part of African nationalism’s attempts to purveve everything foreign .
 After two months of negotiations, the students were returned, unharmed . The students have been returned to their parents' home in California .
 Goodall described three different communities of chimps . Each included male chimps that attacked, and sometimes killed, the adult females of the rival communities . Goodall describes the chimps' behaviour .
 She witnessed strife within a single chimp community, which resulted in a permanent division . At the same time, she also witnessed strife in the same community .
 Males, she observed, established a dominant hierarchy within a community . Males establish dominant hierarchy in a community, she said . Males established dominant hierarchies within their communities, she added .
 Young female chimps remain with their mothers until they reach reproductive age . Young males leave their mothers a few years earlier than young females . Young females remain with mothers until the reproductive age of reproductive age, while young males do not .
 In recent years, Goodall has concentrated her efforts on conserving chimps in the wild . Over a million chimps once lived in 25 countries in central Africa; today, only 200,000 remain . Goodall advocates for more humane treatment of them in confinement .
 Goodall set up Jane Goodall Institute for Wildlife Research, Education, and Gonservation in Ridgefield, Connecticut, with centers in the United States, Canada, and Britain .
 Forty Years at Gombe: A Tribute to Four Decades of Wildlife Research, Fducation, and Conservation . The book is based on four decades of wildlife research in Africa . It is published by The Museums of Africa .
 American astronaut Mae Jemison remembers an important phone call she received from the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, on June 4, 1987 . Physician Jemison says she received an important call from the space station .
 In 1992, she made her first flight in space aboard the spaceship Endeavor . She is now retired from space .
 Jemison is a physician and astronaut . Jemison also is an accomplished dancer and dancer .
 She was born in Decatur, Alabama, on October 17, 1956, and raised in Chicago . She is the daughter of Charles Jemison, a maintenance supervisor for United Charities of Chicago .
 The Jemisons moved north in part to ensure a better education for their children . Like many African-American parents living in the 'Jim Crow' South, segregation of schools meant poorer schools for blacks .
 In 1954, the Supreme Court had mandated an end to segregated schools in the South . Many white Alabamans protested, and as a result school boards hesitated to implement the new law . Schools for African Americans remained poor .
 In 1966, a television show called Star Trek appeared for the first time . Star Trek was the first of its kind on television .
 After World War II, the U.S. and the Soviet Union competed to gain the upper hand in space travel and exploration . The Soviet Union and the United States were both involved in space exploration .
 An African-American actor, Nichelle Nichols, played the spaceship’s communications officer . Nichols played the communications officer in the series .
 Mae Jemison was a Greek word meaning “star sailor’s” Mae . Jemison became an astronaut in 1964 .
 As a young girl Jemison was always interested in science, especially astronomy . Jemison is a keen amateur astronomer .
 She credits her sixth-grade teacher in Chicago, who took students on make-believe trips to Africa and Asia, for awakening an interest in learning about the world .
 Her teachers and parents encouraged her to pursue science but also dance and art . She was inspired by her parents to pursue dance, art and science .
 She earned a double major at Stanford in chemical engineering and African-American studies in 1976 . Her double major was chemical engineering .
 After completing her medical internship, she joined the Peace Corps and worked as a staff physician in West Africa . She is now a member of the U.S. Peace Corps .
 She developed curricula and taught volunteer personnel, wrote manuals for self-care, and implemented guidelines on public health and safety issues for volunteers . She also developed guidelines for public health issues for volunteer volunteers .
 Mae Jemison worked with CIGNA Health Plan of Cali312 SCIENCE AND HEALTH PRACTITIONERS fornia, a health maintenance organization . Upon receiving her medical degree in 1981, Jemison was a member of CIGna Health Plan .
 She applied to the space program in October 1985, three months before the Challenger blew up, killing seven astronauts . She applied for the program in 1985, just three months after the Challenger exploded .
 Jemison believes most of her friends viewed her application to NASA as a natural evolution, despite the fact that, when most people think of the word astronaut, they think of a white man . Jemison: "Most of my friends viewed me applying for NASA as an evolution" Jemison
 Jemison acknowledges that there were voices of discouragement along the way . Jemison: "I'm not going to give up. I'm going to do it"
 NASA postponed the application process because of the Challenger incident . NASA's application process was postponed after the Challenger disaster . NASA says it will not apply for astronauts to be in space .
 Jemison was one of 15 candidates selected from 2,000 initial applicants in 1987 . Jemison is a member of the Smithsonian's Air Force One program .
 She processed shuttles for launch by checking satellites, checking thermal protection systems, performing launch countdowns, and verifying computer software .
 Jemison boarded the space shuttle Endeavor on September 12, 1992, at the Kennedy Space Center . Jemison was a science mission specialist for the Endeavour mission in 1992 .
 Endeavors mission was to conduct experiments in materials processing and life sciences . Mission was to study materials processing, life sciences, and materials processing .
 Second, she conducted life science and materials processing experiments in space to help scientists better understand the environment . Third, she was a member of the Apollo 11 crew .
 These tasks included experimenting with metals and new compounds and studying the effects of gravity on the body .
 Jemison worked as a liaison between the Johnson Space Center in Houston and NASA crew members in Cape Canaveral, Florida . Until 1993, Jemison was NASA's liaison between NASA and the space agency .
 She then became a professor at Dartmouth College where she directed the Jemison Institute for Advancing Technologies in Developing Countries . She is also a former professor at Harvard University and Dartmouth College .
 In 1998, Jemison founded her own company, the Jemison Group, a technological consulting and marketing firm . Jemison is the founder of a technology consulting firm .
 Spencer Taylor mural “Black Americans in Flight’s” unveiled in Lambert-St. Louis museum .
 Jemison was the first black woman astronaut . Jemison is honored at the St. Louis International Airport in 1988 .
 Kenyan biologist and environmentalist Wangari Muta Maathai has spent her career demonstrating the connection between a healthy, tree-growing environment and human health and well-being .
 Maathai left the university to found the Green Belt Movement, a grassroots organization devoted to restoring Kenya’s environment through the planting of trees . After a successful academic career, he found the organization after leaving the university .
 Kenya lies between Ethiopia and Tanzania and is partially bordered by the Indian Ocean to the east . Kenya lies in the middle of the world's most populous region .
 Most of Kenya consists of a broad, arid plateau, with high mountains in the west . Most of the country is largely arid and arid, with mountains in its west .
 Nyeri is located near the city of Nakuru in the west central mountains . Maathai remembers it as being “very green, very productive,” and ‘very green”
 Great Britain colonized Kenya in 1895; African nationalists achieved independence in 1963 . Kenya was colonized by Great Britain in 1895 .
 She graduated from St. Scholastica College in Atchison, Kansas, where she earned her B.S. degree in biology four years later . She also graduated from Kansas State University with a biology degree .
 By 1976, the university administration named her chair of the anatomy department . She was named chair of anatomy department in 1976 .
 She quit her job to make an unsuccessful bid for a seat in Kenya’s national assembly, called the Bunge . She quit the job to run for an unsuccessful seat in the national assembly .
 Around 97 percent of Kenya’s forests had been cut down, either to clear land for cash crops or to provide wood for cooking fires . The forests were cut down to clear cash crops and provide wood .
 Tourism accounts for much of the service industry, which is about 50 percent of Kenya’s economy . Tourism is a major source of growth in Kenya's economy .
 Kenya is well known for its wildlife and parks, and its government has always taken an interest in preserving its natural resources . Kenya's government has taken a keen interest in the country's wildlife .
 Kenya has one of the fastest population growth rates in the world, and poverty is widespread . However, Kenya also has a fast population growth rate, which is also widespread . Poverty is widespread in Kenya, but the country has a history of poverty .
 Deforestation, as Maathai discovered, is directly linked to impoverishment . Deforestation has been linked to poverty, says Maatai .
 Kenya traditionally has been self-sufficient in food production . But drought has hindered its ability to keep its people adequately fed . The drought has been exacerbated by deforestation .
 In traditional Kenyan culture, women are the farmers and responsible for feeding their families . Women are responsible for the survival of their families in traditional Kenya culture .
 Maathai found that, as forests became thinner and thinner, women had to spend more and more time searching for firewood with which to cook . The former president of Kenya's government found that forests are thinning and thinning .
 To reduce the time spent building and tending fires and cooking, mothers began feeding their children lownutrient foods that did not require cooking, such as cassava .
 In addition to requiring more labor, cutting down trees also contributes to poverty . Cutting down trees reduces fertile topsoil by reducing fertile top soil .
 When trees are removed from the land, root systems that retain moisture in the soil die and leave the topsoil vulnerable to wind and water . Wind and water carry the valuable soil into river systems .
 After her campaign ended, Maathai became active in the National Council of Women . She would serve as its chair from 1981 to 1987 . She was the chair of the council .
 Through the NCW, she introduced the idea of women farmers planting trees around their land . The idea was introduced to women farmers .
 To demonstrate her initiative on World Environmental Day, June 5, 1977, she planted seven trees in a public park in Nairobi, Kenya .
 In 1986, the Green Belt Movement established a Pan African Green Belt Network . The network led to the adoption of tree-planting programs in Tanzania, Uganda, Malawi, Ethiopia, Ethiopia and Zimbabwe .
 The long-range goal of the Kenyan Green Belt Movement is to establish sustainable agriculture . Kenya's long-term goal is to set up sustainable agriculture in the country .
 Sustainable agriculture is the growing of food in a way that preserves the environment and allows farmers to continue to grow food crops . Sustainable agriculture can be seen as a way to preserve the environment for farmers .
 Food security is a means of achieving food security, or the ability of farmers to feed themselves, their families, and local populations . It is a way to achieve food security for farmers .
 Sustainable agriculture would require a reduction in the number of trees cleared to produce cash crops in Kenya . It would require the planting of trees to ensure fertile soil and successful food crops .
 Maathai admits that there are times when she misses her academic career . She admits that she misses being able to study in Kenya .
 In addition to her work with the Green Belt Movement, she continues to campaign for a more democratic Kenya . She continues to work with Green Belt movement .
 Her activism has occasionally brought her to blows with the Kenyan government . She is known for her activism against the government .
 Alchemy was a precursor to the modern science of chemistry . The practice of turning base metals such as lead and mercury into precious metals silver and gold .
 Alchemists supposedly performed this transmutation of base metals into precious metals by using the philosopher’s stone, a hypothetical substance that was also believed to give eternal life . The philosopher's stone is believed to be used by alchemists to transmutation base metals .
 Alchemists were the first to combine theory with scientific experimentation . Alchemy was a mixture of chemistry, astrology, occultism, and magic .
 Egyptian alchemy may have originated in ancient Mesopotamia where women alchemists made perfume and other cosmetics . Egyptian alchemist may have started in Mesopotamian culture .
 According to Dee, the transmutation of base metals to gold was a metaphor for the transformation of man to god . Dee: The transmutation was a symbol for the . transformation of . man to . god .
 Many alchemists performed their experiments in secret and used allegorical language to describe them, for fear of persecution . Alchemists often used the language of their experiments to protect themselves .
 As physics and chemistry developed in the 17th and 18th centuries, alchemists fell into disrepute . Alchemists were accused of being bad for their work .
 Alexandria was a center of learning throughout the Roman Empire . Liberal ideas helped loosen the strict patriarchal attitudes toward women held by many Jewish and Greek people at the time .
 Maria the Jewess was able to explore the mysteries of alchemy, in Alexandria . The Greek physician AGNODIKE studied medicine in Alexandria, Egypt, and Maria studied alchemy in the same place .
 Maria the Jewess wrote many treatises on her experiments and inventions, but little of her work survives today . Little of her works survive today .
 Fragments of her Maria Practica exist today in collections of ancient alchemy . Fragments are still found in alchemy collections .
 Maria wrote under the name Miriam the Prophetess, sister of Moses, causing some to mistakenly think that Miriam was an alchemist .
 The Maria Practica combined the theoretical aspects of alchemy with practical descriptions of laboratory devices and processes . The Mariapractica combined theoretical and practical aspects of the alchemy theory with descriptions of lab procedures .
 The best-known device invented by Maria was the double boiler . It has been an essential part of laboratories, and kitchens, for the past two thousand years .
 The double boiler, or bain-marie, consists of two containers, one of which nests on top of the other . The French still call it a bain marie, as the French do .
 The water slowly heats the material inside the upper container . It allows the chemist to heat a substance slowly, or to maintain it at a constant temperature .
 Maria’s description of the tribikos, or threearmed still, is the oldest known description of this useful device . Maria's description is the most accurate description of a device .
 A still is used in the process of distillation, in which a liquid mixture is heated in a vessel until part of the liquid begins to evaporate into a gas . The still is a still used in distillation .
 Maria recommended using a paste made of flour and water for keeping the joints of the tribikos sealed . Maria recommends using a mixture of water and flour to seal the joints .
 Maria invented the kerotakis, consisting of a cylinder with a round cover to be set over a flame . For the purpose of vaporizing arsenic, mercury, and sulfur on metals, she invented the Kerotakis . Maria invented a cylinder to vaporize arsenic and mercury .
 Near the top of the cylinder, suspended from the cover, was a plate containing a copper-lead alloy to be treated . The plate containing the alloy was attached to the cylinder and was used to treat it .
 As the substance below boiled, the vapor condensed at the top of the cylinder and the liquid flowed back down in a continuous cycle . The liquid flowed down the cylinder as the substance boiled .
 The kerotakis was also used for extracting plant oils, such as attar of roses, such a plant oil .
 Marias work marks the end of alchemy as practiced in the Roman Empire . Emperor Diocletian began persecuting Alexandrian alchemists and burning their texts .
 Arabs rescued the science and transported it to Europe during the Middle Ages . The Arabs rescued it from the region and transported the science to Europe .
 Barbara McClintock is a cool, detached scientist with a biting wit and a warm heart . She discovered that genes are dynamic systems that interact with their environment . She says genes are a dynamic system that interacts with the environment .
 McClintock argued that genes could move and could control other genes . This suggests that living things control their own evolution, he said .
 In 1983, after other scientists finally corroborated and accepted her work, she won a Nobel Prize . Thirty-two years later, she became the first woman to win an unshared Nobel in physiology .
 When she asked her father, a physician for Standard Oil Company, if she could go to college, he gave his assent . Her father was a physician who worked at Standard Oil .
 Her mother, on the other hand, balked at the idea . She worried that her daughter would become even more isolated from the rest of society .
 Barbara was afraid that Barbara might become a college professor . Barbara's mother feared that Barbara would become a professor . She was afraid Barbara might be a professor.
 By the time she graduated in 1923, she had decided upon a career in genetics . She had decided to study genetics .
 Geneticists have already discovered that microscopic bodies called chromosomes carry information that determines inherited traits . Geneticists had already found out that genetic information can be passed on to others .
 Each cell contains pairs of chromosomes; each of the pairs is only slightly different from the others . The chromosomes are only slightly similar to each other in the cells .
 By studying Indian corn, a unique, multicolored variety, McClintock found that the pattern of kernels on each ear of corn is inherited .
 She identified 10 different pairs of chromosomes that determine the different colors of kernels .
 The next step was to link changes in chromosomes to changes in the living organism, scientists say . The study was published in the prestigious journal Nature Nature .
 McClintock and her graduate student, Harriet Creighton, performed one of the truly great experiments in modern biology . After completing her Ph.D. in 1927, McClintocks and Creighton performed what was called one of their great experiments .
 McClintock and Creighton beat the German scientist who made a similar finding a few weeks later .
 McClintock wanted to find out more about damaged genomes, or complete sets of chromosomes . He wanted to study damaged genomes or complete chromosomes .
 Another Missouri professor, Lewis Stadler, had shown the damaging effects of X rays on corn .
 McClintock identified ring chromosomes that she realized had been broken by radiation . She said she realized ring chromosomes were broken .
 She found that the broken ends of the chromosomes sometimes fused onto other broken ends, forming a ring . She also found that broken ends sometimes fused into each other .
 McClintock postulated that chromosome tips had a special structure that she called telomere . She believed that the Telomere maintains chromosomal stability . McClintocks postulated the structure maintains the stability of chromosomes .
 Telomere geneticists are applying their research to diseases such as cancer and to the aging process . Today, telomere genetics is applied to diseases like cancer and aging processes .
 McClintock presented her discovery that mutable genes appeared to be transferred from cell to cell during development of the corn kernel . Then came the disastrous reception at Cold Spring Harbor’s Symposium in 1951 .
 Biographer Nathaniel Comfort explains the audience’s reaction in part by her choice of research material . The audience reacted to the book by reacting to the author's research material, Comfort says .
 By the 1940s, Indian corn had simply gone out of fashion in the scientific community . Indian corn went out of science in 1940s .
 By 1951, biologists were becoming ever more specialized, and many of the virologists in the audience did not have the necessary background to completely understand McClintock’s discussion of genetic transposition .
 She inadvertently stepped on toes when she proclaimed the mutability of genes, she said . Furthermore, she also said that genes can be mutable .
 Geneticists had made careers out of mapping genes, pinpointing their exact location on chromosomes . Most geneticists made careers in mapping genes into chromosomes .
 It was not until the late 1970s that other geneticists began to duplicate McClintock’s findings . Other geneticists started to duplicate his findings .
 Researchers began finding transposable genes in other organisms, such as fruit flies and humans . Researchers also found genes in fruit flies, humans .
 McClintock’s notion that some genes could control others, and that therefore genes control their own evolution, was also corroborated by the study . The study was published in the prestigious journal Nature Nature .
 The National Academy of Sciences awarded her the Kimber Genetics Award in 1967; three years later she won the National Medal of Science . 13 years later, 13 years after winning the Nobel Prize, she was awarded the title again . The Nobel Prize was awarded to her by the Academy of Science in
 Like Simone de BEAUVOIR, Margaret Mead called into question the notion that biological differences between men and women determine their behavior .
 She based her understanding on her study of the New Guinea people among whom she observed men and women engaged in what most Europeans and Americans would consider feminine behavior .
 She concluded that the concepts of femininity and masculinity must be culture-specific . The concepts of masculinity and femininity must be cultural-specific, she said .
 Mead viewed cross-cultural knowledge of the world as one of the most important challenges facing modern societies . Mead viewed colonial systems breaking down under the pressures of two world wars .
 Mead was the author of several anthropological studies accessible even to nonacademic audiences . Mead lectured around the world and wrote a column for the popular women’s magazine Redbook .
 Mead received unconventional lessons in data gathering and psychological experimentation at home from her mother and grandmother . Mead says she learned about data gathering from her grandmother and mother .
 She was asked to observe the personality differences in her siblings and prepare a report based on her findings . They asked her, for example, to observe personality and behavioral differences in siblings .
 Emily Fogg Mead studied Italian immigrants in Hammonton, New Jersey, with her daughter in tow .
 Her studies led to the elder Mead’s abhorrence of the racist and nativist attitudes toward foreigners in her day .
 After receiving her B.A. in psychology from Barnard College in 1923, Mead wrote her master’s thesis in which she defended her notion that linguistic and cultural differences explained Italian immigrant children's low IQ test scores .
 In 1923 she married an Episcopal priest, Luther S Cressman; the two divorced in 1928 . In 1928 she was married to another Episcopal priest . She was also married to a priest .
 Boas revolutionized the world of ideas in the 1920s by positing the notion that there was no biological evidence of presumed racial inferiority or superiority . Boas: There is no biological proof of presumed superiority or inferiority .
 Boas believed that cultural differences—or learned behaviors—explained the perceived inequalities between people . Boas: Cultural differences explain perceived inequalities in society .
 Mead and her colleague Ruth Benedict studied how certain behavior patterns emerge within a particular culture . Mead and Benedict looked at the behavior patterns of a culture .
 Mead channeled her scientific impulses into the study of children, where she believed she could discover how these cultural patterns of behavior were instilled . Mead, who died in 1994, was an educator and author of The Children's Book .
 Mead’s fieldwork changed the way others viewed socalled primitive people . Mead's field work changed the . way others . viewed primitive people in the . world .
 Mead criticized the widely accepted notion that the minds of tribal people were equivalent to the mind of a small child . Mead's work was published in The New York Review of Life in New York City, New York, USA, 2012 .
 Samoan girls were taught how to become adults through institutionalized rituals and rites of passage within the context of their culture . American teenage girls suffered during the transition from childhood to adulthood .
 The book’s literary, accessible style catapulted its author to international fame . The book was published in 1996 and has since been translated into print .
 When Mead returned from the field, she began working as a curator in 1926 at the American Museum of Natural History . She held a position until retirement in 1969 .
 With Reo Fortune, she traveled to New Guinea, this time to study children's thought processes .
 During and after World War II, she furthered that objective by marrying her career as an anthropologist to her new concern for public policy . She married her career to her interest in public policy in the aftermath of the war .
 Mead studied the effects of wartime food rationing on the U.S. population . Mead's book, "Food Rationing," was published by the Smithsonian Institution .
 The organization did research on how to use anthropological methods to study cultures from abroad . The research was done in an effort to enhance cross-cultural understanding among different populations .
 Study of Cultures at a Distance resulted from Mead’s tenure at the institute . Mead's tenure led to the study of cultures at a distance .
 During the 1960s, Mead became concerned with the rash of campus riots and general unrest among America’s young population . Mead was concerned about the growing unrest among young people .
 In Culture and Commitment, Mead—^who coined the phrase generation gap —concluded that young adults’ growing sense of cultural alienation resulted from their parents’ lack of control over the world around them . Mead: “Young people’’s . sense of
 Mead stated, were in better shape to weather change than their parents were . Mead said they were better prepared to deal with the weather change . Mead stated that the children are better prepared for the weather than parents .
 She continued to lecture throughout the U.S. and around the world . She continued her lectures throughout the United States and the world.
 She introduced training facilities for nurses, making nursing a major component in the treatment of wounded soldiers . She reformed military medical care by introducing training facilities .
 After the war, she founded the Nightingale School and Home for Nurses at St. Mary's Hospital in London . She also founded a school and home for nurses in London, England .
 Her books Notes on Hospitals and Notes on Nursing persuaded prominent members of British society that medical care needed to be reformed . She persuaded prominent British society to reform medical care .
 While Nightingale’s contributions to the held of nursing are well known, her interactions with women's rights issues are often overlooked . Perhaps because of the contradictory nature of the positions that she took, she took .
 She argued that restrictions placed on women pursuing careers ought to be removed . On the one hand, she argued that the restrictions should be removed.
 She insisted that women should not aspire to become doctors but should pursue the field of nursing instead . On the other hand, she insisted that .
 She strongly opposed legislation requiring prostitutes to undergo examination for contagious diseases . She refused to make public comments on the issue, because she felt it was improper for women to speak publicly on sexual matters .
 Nightingale was born on May 12, 1820, in Florence, Italy, in 1820 . Her wealthy family background enabled her to raise money to fund her reform efforts .
 Both her father and her mother, Frances Smith Nightingale, were Unitarians who believed that human suffering was created by humans, not inflicted by God, not God .
 Unitarians sought social solutions to human problems, and Florence Nightingale’s parents encouraged her reform spirit . Florence Nightedale's parents encouraged Florence to become an Unitarian and Unitarian .
 Frances Nightingale’s role in her daughter's life was primarily that of matchmaker . She was a matchmaker for her daughter, who was born in 18th century .
 Despite a seven-year courtship, Florence rejected his proposal of marriage . Florence rejected the proposal of a marriage after seven years .
 At the age of 25, Florence announced that she intended to become a nurse . Florence announced she was going to be a nurse at the time .
 Parents objected, arguing that nursing was degrading drudgery and not a proper role for a woman of high social standing . Both parents objected .
 Lord Hampton only gave consent to Florence’s plans when Lord Hampton married another woman in 1851 . They only gave their consent to her plans when she was married to another woman .
 She left for Kaiserwerth Hospital in Germany to begin training that year . She began training in Germany in 1996 .
 Next, she traveled to Paris to work at the Maison de la Providence, an orphanage, nursery and hospital .
 There, she compiled reports and comparative statistics on the major medical facilities in France and Germany .
 Upon her return to London, she was appointed superintendent of the London Gharitable Institution for Sick Gentlewomen in Distressed Gircumstances . She was also superintendent of an institution for women in distress .
 When England entered the Grimean War, it was an effort by Turkey, Britain, and France to foil Russian expansion in the Black Sea region .
 Wounded soldiers lay on cots with no bedding, unbathed and still in their uniforms . Wounded soldier lay on bedding and still wearing his uniform .
 War wounds accounted for only one in six deaths at the hospital; typhus, cholera, and dysentery accounted for five of the other five deaths . War wounds, disease spread in unsanitary conditions, accounted for one of six deaths .
 Nightingale knew that if conditions at the hospital were cleaner, the death rate could be reduced . Nightedale knew if conditions in the hospital could be cleaner, he would have a better outcome .
 Readers of the London Times had already seen pictures of hospitalized soldiers . The London Times has already published pictures of the soldiers .
 She fed stories about conditions in army hospitals to William Howard Russell . To keep the public informed, she fed stories to war correspondent .
 After a great deal of negative publicity, the army relented and gave Nightingale the job of reorganizing the hospital . The army eventually relented to the hospital's reorganization after a lot of publicity .
 In 1857, with the aid of her fund-raising efforts, the army founded the Army Medical College to train health care workers to work in army hospitals . The college was founded in 1857 and is now a medical college .
 At the Nightingale Training School for Nurses, nurses learned the scientific basis of medicine, techniques for treatment, and the personal needs of patients . Nurses learned the science of medicine and techniques for treating .
 What it is and What It is Not is the basic textbook for nurse’s training . It was widely acclaimed throughout Europe and the U.S.
 In 1859, Nightingale wrote Suggestions for Thought to Searchers after Religious Truths, a rather unwieldy three-volume work . She presented her ruminations on multiple issues, mostly of a spiritual nature .
 She argued that restrictions keeping women from pursuing careers ought to be removed .
 This legislation allowed police to arrest prostitutes and subject them to humiliating exams for venereal disease . Prostitutes were forced to undergo humiliating exams to find out if they had venereals disease .
 Women found to be infected were placed in a locked hospital until cured . Women found in locked hospital were placed there until cured of the disease .
 Two women, Josephine Butler and Elizabeth Woltenholme, organized the Ladies’ Association Against the Contagious Diseases Act . Two women toured the country touring the country making speeches to change the law .
 She received full-time nursing care until her death on August 13, 1910 .
 Florence Nightingale was the first woman to become a nursing nurse . She died at the age of 50 in 1918 . She was a nurse in her native Scotland .
 Ramphele was born on December 28, 1947, in the Bochum district of the northern Transvaal, near Pietersburg, South Africa . He was born in 1947, and died in 2007 .
 Her maternal grandfather was a Dutch Reformed Church minister and farmer . Her maternal grandmother was a minister and a farmer .
 Her parents, Pitsi Eliphaz Ramphele, were both primary schoolteachers, positions of relatively high status at the time . Her parents were both high-status primary school teachers .
 Ramphele’s family comes from the Bapedi, or North Sotho people of the northern Transvaal . He comes from a family of the Bapingi people of northern Sothotho .
 Ramphele's parents named her after her maternal grandmother’s praise name, Mamphela . She was named after her mother's mother's praise name .
 Traditionally, praise names link people with their clan; naming babies after a relative is the means by which the North Sotho people incorporate newborns into the extended family . The North African people name babies after their relatives .
 The European names are a legacy of the European missionaries who came to South Africa and gave the indigenous people baptized Christian names . The missionaries were unwilling to learn the African names, Ramphele says .
 For convenience’s sake, many South Africans have kept their European names . For convenience, many keep European names for convenience .
 Ramphele’s political consciousness would not be raised until her college years, but she had heard political issues discussed during her childhood, she says . Rampheele's political consciousness was not raised until she was in college .
 South Africa’s status as a colony of Great Britain, and the racial discrimination black South Africans withstood during colonial times and after independence, affected her family .
 The situation in South Africa differed from other colonized nations in Africa . South Africa was one of the most colonized countries in the continent .
 Once European descendants gained independence in 1961, friction between black and white South Africans intensified . However, once European descendants of South Africans gained independence, friction intensified .
 The system of apartheid, established by the South African Nationalist party in 1948, became more oppressive and restrictive after independence . The system was more oppressive after independence from South Africa .
 Authorities expelled Ramphele’s sister from high school for participating in a demonstration against the parades celebrating South African independence . Authorities expelled her from school after she participated in an anti-independence demonstration .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, the Pan-Africanist Congress, and the African National Congress (established in 1912 to protest racial discrimination in South Africa), began campaigning against the government’s system of apartheid .
 She dropped her European name, Aletta, and began using her African praise name, Mamphela . She moved to Africa, where she was born, to Africa .
 Biko felt that the NUSAS’s opposition to racial discrimination was ineffective and unlikely to result in real improvement in the status of black South Africans . Biko said that the opposition to race discrimination was not likely to lead to real improvement .
 He became convinced that to effect change blacks would have to direct their own future . Ramphele: "To effect change, blacks must direct themselves own future"
 Biko and Ramphele founded the Black Consciousness Movement, within the black South African Students’ Organization, in 1969 . Biko was a member of the South African National Socialist Party .
 SASO instituted legal aid and medical clinics, as well as cottage industries for black youth . The African-American black protest movement, which began around the same time, influenced SASO . SASO established legal aid clinics, medical clinics and cottage industries .
 SASO promoted consciousnessraising and self-reliance as a cure . Its primary goal was to attack what it viewed as the slave mentality of oppressed black South Africans . SASO was founded in the 1950s .
 SASO chose her to head its local office, where she participated in leadership development seminars . SASO is based in London, England, based in the United States .
 Steve Biko received banning orders from the government, which meant that he could not speak or publish, teach or attend public meetings . Biko was banned from speaking or publishing, teaching or attending public meetings.
 Biko and Ramphele became lovers; he was married, and she had divorced her first husband . He was married to Biko; she was also divorced from his wife . Biko became a lover of Rampheele's wife .
 Biko was detained and interrogated by the South African government four times . He was held and interrogated four times by the government in South Africa .
 The government claimed that he died as the result of a hunger strike . However, an autopsy revealed evidence of brain damage and extensive abrasions on his skull .
 The effect of Biko’s death rallied support worldwide for an end to apartheid . Biko's death helped end apartheid in South Africa . His death was the catalyst for the end to the system of apartheid .
 In 1975, Ramphele founded the Zanempilo Health Clinic in King Williamstown . The clinic was a project engineered by the Black Community Programmes .
 Ramphele was removed to the northern Transvaal in 1977 . In 1977 she became the target of banning orders and was removed from the province .
 She became an itinerant doctor with the Ithuseng Community Health Programme at Trichardsdal . She became a doctor in the community at the end of her life .
 She began editing a book called Restoring the Land on the ecological challenges facing post-apartheid South Africa, published in 1992 .
 A Bed Called Home, written in 1993, is about the migrant labor hostels in Cape Town . It was written by Nelson Mandela in 1993 .
 Ramphele has received numerous awards and honorary degrees, including the Noma prize for African writers and scholars . He has also received numerous honorary degrees and honours from universities .
 Jamaican-born Mary Seacole was a nurse to wounded British soldiers during the Crimean War . She was a businesswoman and author of her autobiography .
 Like Florence Nightingale, Seacole helped open medical professions to women by insisting on recognition and compensation for her wartime nursing work . Like Florence NIGHTINGALE, she helped open the medical profession .
 It was from this culture that Seacole learned nursing, and it was probably also her African ancestry that accounted for her struggle to gain respect as a nurse .
 Seacole was born in Kingston, Jamaica, to a free black mother and a Scottish army officer named Grant . She learned nursing from her mother, who was a nurse in Jamaica .
 At age 12, Mary Seacole began helping her mother tend to her patients at the boardinghouse . She was 12 when she began caring for her patients .
 Edwin Horatio Seacole, an invalid and perhaps a onetime patient under Mrs. Mrs. Seacoles, is a former patient of Mrs. Horatio . Mrs. Seacole is believed to have been a patient of the invalid . She is also believed to be
 After the couple married, they moved to Black River, Jamaica, on the west coast of the island . They now live in Black River on the island's west coast .
 Edwin Seacole died shortly after. There they started a dry goods store, but sadly, Edwin died soon after .
 After her mother’s death, she continued operating the boardinghouse, rebuilding it after the devastating 1843 fire that swept through the city . The boardinghouse was built in 1843 after the fire .
 Once, she performed an autopsy on a baby that had died of cholera, in order to gain more knowledge about the disease . She performed the autopsy on the baby that died of the disease to gain new knowledge .
 Seacole took charge of nursing operations at the Up Park Military Camp during the yellow fever attack . Seacoles is a nurse at Up Park military Camp in the Philippines .
 Mary Seacole was a hotel proprietor, nurse, and gold prospector in New Granada . She and her brother, Edward, traveled to Granada, now Colombia and Panama, in the 1850s .
 An American patient once praised her to his fellow countrymen for her healing abilities, but added that her skin color made him and other Americans uneasy .
 Seacole began reading newspaper accounts that told of the need for nurses in Jamaica . Soon after she returned to Jamaica, the Grimean War broke out .
 She sailed for London and then made an application to serve the army as a nurse at the British War Office . She sailed to London and made a bid to join the British army .
 She applied to Elizabeth Herbert, one of Florence Nightingale’s companions, but was again denied an audience . She then applied for Elizabeth Herbert again, who was also a companion of the nightingale . She applied for an audience at the time but was turned down again .
 She made the 3,000-mile trip at her own expense and set up a boardinghouse with a distant relative, a man named Day . She stayed in the boardinghouse in a boarding house with a relative .
 She opened the British Hotel at Balaklava, at the southern tip of the Crimean Peninsula, in Crimea .
 There, she claimed to have tended to more wounded soldiers than Nightingale . She met frequently with the wounded soldiers in hospital .
 More soldiers died from diseases, such as jaundice and dysentery, than wounds, says Nightingale . She soon realized that more soldiers were dying from diseases than wounds .
 Seacole asked friends in the military to help her raise money to pay her debts . She asked them to help raise money for the next month .
 Seacole decided to capitalize on her growing public image by writing and publishing her life’s story . She decided to write and publish her life's story .
 A Grand Military Festival was held in her honor, attended by an estimated 10,000 admirers . The event was attended by a large number of admirers of the Queen . The festival was held at the end of the year .
 Seacole spent her final years as a masseuse to the Princess of Wales . She became acquainted with British royalty and spent her last years with the princess .
 Chinese physicist and educator Xide Xie represents the epitome of an academician . In English, the order of her name is reversed in her honor .
 She has won numerous honors for her work as a scientist in both China and the United States . She has been an outstanding teacher and mentor to her students, many of whom have gone on to win awards themselves .
 Xide Xie has managed to shine in either research or teaching . Xie is a professor at the University of Cambridge, England . Xie has been a professor for more than 20 years .
 Xide, who had been living with her grandmother during her father’s two-year stay in Chicago, joined him in Beijing and received her early education there . Xide excelled in math and physics .
 Japan's invasion of China in 1937 interrupted Xide’s education . Her family fled Beijing, moving south to Changsha, Hunan Province, and then to Guiyang, Guizhou Province .
 Japan forced the Chinese government, headed by nationalist Chiang Kai-shek, to move south, too, to Chongqing, in Sichuan Province . Japan also made the move south to China, and forced the government to move .
 Xide had tuberculosis in her hip joint, which kept her bedridden for nearly four years . Xide’s hip began to bother her, and she had tuberculosis .
 Xide refused to let these problems interfere with her inquisitive mind, however . Xide refuses to let them interfere with the problems of Xide .
 A year later, she left for the U.S. to pursue graduate degrees in the United States . A year after she left, she returned to France for a study .
 She received her M.A. from Smith College in Massachusetts and her doctorate from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1951 . Both degrees were in physics . She received both M.S. and M.T. degrees .
 Four years later, Xide became the director of the solid state physics laboratory . Xide is now the head of the Laboratory of Solid State Physics .
 Xide developed a method of placing advanced students in the classroom, allowing them to teach neophytes . Xide is a teacher who uses advanced students to teach new students .
 The advanced students received teaching experience, while the less advanced students learned from their peers . This method benefited both groups; the advanced students got teaching experience .
 In 1958, Xide coauthored Physics of Semiconductors, the first book published on the subject in China . Xide also coauthored a book on semiconductors .
 Semiconductors are solids that are very poor conductors when pure or at low temperatures . They are effective conductors if impure or heated, but when heated .
 Conductors are substances that form channels for the passage of heat or electricity . Conductors form channels in the flow of heat, electricity and heat .
 During this decade, Mao Zedong directed a purge against the upper middleclass bureaucrats, artists, and academics . Many of whom were killed, imprisoned, or publicly humiliated .
 The purpose of the Cultural Revolution was to strengthen Chairman Mao’s power base by destroying those who opposed him . Chairman Mao wanted to strengthen his power base, according to the historian .
 Xide Xie was imprisoned in her own laboratory for nine months and then released to do janitorial and factory labor . Xie was released from her lab after nine months in prison and forced to work in a factory .
 When the Cultural Revolution ended, Xide pursued her work with even more vigor . Xide's work was published in China's first book, "Xide"
 In addition to authoring and coauthoring more than 60 scientific papers, she has cowritten four books on physics .
 She has held consulting positions within the Chinese government . She has also held several consulting positions with the government .
 An internationally known physicist, she played a prominent role in the 21st International Conference on Semiconductor Physics in Beijing .
 Set and costume designer Aline Bernstein was the union’s first female member in 1926 . Bernstein was introduced to the United Scenic Art Union of the American Federation of Labor .
 Bernstein won the admiration of theater people involved in every facet of dramatic production . Bernstein overcame the discriminatory practices of her union . Bernstein won admiration from theater theater people .
 Her colleagues in set and costume design praised her as a standard-bearer in the profession . Actors respected her ability to enhance the characters they played through her costume designs .
 Without proper mechanisms in place onstage, the entire play loses its meaning . Without the proper mechanisms, the character Peter Pan, whose magical flying abilities send him soaring through the air, the play loses meaning .
 Bernstein rigged a mechanism backstage that sent Peter sailing through the air above the stage, to the audience’s delight . Bernstein rigged the mechanism backstage .
 Bernstein’s work on Caesar and Cleopatra demanded strict attention to the historicity of ancient Egyptian dress, or the critics would dismiss the play as bogus . Bernstein's work on the play is critical of the historical accuracy of the dress .
 She came into the custody of her Aunt Rachel, a drug addict, in 1897 . She lost both parents by 1897, at which point she was adopted by her aunt .
 Settlement houses were established to help immigrants acclimate to their new surroundings in industrial areas in large urban centers in the eastern and midwestern U.S. They were established in large industrial areas .
 Alice and Irene Lewisohn were producing pageants and plays at The Neighborhood Playhouse . They established the theater in 1915 . The theater they established in 1915.
 Bernstein began learning the “new stagecraft” from her mentors Robert Edmond Jones , Lee Simonson, and Mordecai Bernstein .
 Bernstein began designing costumes and sets in 1916 for The Queens Enemies . Bernstein designed costumes for The Queen Enemies .
 Her designs for The Little Clay Cart{\92A, an ancient Sanskrit play, brought her to the attention of a wider, critical audience .
 Bernstein’s designs captured the essence of the Rajput style, or the culture of the Hindu military and landowning classes, from which the play was derived . Bernstein's designs, according to critics, captured the idea of Rajputs, or Rajput culture .
 In 1925, she used dim lighting and somber settings to accentuate the mysticism that permeated the classic Jewish play The Dybbuk .
 Bernstein’s sets became progressively more distorted as the plot of the play turned increasingly to the supernatural . Bernstein's sets became increasingly distorted during the play's final stages .
 Bernstein’s professional career brought her increasing fame, her private life grew more and more complicated . Bernstein's private life became more complicated as Bernstein's professional career grew . Bernstein died at the age of 92 at a New York hospital .
 In 1925, she fell in love with Thomas Wolfe, then an aspiring writer 18 years her junior . Wolfe was 18 years younger than her then .
 Bernstein’s attempted suicide in 1931 caused Bernstein to try to kill himself . Bernstein's relationship with Bernstein was a stormy affair that ended in 1931 . Bernstein and Bernstein were married in 1945 .
 Her biographers contend that her husband, children, and increasing respect she received from the theater world sustained her during her recovery from her involvement with Wolfe .
 Civic Repertory Theatre and Neighborhood Playhouse were closed by 1934, the height of the economic slump . However, both the Civic and Neighborhood theatres were still open .
 Playwright Lillian Heilman and director Herman Shumlin asked her to collaborate with them on their production of The Childrens Hour in 1934 . She has also appeared in four subsequent plays .
 Bernstein also began writing during this period, including Three Blue Suits . The Journey Down is a play about a young novelist and an older costume and set designer .
 Her costume designs for the opera Regina won her the prestigious Tony Award for the costume design . Her costume design for the show won her Tony Award .
 Cassatt experimented with new art forms, including prints and etchings, in the early years of the 20th century . Cassatt began to experiment with new forms of art in his early 20s .
 Many critics refer to Cassatt as the best American painter of her generation . Cassatt is considered one of the most prolific American painters .
 Impressionism originated in France in the 1860s and dominated European and North American painting until the turn of the 20th century . Impressionistism dominated European, North American and American art until the end of the century .
 The impressionists’ first exhibit was in 1873; the show consisted of works rejected by the official Paris Salon . The impressionist’s first show was at the Paris Salon.
 The conventional art world fiercely opposed the impressionists’ work, which they felt lacked distinctive subject matter and quality technique . The conventional Art World felt the impressionist's work lacked distinctive subjects matter and technique .
 Impressionists tried to depict detailed atmospheric conditions, especially natural light and the artificial gaslight invented in the 19th century . Impressionist paintings depict atmospheric conditions such as natural light .
 One of the first impressionists, Claude Monet, devoted several paintings to the changing effects of sunlight on the cathedral in Rouen, France .
 Mary Cassatt’s work reflected much of the impressionists’ style, although she had a sharp sense of her own individual talent . Cassatt's work reflected many of impressionists' style, but she had her own own personal talent .
 She was born to an upper-middle-class family in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in 1844 .
 In 1861, Cassatt entered the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, one of the first art institutions in the world to admit women, where she remained for four years . Cassatt was the first woman to be admitted to the institution .
 She became convinced, through her experiences, that were she to stay in the United States, her work would remain mediocre at best . She says she became convinced that if she stayed in the U.S. she would be mediocre .
 Cassatt went to Paris, the mecca of the art world, to create works of art . Cassatt was an artist of the 1930s and '60s .
 Degas, with whom she developed a friendship, invited her to join the impressionist school, though at the time they called themselves Independents . Degas was a close friend with her, and she was invited to join him .
 Cassatt never married or had children; her family, particularly her sisters, visited her in Paris and served as models for many of her works . Cassatt's sisters were models for her work .
 She is slightly inclined, as though she might be talking with a companion . She was slightly inclined to talk with her companion .
 Many impressionists loved to show scenes of middleand upper-class urban leisure activities, such as chatting in cafes, boating and theatergoing .
 In The Loge features a mirror behind the subject, creating a sense of intimacy between the viewer and the painting’s subject .
 Another impressionist feature is the effect of gaslight, which created a sort of unnatural radiance in the subject's face, body, and dress .
 Like many impressionist works, the subject is slightly off center, with one of her arms extending beyond the painting . The effect is like an impulsively taken snapshot rather than a painting .
 Cassatt’s study of, and work in, the art of Japanese woodblock prints, featured elevated viewpoints, high horizon lines, and lack of evident brush strokes . This painting also reflects Cassatt's interest in, and study, of, or interest, in, Japanese wood
 Cassatt's subjects seem to have been taken off-guard; they look unposed (much like another famous Cassatt work) Cassatt is famous for her work of art .
 Cassatt’s most interesting work, if not most famous, has been lost . Sadly, what may have been Cassatt's most interesting piece of art, has not been found .
 She painted a mural for the Women's Building at the 1893 Columbian Exposition World’s Fair . The mural was for the women's building at the Columbian Fair .
 The mural, with the intriguing title The Modern Woman, featured bright colors and brilliant light . The modern woman was featured in the mural .
 Cassatt turned down the prestigious Lippincott Award . Cassatt accepted a medal of the French Legion of Honor in 1904 .
 Leonor Fini’s paintings enfold viewers with their strange power . Fini is a painter, costume and set designer .
 She drew upon the archetypes of female sexuality and fertility, depicting women as bold human beings and quixotic sphinxes .
 Fini refused all references to herself as a surrealist artist, never becoming a member of any particular school . Fini had no formal training as an artist .
 She developed a modern feminist consciousness through her art by painting a world inhabited and defined by women . Her work includes paintings of women and women .
 Fini's parents divorced when she was less than a year old . Fini was born in Buenos Aires to an Argentine father and Italian mother .
 Fini spent her childhood and adolescence in Trieste, Italy, where Fini was born . Fini's mother took her to Trieste where she was born and raised her own daughter .
 Leonor’s mother disguised her as a boy until she turned six to avoid a kidnapping . Her father followed them overseas, threatening to regain custody . Leonor's mother hid her from her father until she was six .
 She cultivated an inner vision, imagining fantastic images that she later painted when she recovered from her illness .
 She toured art museums and immersed herself in her uncle’s collection of art books . She studied the works of Renaissance masters .
 Word of her talents reached Milan, center of the Italian art world, where she met and was influenced by Giorgio de Chirico and Carlo Carra .
 Fini frequently depicted courtly scenes featuring saucy young women as the focal point . In this period, Fini often depicted court scenes featuring young women . Fini was born in Italy and lived in Italy .
 Surrealists were inspired by the thoughts and visions of the subconscious mind . They sought ways to recreate dreams onto canvases .
 When members of the surrealist school saw her paintings, one of them arranged a meeting with her at a Paris cafe .
 Fini came to the cafe dressed in a cardinal’s scarlet robe . Fini gained a reputation as an eccentric after his appearance in a red robe .
 She participated in surrealist exhibits, but she kept her distance from surrealist art . She denied that her art could be described as surrealist .
 The Surrealist Manifesto seemed authoritarian and confining to Fini Fini . Andre Breton was the leader of the surrealist movement .
 She found the members of this school to be homophobic and misogynistic, despite their ideals of liberating sexuality from Victorian constraints . She found members of the school were misogynistic and homophobic .
 The women in her art are bold and alluring, powerful, and sometimes threatening, sometimes threatening . Her art is bold and powerful, powerful and often threatening .
 Fini's women are not idealized goddesses but amazons, independent and authoritarian . Fini’s women were not idealize goddesses, but are rather amazing and authoritarian .
 Her painting The Ideal Life features a young woman seated in a position reminiscent of Francois Auguste Rodin’s sculpture The Thinker .
 Her visage is direct and frank, challenging onlookers to deny her powers . Her visages challenge onlookers at denying her powers.
 Fini shocked her viewers by upsetting gender roles . Fini surprised them by playing with classical composition . She shocked them by shocking them by upsetting roles .
 In Chthonian Deity Watching Over the Sleep of a Young Man, for example, a young man reclines in a position of a typical classical female nude, watched over by—or perhaps controlled by—a female sphinx .
 Leonor Fini had been cultivating inner visions since her childhood illness . Fini was diagnosed with an illness that left her with an undiagnosed form of mental illness . She has been in touch with her family since childhood .
 Her attraction to psychic automatism, the surrealist practice of creating art directly from the subconscious mind, shaped her work . Her work was influenced by her fascination with the subject subjectivity .
 World’s End features a woman partly submerged in dark waters, surrounded by skulls and decaying foliage . The dream-like quality of the film has been described as 'dream-like'
 Like The Ideal Life, the watery woman confronts us directly, subtly challenging us to consider her—and our own demise . Like the ideal life, the Ideal Life challenges us to think about our own fate .
 After World War II, Fini expanded her artistic venue by illustrating books and designing theater sets and costumes . Fini also designed theater sets, costumes and designs books .
 Her work has been displayed in major galleries and museums throughout the world . Her work is displayed in galleries and exhibitions worldwide .
 Caravaggio was an exponent of the baroque style, characterized by extravagance in ornamentation, asymmetrical design, and grandiose expressiveness . The style dominated European art during the 17th century . It was characterized by extravagant ornamentation and asymmetrical designs .
 Gentileschi’s style—in terms of color and dramatic flair—mimics Caravaggio's, many of her paintings feature strong female characters that are absent from Caravagio's work .
 Gentileschi portrayed women most often as physically and psychologically strong . Unlike most male painters of the time, Gentilesch portrayed women as physically charming and physically strong .
 Some art historians have called Artemisia Gentileschi the most important artist of her time . Gentilesch is considered the most significant female artist of the time .
 Her father, the respected artist Orazio Gentileschi, was also a Caravaggist painter . Her father was also an artist and Caravagist painter.
 Artemisia's father hired a coworker to teach her perspective on art . He wanted to teach his daughter a new perspective .
 Tassi, who had previously been convicted of conspiring to kill his wife, raped his pupil . Tassi was convicted of conspiracy to kill wife and rape his pupil in 2009 .
 Orazio Gentileschi sued Tassi for the rape, the unfulfilled promise, and for stealing some of his paintings . Gentilesch sued for rape and the theft of some of the paintings .
 Artemisia served as a witness for the prosecution, wearing a pair of thumbscrews, the lie detector apparatus of the day . Artemisia was a witness in the case, testifying in court wearing the device . She was the first woman accused of lying to the prosecution .
 Artemisia married Pietro Antonio di Vencenzo Stiattesi a month after the trial ended . The two settled in his Florence home of Florence .
 By 1615, Gentileschi had gained a reputation as a professional painter in Florence, spreading knowledge and appreciation of the baroque style .
 Some believe she traveled with her father to Genoa and Venice during the 1620s . By 1620, she had returned to Rome; some believe she had traveled to Venice .
 Many 17th-century artists, male and female, reproduced this story on their canvases . Many artists reproduced the story in their paintings .
 The two crossed enemy lines but were caught outside the general’s tent . The two were caught by the general's tent . They were captured in the tent of a German general .
 He invited her to dinner; she drank him under the table . She proceeded to sever his head from his body . She drank him and then struck him in the head .
 The two took Holofernes’s head back home, to much rejoicing by the townspeople . The two returned the head back to the town, much rejoining .
 A comparison between Caravaggio’s treatment of the Judith story {Judith and Holofernes, 1598) and Gentileschi's portrayal reveals important differences between exemplar and disciple . A comparison of Caravagio's treatment of Judith story reveals differences between
 In typical Baroque fashion, both position large-scale figures in the foreground and use a shadowy backdrop . Both images are taken in Baroquesque style .
 Caravaggio’s young Judith is positioned so that she is almost facing the viewer; one hand holds a knife that is severing the head . For example, the young Judith was positioned so much to the viewer .
 Her arms are outstretched, as though she can hardly stand to do the deed . Her arms were outstretched as she tried to perform the deed in front of the camera .
 Gentileschi's mature Judith plunges the knife brutally, almost greedily, into Holofernes’s neck, and her maid actively participates in the act . The mature Judith is the mature Judith, on the other hand, plunging the knife into the neck .
 Judith's and her maid’s arms are forcing their victim down, while Holofernes's arms resist his fate . Judith and the maids are forcing the victim down .
 Gentileschi’s masterpiece is Judith and Maidservant with the Head of Holofernes, painted in the 1620s . The painting is a masterpiece of the 16th century .
 Judith's dress is golden, while her servant's is purple . The colors Gentileschi employs are rich and royal . Judith’s dress is gold, while the servant’'s is a purple .
 Rather than violent action, Gentileschi portrays the nervous suspense of the moment . The women are in fear of getting caught before they can escape from the scene .
 Judith holds a sword in her right hand, which is centered on the canvas . Judith holds the sword in the right hand . Judith is the first person to depict Judith in a painting .
 Her maid wraps her head up in a cloth, but an approaching light disturbs her work . Meanwhile, her maid wraps the head up with a cloth . The maid wraps herself up in the cloth .
 The flavor of the scene is one of pending action abruptly halted by coming danger . "The flavor of this scene is that of a scene where pending action is interrupted by danger," the author says .
 The same combination of action and emotion is evident in Gentileschi’s Self-Portrait as the Allegory of Painting .
 Many artists painted self-portraits in which an ethereal female figure representing Painting hovers over them, inspiring their work . The ethereal ethereal figure represents Painting .
 Gentileschi was female, she could portray herself as the allegorical hgure . Gentilesch was able to portray himself as an allegorical figure .
 Her left hand holds the artist’s palette and paints, while the other hand stretches up toward a canvas, outside the frame . The artist's left hand is held up by her left hand and paints .
 Gentileschi portrayed herself with the same vibrancy she saw in her other female hgures . Gentilesch portrayed herself as a strong woman .
 By 1630, Gentileschi had settled in Naples, Italy, where she remained until 1639, when she moved to London in 1639 . She was the first woman to travel to London to work in England .
 She came to the aid of her dying father, who had been commissioned to decorate the home of Queen Henrietta Maria (wife of King Charles I, 1600—49) in Greenwich .
 Herrade of Landsberg, abbess of Hohenburg, wrote and illustrated the Horus Delicarum (the garden of delights), an encyclopedia of religious history, contemporary life, and gardening .
 Her work has been called the greatest of the medieval pictorial encyclopedias . Her work was called the most comprehensive of the encyclopaedias .
 Herrade wrote Horus Delicarum, was abbess at Hohenburg, and died in 1195 . We know nothing about Herrade herself other than that she wrote a book . Herrade died at the age of 1195 in her native Germany .
 Since the mid-11th century, monasteries had begun to lose their prominence in society, as universities usurped the role of educating young men . Monasteries were once the most prominent monastic institutions in Europe .
 Church leaders began reinforcing the hierarchical political system of bishoprics to the detriment of the monastic system . In addition, church leaders also reinforced the system of bishops .
 The withdrawal of church support caused a decline in the standards of education for nuns . The withdrawal led to the decline in standards for nuns' education .
 Herrade’s Horus Delicarum, written between 1160 and 1170, was designed to educate her nuns in the history of the world from creation to Ghrist's final days . It also offers them practical advice for living in the contemporary world .
 Herrade popularized the medieval trope of battle between Vice and Virtue in the Horus Delicarum . Herrade also popularized a medieval battle between Virtue and Vice .
 Illustration features an army of female Vices, wearing chain mail tunics, ready to clash with a band of armed Virtues . The illustration features a group of armed Vices and armed Vics .
 Superbia sits sidesaddle astride a prancing steed, wielding her spear in anticipation of battle . Superbia is shown with a spear in her spear-wielding stance against the odds .
 In an illustration of the Ladder of Virtues, men and women, both secular and ecclesiastical, fall off the ladder as they succumb to temptations of immediate gratification of earthly wealth and power .
 Other miniatures in the Horus Delicarum include a sort of class portrait of the nuns in Herrade’s convent . Some nuns pictured worked on the manuscript with their abbess .
 The manuscript we have now is a copy, including black-and-white tracings of Herrade’s illustrations . The manuscript is now a copy of the original .
 Herrade’s original richly colored illustrations are gone forever . Indebted though we are to the meticulous work of those 19th-century copyists, we are . The illustrations are now available on the Internet .
 Recognition and Reappraisal from the Early Middle Ages to the Twentieth Century. Recognition . from the early Middle Ages . to the early 20th Century. From the early to the late 20th century .
 Mexican painter Frida Kahlo inspired by native art of her native Mexico . Kahlo was inspired by popular native art in her native country .
 The content of her work was wrenched from the anguish and pain of her own life . Her work was "wrenched from her own pain," she said .
 Some viewers have seen Kahlo’s art as too personal— penetrating too deeply into a troubled, painful life . Some viewers see Kahlo's art as penetrating too deep into his troubled life .
 Kahlo spent most of her life in Mexico, except during the early 1930s . Her husband Diego Rivera opened his home to the Russian communist Leon Trotsky . The two lived in the United States .
 Kahlo's father, Wilhelm Kahlo, changed his name to Guillermo Kahlo when he arrived in Mexico . Her mother, Matilde Galderon, was a Gatholic mestiza, or woman of mixed European and Indian ancestry . Kahlo was a German Jewish
 At 13, Frida told her friends at school that she would marry and bear the children of the Mexican muralist Diego Rivera . She had seen Rivera working on a mural at the theater of the National Preparatory School in Mexico Gity .
 Murals are paintings that have been executed on walls or ceilings, as opposed to portable canvases . Murals can be found on walls, ceilings or walls, and are executed on ceilings, rather than walls .
 murals are sometimes considered propaganda, since they often appear on the outside walls of public buildings . Known since ancient times, murals have appeared on public walls of buildings .
 At 15, Kahlo was a bright, energetic student planning to pursue a medical degree . She was planning to be a medical student . Kahlo died at the age of 15 .
 The impact crushed her pelvis, fractured her spine, and broke her foot . She also broke her spine and pelvis in the impact of the impact .
 No one expected her to live, and although she survived another 29 years, she underwent 35 operations to correct spinal injuries . She suffered nearly constant pain during those years .
 Her dream of having children with Diego Rivera would never come true . She suffered several miscarriages and abortions during their stormy marriage .
 Much of Kahlo’s art reflects the physical and mental anguish she suffered as a result of her accident . Much of her art reflects her physical and mentally anguish .
 While recuperating from surgery, Kahlo taught herself to paint, using an easel that attached to her hospital bed . Kahlo used the hospital bed to teach her to paint .
 Kahlo also showed her work to Andre Breton , guru of the surrealist school of artists, whose work came from the subconscious world of dreams . Kahlo's work was shown to Breton .
 Breton admired the images of pain and death that he saw in Kahlo’s paintings . Breton was inspired by the pain he felt in his work .
 Breton claimed Kahlo as a surrealist artist in an essay he wrote for Kahlo’s exhibition at the Julien Levy Gallery in Manhattan .
 Like her contemporary Leonor FINI, Kahlo denied the title, insisting that she “never painted dreams’s dreams .
 Most of Kahlo’s paintings are self-portraits, presenting herself to viewers as if on a stage . Kahlo's paintings are known for their subject subject subjecting her to a stage in the works .
 Rivera wears a simple suit, while Kahlo is decked out in a Mexican-style dress, shawl, and jewelry . Rivera and Kahlo were married in 1926 .
 Rivera holds an artist’s palette in one hand, and he stands slightly in front of Kahlo . Rivera was exhibiting the preeminent position in the relationship that he apparently held .
 Kahlo shows the painful reality of her accident and what happened to her spinal column as a result . In the latter, Kahlo reveals the pain of her spinal injury .
 Mexican artist Frida Kahlo was married to Diego Rivera in 1932 . Kahlo died in her home in Mexico City .
 The painting features the subject, the artist, facing the viewer, naked from the hips up . She is wearing only the brace that she wore in real life .
 Her entire spinal column is in view, and all over her body are tiny needles, indicating the pain that she felt . The needles are all over the body, indicating that she was in pain . The needle-wasting procedure was performed by a team of doctors .
 A year before her death, the Gallery of Contemporary Art in Mexico City exhibited her work for the first time . Her work was exhibited a year before she died in Mexico .
 Weakened by illness, Kahlo was carried to the opening on a hospital gurney . Kahlo carried out of the hospital on a gurny . The opening ceremony was held in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Her body lay in state at the Institute of Fine Arts in Mexico City . She died in Coyoacan on July 13, 1954 .
 Frida Kahlo donated her home in Coyoacan, Mexico, to the city . Her husband donated her house to the museum . Her home is now the home of her husband and is now a museum .
 Kathe Kollwitz was one of the best-known artists of the early 20th century . She produced hundreds of etchings, lithographs, and woodcuts during her career .
 The content of her work was inspired by her anticapitalist and feminist political philosophy . Her work is based on her anticapsitalism and feminism .
 Her work epitomized her sympathy with the working classes and with the tragedies of the age in which she lived . Her work was her sympathy for the working class and the tragedies she lived in .
 Kollwitz’s work reflects German expressionism, a style of art begun around 1905, in which the artist sought to depict bold and sometimes harsh emotions in her work .
 Most of her work was done on flat surfaces, but she also sculpted . Although most of her sculpted, she also used to sculpt .
 Der Vater und Die Mutter was unveiled at the Roggevelt Military Cemetery in Belgium in 1933 . A sculpture featuring Kollwitz and her husband mourning the loss of their son Peter was unveiled in 1932 .
 Kollwitz was born Kathe Schmidt in the Baltic seaport of Konigsberg, Prussia, on July 8, 1867 . He was born in Konigsburg, Germany .
 Kathe began combining etching with soft aquatint backgrounds . Under Klinger’s influence, Kathe used to combine etching and aquatints .
 Her choice of printmaking, as opposed to paintings, was politically motivated, she said . Her choice to printmaking is politically motivated. Her choice was to be politically motivated .
 Printmaking enabled her to portray the working class but also to make her art more available to them, she says . Printmaking allowed her to depict working class .
 A number of original copies could be made cheaply from one source and could thus be circulated more widely . Original copies of the book could be easily made cheaply and circulated widely .
 Karl Kollwitz, despite concerns for the future of her career as a married woman, is still working as a professional musician .
 In 1907, she spent a year in Florence and Rome, Italy, thanks to a Villa Romana prize she won that year . In 1907 she spent the year in Italy thanks to the prize she received .
 The government of the Soviet Union invited her to tour with her works in 1927 . The tour was in commemoration of the 10th anniversary of the Russian Revolution . The Soviet Union was established .
 In 1919, Kollwitz became the first woman to be elected a member of the Prussian Academy of Arts . In 1928, she became a professor in the graphic arts division at the Academy, until the Nazi government forced her resignation in 1933 .
 Kollwitz concentrated her artistic energies on portraying the plight of peasants, factory workers, and women . Her work was based on her portrayal of peasants and factory workers .
 Like Mary CASSATT, Kollwitz portrayed women with their children sharing intimate, joyous embraces . Like Mary Cassatt, she portrayed women sharing intimate moments of intimacy .
 Cassatt's subjects were typically middleor upper-class, whereas Kollwitz’s mothers came from the lower classes . There is a sympathy inherent in the art, which is absent from the work of Cassatt, which was absent from Cassatt .
 One exception to this would be Kollwitz’s Pieta, a bronze sculpture of Mary cradling a dying Jesus . One exception would be the Pieta of Mary, cradled by Jesus Christ, by Pieta .
 Kollwitz's Pieta differs from traditional pietas in that Mary’s facial expression is one of thoughtful contemplation rather than sorrow . The Pieta is a Pieta of the Pieta by Mary's mother, Mary, and her daughter's mother .
 Kollwitz’s 1898 series Ein WeberaufitandGWede/eTs Uprising) was inspired by Gerhard Hauptmann’�s play of the same name . The series is based on a play by Hauptman that inspired the series .
 The play dramatized the 1844 armed rebellion of a group of destitute German linen weavers . It was one of many industrial workers’ revolts in the mid-19th century . The play is set in Germany .
 Another historical piece, Bauernkreig (The Peasants’ War, 1902-08), portrayed the brutality of the 16th-century peasants’ revolt against landlords against landlords .
 This work features the female leader of the movement, known simply as Black Anna, attacking an armed horde . Black Anna is the leader of a movement known as the Black Anna .
 The central figure, the one nearest the viewer, presses her two children close to her body in a protective embrace . The one nearest to the viewer is the mother of the children .
 The fourth woman is childless, but she holds her face in her hands in a grieving gesture . She holds her hand in the hands as she mourns her loss .
 She continued to work in her Berlin studio until the last few months of World War II . She was evacuated to Moritzburg, near Dresden .
 Her husband died in 1940, and her grandson died at the Russian Front in 1942 . Her grandson was killed in 1942, and she was married to her husband .
 Szechuan artist Li Fu-jen invented the art of bamboo painting while imprisoned in an isolated but comfortable house . Chinese painter, calligrapher, and poet invented bamboo painting during the transitory Five Dynasty period .
 Lady Li gazed at the rice-papered window of her study, saw the sensuous play of bamboo branch and leaf shadows against the paper, and traced its outline .
 Kuan Taosheng, author of treatise on painting called Bamboo in Monochrome, became China’s best-known bamboo artist and calligrapher .
 In premodern China, calligraphy and painting were considered complementary arts because both used the same materials and methods . Calligraphy was considered complementary to painting because it used same materials .
 Paintings considered aesthetically pleasing when the forms and figures were as lovely as the inscription accompanying the work . Paintings were considered aesthetic pleasing when they were as pretty as the inscriptions accompanying them .
 Calligraphy has a longer history and a wider base of appeal in China, since its function encompasses both beauty and practical use . The function of calligraphy in China is to be seen as a useful tool for beauty .
 Chinese characters lend themselves more readily to calligraphy than other languages, since the Chinese script is based on pictographs . Chinese characters are more readily calledigraphy .
 Hand scrolls consist of a long piece of silk or paper that is kept rolled in storage . Hand scrolls are rolled in long pieces of silk and paper that are kept rolled .
 Hanging scrolls are hung so that the entire composition can be seen all at once . The composition is hung so it can be viewed all at one place .
 Wall paintings are created for display at palaces, temples, and tombs . Wall paintings were created to display at . palaces and temples, . tombs.
 Fans may originally have been fans that were later mounted for presentation .
 A Bamboo Grove in Mist is a six-foot-long hand scroll . The Slender Bamboo of Spring is inscribed by the artist with a brief poem that she wrote about a thicket of trees she and her children strolled through .
 Both paintings feature highly defined bamboo branches and leaves, and blurry-lined trees that seem to melt into the landscape behind .
 Another famous Kuan Tao-sheng work, an untitled woodcut, is a self-portrait of the artist with her husband working together .
 Kuan Tao-sheng’s soothing, quiet paintings belie the tumultuous times in which she lived . Her paintings show how she dealt with her tumultuous times .
 The Mongol leader Genghis Khan’s invasions terrorized Asia and Europe in the 12th and 13th centuries . The Mongols terrorized Europe and Asia and Asia in the 13th and 14th century .
 In 1263, Kublai Khan established his kingdom in Beijing, and by 1279 he had driven the last of the Sung Dynasty literally into the sea . The emperor flung himself into the waters of China’s south coast .
 Kuan's husband, Chao Meng-fu, a descendant of one of the founders of the Sung Dynasty, consented to work as a secretary for the Mongol Dynasty . Kuan’s husband, painter Chao Meng, worked for the Chinese government .
 He held various posts in government and traveled throughout China, always accompanied by his wife .
 Chao Meng-fu and Kuan Tao-sheng collaborated frequently on paintings during their travels . Chao was a painter and painter of China's first century .
 Kuan Tao-sheng contracted the disease beriberi while she and her husband were traveling back to Beijing in 1319 . She died of the disease in her native China .
 The four virtues of women: Right Behavior, chastity, docility, proper Speech, proper Demeanor and proper Employment . Proper Employment—embroidery, the use of silk and thread . The virtues of right behavior include chastity and docility .
 The depression-era photography of Dorothea Lange created an indelible imprint on the conscience of American society . Lange's depression era photography of Lange left a lasting imprint on American conscience .
 Her most widely regarded work is the photographs she made of migrant farmworkers during the Great Depression . Her work brought the plight of an impoverished agricultural labor force to the forefront of Americans’ consciousness .
 Photography was invented in the early part of the 19th century but was not considered an art in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . Photography was not an art until the late 20th century when it was considered as an art .
 Most photographers made their living taking portraits of individuals and families . Most photographers make their living photographing individuals and family .
 During the American Civil War, the documentary photographs of battlefields were used to spread news about the events of the war . Mathew Brady and his workers captured the aftermath of major battles in the Civil War .
 Unlike the fine arts of painting and sculpting, no established schools of photography existed to disseminate technical information about how to take pictures . Anyone who could afford a camera could become a photographer .
 Because there were no restrictions, women photographers were recognized soon after the new medium was born .
 Lange was born to German immigrants in Hoboken, New Jersey, on May 26, 1895 . Lange knew she wanted to become a photographer by the time she was 17 .
 She took courses to become a teacher so that she would be able to find work as a photographer . Her career was risky business, so she took up teaching so she could find work .
 When she turned 23, Lange decided it was time to take a chance . Lange decided to take her own life after she was 23 .
 Lange thought that, as a young photographer just starting out, she would have the best chances of success . Lange and a friend packed up their belongings and headed for San Francisco, where she wanted to start out .
 The work that Lange did during the Great Depression assured her a place in the history of photography . Lange was a photographer during the Depression in the 1930s .
 When the stock market crashed in October 1929, Americans assured themselves that the disaster was only temporary and that the economy would soon get back on its feet . Americans were assured that the crash was temporary, but it was soon to be over .
 A decade of rash speculation in the stock market, overproduction and underconsumption, drought conditions in the Great Plains, too much buying on credit, and poor economic conditions in Europe, combined to dash hopes of such optimists .
 FDR believed that the U.S. government should directly aid the unemployed, whose numbers by this time had reached an all-time high . The unemployment rate was about 25 percent in 1932, and the unemployed stood in line to feed themselves and their families .
 Roosevelt established several government-sponsored programs to reduce unemployment, get hungry people off the streets, and reestablish confidence in the government’s ability to serve the American people . Roosevelt established programs to help reduce unemployment and get people out of poverty .
 The drought that blighted the United States farmers in the southern Great Plains states could not have come at a worse time . The drought has been devastating for farmers in southern Plains states .
 The prosperity enjoyed by most sectors of the economy during the 1920s had not included farmers, and the depression that struck the country only made the situation worse .
 A severe drought combined with fierce winds blew precious topsoil away . Added to that was a severe drought, combined with the fierce winds that blew it away . Drought caused by fierce winds and severe drought .
 Thousands of farm families left their homes in states such as Texas and Oklahoma and headed for the fertile valleys of California’s San Fernando Valley . The fertile valleys are fertile and fertile in California's fertile valleys .
 Dorothea Lange's work became nearly as well known as Steinbeck’s novel as a documentary of the experiences of migrant farmers . Lange's documentary, "The Migrant Farmer," was a documentary about migrant farmers in the 1930s .
 Migrant Mother, Nipomo, California, has come to symbolize the depression for many Americans . Migrant mothers have been a symbol of depression in recent years .
 The photo features a mother flanked on both sides by her two children, whose faces are buried in their mother’s shoulders . The photo was taken in New York City .
 The expression on her lined face is one of fear, anxiety, and intense worry . The expression was one of the expressions of anxiety, anxiety and worry .
 Lange's photo fulfilled his first obligation, to document the plight of migrant workers . At the very least, the photo fulfilled Lange’s first obligation .
 The stamp of desperation was clearly written on the face of the mother in Lange’s photo . Lange's photo shows the desperation of a desperate mother .
 During World War II, President Roosevelt ordered the internment of Japanese Americans in armed camps in several western states . The internment was ordered by President Roosevelt during the war .
 Lange took pictures of Japanese neighborhoods in cities along the West Coast . Lange took photos of the centers that the government set up to process Japanese Americans, and the camps in which they were interned .
 Lange expressed outrage at the racist assumptions voiced by government authorities . Lange found herself at odds with her employer . Lange expressed her outrage at government officials' racist assumptions .
 Maya Lin grew up in her hometown of Athens, Ohio, with little sense of her ethnicity . She felt little pressure to conform to typical teenage rituals such as dating and wearing makeup .
 While working at a McDonald’s, she kept her mind busy by solving math problems in her head . She solved math problems by solving problems in the head .
 The memorial is one of the most photographed and filmed pieces of art in the United States . Denounced by some as “a wailing wall for draft dodgers,” the memorial is also known as a memorial to those who have not been drafted .
 Maya Lin’s parents, Julia Chang Lin and Henry Huan Lin, fled their homeland just after the Communist Revolution in 1949 . Maya Lin's parents, both born in China, fled the country after the revolution in 1949. Maya Lin is one of the world's most famous actresses
 Lin was born in Athens, Ohio, on October 10, 1959, in 1959 . Lin spent many hours as a child building model houses and towns and studying math, her favorite subject .
 In high school, she took college-level courses and earned money at McDonald’s . She also earned money working at McDonalds .
 Lin entered the competition to design the memorial during her senior year in college . Lin is one of 1,421 others who designed the memorial . Lin won the competition .
 Lin entered in 1981 contest that asked architects to submit proposals that were ‘contemplative’ and ‘reflective” and devoid of political sentiment . The memorial contest that Lin entered was asked to submit a proposal that was devoid of politics .
 Lin Lin thought she had followed instructions, but after judges unanimously chose her proposal and she unveiled her work, she discovered that others viewed her work differently . Lin: "I thought I was doing what I wanted to do, but I was not following instructions"
 The Vietnam Veterans’ Memorial sits in a flat park setting in the Washington, D.C., Mall . It sits across the Lincoln and Washington memorials .
 On the street side, the slabs protrude only slightly above ground, while on the inside the walls rise above the earth to form a shallow bowl . On the inside of the walls, the walls are seen to be rising above the ground .
 Inscribed in the inside of the granite walls are the 58,000 names of men and women who died, or are still missing in action, during the war . Inscription includes the names of those who died or are missing in service .
 Lin wanted the names to read like a narrative history of the war . The names are listed in the order that their deaths occurred, rather than alphabetically . Lin wanted to make the names read like an historical narrative .
 Visitors seem to instinctively raise their hands to touch the names of the soldiers, perhaps their relatives or friends, and their hands can be seen in the reflection of the walls . Visitors can also see their hands touching the soldiers' names .
 Others seem to touch names randomly, as though they carry the burden of loss of the entire nation on their shoulders . Others seem like to carry the weight of the loss of a nation on them .
 Maya Lin’s work sparked immediate controversy . Like any attempt to memorialize a national conflict, Maya Lin's work has sparked controversy .
 For some critics, Lin’s wall was a monument to dead soldiers, which they equated with loss, not victory . As such, they deemed the memorial unpatriotic . Lin: "For these critics, the wall was to be a monument ... not to victory"
 Had the soldiers had the will to win, the war would have ended in favor of the U.S. Had they won, they would have been able to win the war .
 Some felt that Lin, as an AsianAmerican woman, presented the “wrong’s perspective . Some felt she presented the "wrong" perspective . Lin is the daughter of Lin, who is AsianAmerican .
 In 1988, the Southern Poverty Law Center in Montgomery, Alabama, asked Lin to create a commemorative sculpture honoring the Civil Rights movement . Lin created the sculpture in 1988 . Lin's work was commissioned by the Southern Civil Rights Law Center .
 Lin used Martin Luther King, Jr.’s ‘I Have a Dream’ speech as her theme . Lin used the speech as a reference to the struggle for civil rights . Lin: "Justice rolls down like water and righteousness like a mighty stream"
 King's words are imprinted on a convex water-covered wall overlooking an inverted, asymmetrical cone-shaped table . King’s words are . imprinted . on the convex . wall overlooking the inverted, inverted table .
 On top of the table are the names of 40 people who gave their lives during the struggle to achieve equal rights for African Americans in the U.S. between 1955 and 1968 .
 The names are intermixed with key events in the movement itself . Lin worked an additional theme, the juxtaposition of equality and difference . The shape of the table looks different from all angles .
 In 1997, she began designing a 20,000-square-foot recycling plant in the South Bronx . The plant is expected to be built in the next decade .
 Moses’s self-taught talents were often dismissed as valuable commercially, but not artistically . She was often referred to as a ‘primitive’ painter, and often dismissed .
 "Great" artists often retain childlike or "primitive" qualities in their work . Art critic Peter Schjeldahl points out that great artworks retain their childlike qualities .
 Moses followed a conceptual, rather than visual, approach to painting . Moses painted the idea and the feeling of a bucolic scene, without adding the shading and depth .
 Like many rural 19th-century children, her education lagged in winter, due to harsh weather and limited warm clothing . Like many 19th century children, she struggled to learn due to the harsh weather .
 In 1887, she married Thomas Solomon Moses, a hired hand at the same farm . She married him in 1887 and he died in 1881 .
 The couple moved to the Shenandoah River Valley of Virginia, where they rented a farm for $600 . The couple rented a $600 farm .
 In 18 years Anna Mary spent in Virginia, she gave birth to 10 children . Five of her children survived to adulthood .
 After Thomas Moses died in 1927, his wife and children continued to operate the farm . Thomas Moses' family operated the farm until his death .
 Moses had no formal art training, but she did have several decades of practice before she began painting professionally . Moses was a painter for more than 40 years .
 As a child, her tools were minuscule, but her talents were already apparent . Her talent was already apparent when she was a child .
 She thickened grape juice and berry juice to create red and purple hues . The color was created by thickening grape juice with grape juice .
 Grandma Moses’s body began to strain under the heavy farm work . After her children were raised and began having children of their own, her body strained .
 With time on her hands, she turned to the artistic hobbies she had enjoyed as a child .
 Her daughter suggested that she try applying her drawings to canvas and embroidering them to make pictures . Her daughter said that she should try her drawings on canvas .
 Soon, however, her arthritic fingers could not grasp the tiny needle adequately . Soon, she was unable to grasp the needle in her hand .
 At the age of 78, Grandma Moses painted her first picture on a thresher cloth . She experimented with old abandoned cans of paint she found in her barn . The 78-year-old still paints her first pictures of her life .
 Moses, a self-described thrifty woman of Scottish descent, stored used paint in old coffee cans . She kept her brushes clean in old jars of cold cream .
 She began copying illustrated postcards and Currier and Ives prints . She added figures after she had painted in scenery .
 When she had mastered this technique she turned to composing her own scenes, often from memory, showing people engaged in everyday farming activities .
 He purchased four there and then went on to the Moses farm to see about buying more . He then went to Moses farm, where he purchased four more .
 Gimbel’s Department Store arranged a Thanksgiving Day exhibition of several of Moses's paintings . Gimbel's Department Store organized the exhibition .
 Grandma Moses regaled the audience on home canning and freezing techniques . She said little about her life as an artist; instead, she regales the audience with her home-canning tips .
 Since then, her work has appeared in more than 65 exhibits, 48 of which were one-person shows . Since then she has been exhibiting her work in over 65 exhibits .
 Harry S Truman invited Grandma Moses to the White House for tea . The president entertained her by playing the piano .
 In the late 1930s, the nation had suffered through nearly a decade of economic depression, and the world appeared to be heading into another war . The war was the focus of the story .
 Moses’s paintings recalled an earlier, simpler time when the seasons and the weather, conditions over which humans had no control, determined people's daily existence . Moses's paintings recall an earlier time when people were not in control of daily life .
 Moses’s paintings show the grim world of politics and war were nowhere to be found in his paintings . Moses's paintings include a portrait of the artist's life in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Many Americans found solace in her art, while the world seemed to be crumbling around them . Her art helped them cope with the world's crumbling .
 Grandma Moses continued to paint until August 1961, when she was hospitalized in Hoosick Falls after she fell in her home . Moses continued painting until she was in 1961 .
 Newspapers throughout the U.S. and Europe announced her death on December 13, 1961, four months later .
 Grandma Moses left an artistic legacy and 11 grandchildren and 10 great-grandchildren behind when she died at the age of 101 . She left behind a legacy of 11 children and 10 grandchildren .
 American sculptor Louise Nevelson’s contribution to the history of modern art is her invention of a new method of creeling a large-scale, monumental sculpture made up of smaller works . The work is based on the works of American artist Louis van Gaal, who died in
 This large-scale sculpted environment technique is unique to Nevelson; it is without precedent in the world of sculpture. This large scale sculpted environments technique is . This is a unique technique that has no precedent .
 Louise Berliawsky was born on September 23, 1899, in Kiev, Ukraine, to Jewish parents . She was born in 1899 .
 In 1905, her family immigrated to the United States, settling in Rockland, Maine . Her family moved to Rockland in 1905 .
 Louise's father owned a lumberyard that became a playground for Louise while she was growing up . Her father owned the lumberyard where she grew up . Louise grew up with her father, who owned the business .
 Louise knew she wanted to be an artist when she was nine years old . By the time she turned nine she knew she was going to be a professional artist .
 In 1920, Louise Berliawsky married Charles Nevelson, who owned and operated a cargo shipping business . The couple was married in 1920 .
 In 1931, separated from her husband, Nevelson went to work under the artist Hans Hofman in Munich, Germany . Her husband died in 1931 .
 She had been interested in art from around the world and began collecting American Indian, South and Central American native art, and African art .
 She continued to paint through the 1940s, although she never really found her niche in this particular medium .
 It was only when she began working with wood that she found her artistic identity, she said . She said: 'I found my artistic identity when I started working in wood'
 She began by nailing pieces of wood together and painting the resulting sculpture a uniform color . The sculpture was created by combining wood pieces and painting them together .
 By the late 1950s, she had created a reputation based on her ability to form a sculpted environment standing more than eight feet tall and stretching 11 feet wide . She had a reputation for being able to stand more than 8 feet tall .
 Her environments were assemblies of objects of almost every possible shape into one overarching shape . Her environments included objects of all shapes and sizes of objects .
 Art critic Cindy Nemser uses the word tableaux, or vivid representations, to describe the stage-like presence of the environments . Nemser: Tableaux are vivid representations of environments .
 The environments demonstrate a degree of unity that is remarkable since they are made up of so many different shapes . The environments are remarkable because of their unique shapes and their unity .
 Nevelson combined pieces of wood in arch shapes with straight wood pieces . The artist created the arch-shaped wood pieces in the shape of arch shapes . The arch shapes were created by combining wood and straight pieces .
 First, the overall effect commands the viewer’s attention, and his or her imagination, to comprehend the work as a whole . Second, the viewer's attention commands the viewers’ attention and imagination . Third, the work commands viewers to comprehend, and to comprehend it as a
 Most often, Nevelson used the color black to finish off her wood environments . Most often used to use black for finishing .
 A man simply couldn’t use the means of, say, fingerwork to produce my small pieces, he says . He says, "A man simply cannot use the . means of fingerwork" to produce his small pieces .
 Women through all ages could have had physical strength, and mental creativity, and still have been feminine . Women could have physical strength and mental strength, but still have a feminine side .
 In 1980, Nevelson collaborated with Clarkson Potter, and the Whitney Museum of American Art, to write Atmospheres and Environments . In 1980 he wrote a book of reproductions of his works and thoughts by the artist .
 Georgia O'Keeffe developed an original style of both simplicity and towering magnitude in her paintings of the natural world . O’KEEFFE, Georgia, was an American artist of the day .
 Some critics have labeled O’Keeffe’s work as abstract and precisionist . Some critics say her work is abstract .
 Abstract art in sculpting and painting began in Europe and North America in the 1910s . Abstract art began in the 1900s in North America .
 The other approach, called nonobjective, or pure art, has no connection or reference to any real object at all . "Pure art" is "nonobjective"
 Impressionism reduced the importance of the object by looking instead to the effects of light on the subject . The result was less a painting of an object and more a painting of light .
 Wassily Kandinsky, Marcel Duchamp and Pablo Picasso are among the bestknown abstract artists . Kandinsky is one of the best known abstract artists in the world .
 Precisionists, such as Charles Sheeler, employed the philosophy of mechanism to their art . Precisionists employed a philosophy of the art to their work . Precisionist Charles Sheerer employed the theory of mechanism .
 Mechanism is a system of adapted parts working together, as in a machine . Mechanism means adapted parts of a machine are working together . Mechanisms are a system that works together, like a machine, to work together .
 Mechanists hold that all natural phenomena have a mechanical explanation . Artists seek to portray the mechanical aspects of the objects they paint .
 Precisionists’ works included very precise lines (as opposed to the blurred lines of the impressionists) They frequently used photographs as the basis of their paintings .
 O’Keeffe’s work, generally speaking, cannot be called purely abstract, because her paintings do reflect—even if exaggerated—their natural forms . Her paintings reflect their natural forms, even if exaggerated, they reflect them .
 The fluidity of her flower paintings would gainsay any connection she might have with the precisionists . Her fluidity would gainay her connection with the preciseists .
 O'Keeffe was born on a dairy farm near Sun Prairie, Wisconsin, on November 15, 1887 . Her early interest in music was soon replaced by her resolve, at age 10, to become an artist .
 She won a class prize from William Merritt Chase at the Art Students League for her still life . She soon lost interest in imitating European styles .
 In 1912, Alon Bemont, a prodigy of Arthur Wesley Dow, tutored her . He also rejected academic realism . In 1914, she was the subject of a Pulitzer Prize-winning novel .
 Dow believed nature’s forms should be used to express human emotions, not merely serve as models to be reproduced in a painting . Dow believed that nature's forms should not be used as models but as models for artworks .
 Between 1912 and 1916, O’Keeffe taught art in Amarillo, Texas, where she discovered a landscape that inspired her . The landscape was the inspiration for her work .
 She began drawing abstract shapes that reflected both the open north Texas plains and her imagination .
 She sent a few paintings to an art school friend, Anita Pollwitz, with the proviso that Pollwitz was not to share them with anyone else . She sent the paintings to a friend with the caveat that they were not to be shared with others .
 Pollwitz remembered that O’Keeffe had once told her that she would rather have photographer Alfred Stieglitz admire her work than anyone else . Pollwitz said she would have preferred to have her work admired more by Stiegitz than any other photographer .
 Georgia O’Keeffe’s talent lies in her ability to look deeply at natural objects and express them in her own style .
 One of her most famous pieces, Black Iris, features a single bloom spread across a canvas . The artist's most famous piece is a painting of a single flower .
 The black-gray lower section of the bloom forms a solid base on which the bloom rests . It is the largest bloom of its kind in the world .
 O’Keeffe redeemed the flower from its excessive use in the commercial art of the early 20th century to once again become the subject of serious artists .
 To critics’ astonishment, she began to combine flowers with bones . She then began combining flowers and bones to create a mosaic of flowers .
 Stieglitz moved permanently to Abiquiu, New Mexico, when she died in 1946 . She had been spending summers in New Mexico since 1929, but moved permanently .
 There, she would stumble upon dried-out bones in the desert that inspired a series of desert scenes . The bones were found by the author of the book, The Desert Desert .
 Red Hills and Bones juxtaposes bleached animal bones with rolling hills backdrop . Stieglitz painted before his death, painted before he died, in a series of paintings .
 Both the bones and the hilly background stretch out the length of the canvas . The bones and a hilly backdrop stretch out of the frame .
 The bones have gentle curves, reflected in the violet, red, and yellow hills behind . The bones are gentle curves and reflect the landscape .
 The viewer gets caught up in a luxurious, undulating, sensuous experience of desert colors and landscape . The viewer is captured in the desert desert .
 The victim of a degenerative eye disease at the age of 84, her central vision deteriorated, leaving only her peripheral vision intact . She was the victim of an eye disease that left her with only a small part of her vision .
 O’Keeffe was elected to the National Institute of Arts and Letters in 1949, the American Academy of Arts & Letters in 1963, and was awarded a Gold Medal for Painting in 1970 .
 Potter began drawing and writing stories as a way to counteract the children-should-be-seen-and-not-heard ethos in which she was raised . Potter: "I'm not afraid to be afraid. I'm scared to be scared," she says .
 Potter drew animals in their natural surroundings without the exaggerated or human-like features often seen in children's books about animals .
 She preferred to pair exact, detailed illustrations of small creatures with the intricate plots of her stories . Her stories were meant to evoke children’s curiosity about the world around them, as well as entertain .
 Potter spent the last few decades of her life as busy with her sheep farm as with the more than 30 children's books she wrote and illustrated . Potter spent most of her career as a sheep farmer .
 Her parents both received large inheritances from the cotton trade . Potter’s education was conducted by nannies and tutors in her third-floor rooms . Potter ate and slept separately from her parents .
 Beatrix and Bertram roamed among the Lake District during family vacations . The Potter children’s only extensive time free from the confines of their home was during family vacation . Beatrix, Bertram, and Beatrix roamed the hills gathering plants, fossils, and rocks .
 Occasionally, the two would skin and dissect dead animals so they could learn more about anatomy . The pair would skin dead animals and dissect them to learn anatomy .
 Beatrix Potter lost the companionship of her brother when he was sent away to boarding school . Beatrix started writing in a journal that she kept for over a decade, written in a code only she understood .
 She received an Art Students’ Certificate from the Science and Art Department of the Committee of Council on Education for her ability to draw freehand .
 Many of Potter’s early animal drawings were based upon samples she saw at the Kensington Museum of Natural History . Potter's first animal drawing was based on samples she found at the museum .
 Later, she took a 12-lesson course in oil painting but, she regretfully noted, she never had the opportunity to learn and draw human anatomy .
 She did, however, collect specimens of mold spores and lichens . She painted them in minute detail .
 Potter began her professional career as an illustrator by sending a sample of her work to a greeting card company in Germany . Potter has been a professional illustrator since 2000 .
 The company accepted her offerings and then, in 1893, asked her to illustrate a book of children’s verses written by Frederic E Weatherly called A Happy Pair . In 1893, she was asked to illustrate the book by the company .
 The book contained drawings of rabbits, piglets, and other farm animals . It was published in 1996 .
 When Potter's former governess asked her to write a letter to her ill son during his bout with scarlet fever, she gladly obliged . Potter’s ex-governess wrote the letter during his illness .
 She began the letter by explaining that she did not really know what to write to him, so she would tell him a story about four little rabbits named Flopsy, Mopsy, Cottontail, and Peter .
 She submitted a reworked and expanded version of the story accompanied with illustrations to six publishers . Later, she submitted an expanded version to six different publishers .
 The author resubmitted her work to the editor who had sent her the most courteous rejection letter . By 1902, the book had been published, and by 1902, it was published .
 The Tale of Peter Rabbit had sold so quickly in England that a pirated version of it had appeared in the United States . Later, her works were translated into more than 15 languages . Her works have been translated into over 15 languages.
 A number of features endeared Potter’s books to children and their parents alike . Harry Potter's books have been published in more than 40 years .
 Maria MONTESSORI, who designed small desks for pintsized students, has designed desks for students .
 Potter thought that children’s books should be small and easy for small hands and fingers just learning to manipulate pages to hold . Potter's book is designed to be easy to hold for children's hands .
 The illustrations accompanying the stories showed animals in their own environments, albeit using human tools and wearing human clothes . The illustrations were accompanied by illustrations of animals in the human world .
 People were never allowed to wrest the spotlight from animals, says A. Milne . Milne’s Christopher Robin in his Winnie the Pooh stories, but people never wrested the spotlight .
 She used the money she earned to buy a farm in the Lake District called Hill Top Farm . She used it to help raise money to buy the farm .
 The solicitor who drew up the contract for Potter, William Heelis, became her husband in 1913 . Harry Potter was born in 1913 and died at the age of 92 .
 Potter and Heelis acquired more property in the Lake District in an attempt to save the region’s rural culture . The company has acquired more than 1,000 acres of land .
 Potter continued to write and illustrate her books, but failing eyesight, and her passion for farming, slowed her productivity later in her life . Potter died at the age of 92 at the end of her career .
 She always kept rabbits at her farm, telling visiting children, with a twinkle in her eye, that they were the descendants of Peter Rabbit . She always told visiting children she was Peter Rabbit's descendant .
 When Louis XVI and his queen were guillotined, Tussaud ‘borrowed’ their decapitated heads and made wax models of them . Later displaying them in her famous wax museum .
 Madame Tussaud emigrated to England after the French Revolution . She established a permanent exhibit of her worldrenowned wax models in her museum .
 Madame Tussaud’s father, a German soldier, died before her birth on December 1, 1761 in Strasbourg, France .
 Tussaud’s mother raised her in Bern, Switzerland, in the home of her brother, Dr. Dr. J. Tussau . Tussua was born in Switzerland and raised in Switzerland .
 Philippe Curtius left Bern for the art capital of the world, Paris, in 1770, with his sister and niece in tow . Curtius was a wax worker himself .
 He opened a wax museum in the Palais Royal and a second museum in 1783 . The first museum opened in the 17th century in Paris .
 Tussaud learned the art of wax modeling from her uncle, and at the age of 17 she had already become quite skilled .
 Waxworks, or life-size displays of wax figures, derive from an ancient custom of creating effigies of dead celebrities . Waxworks were created by ancient Egyptians in ancient times to create effigy of celebrities .
 Fourteenth-century English and French courtiers revived the practice, which continued until the 18th century . The practice was revived by the French and English courtiers .
 Various materials, such as grease, oil, and animal fat, were added to the wax to enhance its elasticity . Various materials such as resin increased its hardness .
 A model is built up by adding small bits of wax onto an armature, or framework, then worked with a spatula . A model can be built up using small pieces of wax then added to the armature .
 Casting, the second method, is done by first assembling a small mock-up of the sculpture in clay, and then creating a plaster cast of the desired shape . Casting is then made using plaster of the shape .
 When the wax cools and hardens, the cast is removed and finishing touches made with a spatula . The cast is then removed and the finishing touches are made with the spatula.
 From 1780 until the first rumblings of the French Revolution, Tussaud tutored Louis XVI’s sister Elizabeth in art . Louis XVI's sister Elizabeth was tutored in art from 1780 .
 The piece is now on display at Madame Tussaud's in London . It consists of a room decorated in rococo style, a type of art and interior design .
 The queen, Marie Antoinette, stands next to her son, Louis Charles, who stands in between his mother and father . Louis Charles is the son of the queen and the queen of France .
 All four members of the royal family appear to be listening to a recitation . The recitation is part of a series of recitations by the Queen .
 In October 1789, the king was forced to vacate his palace at Versailles and live in Paris instead . The king had been forced to move to Paris in 1789 . The French king died in 1791 .
 Madame Tussaud made casts from the severed heads of her friends . She poured wax into the casts to make her wax models .
 The wax models of the ‘heads of state’ were then displayed at Curtius’s museum . Curtius's wax models are now displayed at the museum .
 Madame Tussaud inherited both of Philippe Curtius' museums after his death in 1794 . She inherited both museums from Curtius .
 Tussaud spent some time in prison in 1794 . Due to her former liaison with the royal family, she spent time in jail .
 Her friendship with Josephine de Beauharnais, Napoleon I’s wife, benefited her later, when Napoleon I seized power in France in 1799 . Tussaud's alliance with the couple improved her waxworks business, and her friendship with Napoleon I's wife .
 The exhibit includes one of the knives used in the guillotines used to carry out the bloody deeds . She added to the exhibit by adding famous British subjects .
 Her French Revolution exhibit became known as the “Chamber of Horrors,” a phrase coined by a reporter for the English magazine Punch in 1845 . The phrase is still known today .
 Following Napoleon’s attack on Russia in 1812 and his defeat at Waterloo in 1815, Tussaud cast a model of Napoleon's carriage in her museum .
 She finally found a permanent home for her models in Baker Street, London . She continued to work until her death on April 16, 1850 .
 The severed heads of both the perpetrators and victims hung garishly from the same chamber walls in her best-known piece, “Chamber of Horrors,” may have enhanced the perception of the French Revolution as one of the most diabolical .
 Madame Tussaud's art brought the French Revolution into a public venue for inspection, ridicule, and, at the very least, conversation . Like today’s political cartoonists, she brought the Revolution into public space .
 Lina Wertmuller's critics in the world of international film have pegged her as either the former or the latter (American critics), which may tell us more about cultural differences than about her films . Lina’s critics are either the American critics of her films or
 Wertmuller herself claims to be sympathetic to some feminist issues, but she does not call herself a feminist . She says she is sympathetic to women's issues but doesn't call herself feminist .
 Many feminist critics view Wertmuller’s use of violence and vulgarity in film as reinforcing sexist stereotypes .
 From Wertmuller’s perspective, sexual equality will never be realized until society stops forcing women into traditional roles, she says .
 Wertmuller’s creations examine the politics of gender in a satirical, picaresque style while addressing revolutionary social and cultural changes . His creations examine gender politics in the satirical style .
 Lina Wertmuller was thrown out of more than a dozen Catholic schools by the time she was a teenager . Born in Rome in 1928, Lina was born to a lawyer and aristocrat of Swiss ancestry .
 Flora Mastroianni sparked her interest in acting . She was the wife of the great Italian actor Marcello Mastroinianni .
 She went on to work as an actress, writer, and set designer for a variety of theater companies . She was also a writer, set designer and actress .
 Fellini helped her raise money for her own film . Fellini was so impressed with her work that he helped her make a film of her own .
 The Lizards is a critique of middle-class life in an Italian village . It was made with the crew from 8 1/2 .
 Beginning in 1972, Wertmuller began a long and fruitful association with actor Giancarlo Giannini . She paired frequently with Mariangela Melato .
 Through the couple, Wertmuller explored various political and social themes and their interplay with love and sexuality . The book explores various political themes .
 In The Seduction of Mimi, the Sicilian Mimi is enlightened politically and liberated sexually by his mistress Fiore . Fiore turns into a raging animal when confronted with his wife’s infidelity .
 In Love and Anarchy, an anarchist, chosen to assassinate Mussolini, relinquishes his will to prostitutes including his comrade Salome . Salome was chosen to kill the Italian dictator Mussolini .
 Swept Away presents the same situation between a working-class politico and his bourgeois lover . The film is set in New York City, New York, at the end of the year .
 The 1975 movie Seven Beauties earned Wertmuller an Academy Award nomination and a contract with Warner Brothers . It was based on the actual experiences of a concentration camp prisoner who chose survival at the expense of humanity .
 The End of the World, in Our Usual Bed in a Night Full of Rain, flopped, and the two parties mutually agreed to cancel their contract . Gandace Bergen and Giannini starred in the film .
 Lina Wertmuller won a Locarno Film Festival Award for The Lizards . She also won a Gannes Foreign Film Award in the “best director” category for The Seduction of Mimi .
 Seven Beauties was nominated for Academy Awards in the best director, best screenplay, and best writer categories . The film is nominated for best director and best screenplay .
 Wertmuller’s kudos have come at a price, however, especially for those with whom she works . She has been criticized for her work ethic, but she has been praised by others .
 Wertmuller has a reputation for being difficult on the set, for terrorizing her cast into submission, and for abruptly cutting parts of scripts .
 Her principal aim in making films, as she has said, has been to generate excitement and provoke thought . She said: "Her principal aim is to generate exciting and provoking thought"
 Susan B Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton worked together for woman suffrage, and other liberal causes, nearly all their adult lives . They were friends and colleagues for over half a century .
 Both died before passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1920, guaranteeing the right to vote .
 Both worked tirelessly for women's rights, with Anthony’s contribution more in the area of the federal suffrage amendment . Stanton's work encompassed wider social changes, especially in the realm of religion . Anthony and Stanton were both prominent figures in the field of social change .
 Both women believed that if women’s sense of morality were added to American electoral politics, society would be greatly improved . Mirroring the broader women's rights movement in the late 19th century, both women highlighted differences from men .
 The abolitionist movement fought inequality in American society through the abolitionists . Women's rights activists fought for women's rights in America .
 Anthony was born in Adams, Massachusetts, on February 15, 1820, to Daniel Anthony and Lucy Read . He grew up in a Quaker farming family that worked to end slavery .
 Anthony first tasted sexual discrimination when she found that her wages were far less than what her male colleagues received . Anthony found that she was being discriminated against for being a teacher . Anthony says she was discriminated against because she was paid less than those of her colleagues .
 Anthony never married or had children; as a single woman, she had greater mobility and flexibility than her married colleagues . Anthony was essential asset to the women’s rights cause .
 The Scottish Presbyterianism of her conservative family influenced her less than her cousin Gerrit Smith's radical abolitionism . The abolitionist was born in Edinburgh, Scotland .
 Through Smith, she met the famous abolition orator Henry Brewster Stanton . The abolitionist met Stanton through Smith .
 Officials refused to seat Elizabeth Cady Stanton because she was female . Shortly after, they attended the World’s Anti-Slavery Convention in London .
 They blamed men for usurping religious power and for denying women their individual identities and rights within marriage . Further, they said men were responsible for usurging religious power .
 Stanton argued for a broad range of social changes, including higher education for women, the wearing of trousers, and short hair . Stanton wrote articles on women's rights in Amelia BLOOMER’s Lily and Paulina Wright Davis's Una . After the convention, Stanton wrote
 Elizabeth Cady Stanton was, with Susan B Anthony, the most important American women’s rights leader of the 19th century . Stanton was the most prominent leader of women's rights in America .
 Susan B Anthony, too, had shirked her corset and donned bloomers when she met Elizabeth Cady Stanton at a meeting in 1851 .
 In 1854, the collaborators focused on specific laws that discriminated against women, including custody rights and property rights . The collaborators were able to create a law that allowed women to have custody rights .
 Anthony's job was to circulate pamphlets, petitions, and political tracts . Stanton crafted the arguments, while Anthony circulated pamphlets and petitions .
 Both agreed that the fastest way to secure equality for women in American society lay in the legal realm . Women’s rights, as wives and mothers, were not being represented by men .
 Women, in other words, needed to represent themselves because they were different from men . Women needed to do so because of how different they were from men, she said .
 Anthony and Stanton lobbied Congress in favor of the Thirteenth Amendment which abolished slavery . Stanton and Anthony lobbied Congress to pass the amendment .
 When abolitionists began garnering support for the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments, the two women hoped to pass woman suffrage on the coattails of voting rights for blacks .
 The leadership within the abolitionist movement claimed that the time was not ripe for woman suffrage . The leadership of the abolitionists claimed that it was not the time for women to vote for women .
 Stanton and Anthony formed the American Equal Rights Association, which promoted universal adult suffrage, in 1866, hoping to change their opponents’ minds . Stanton, Anthony and Anthony hoped to change the minds of their opponents .
 President Lincoln argued that African-American men’s service in the Union army during the Civil War proved them worthy of the vote . Abolitionists continued to support only universal manhood suffrage .
 By 1869, Stanton insisted that granting voting rights to black men was endangering women’s rights . Anthony and Stanton formed the National Woman Suffrage Association .
 She argued that black men’s voting rights in Southern states should be protected when segregationist laws began making it impossible for freedmen to exercise their rights . Although she never backed away from her position, she later argued that .
 By the 1890s, Stanton entered a new phase of her intellectual life in relation to women’s position in society . Stanton became a prominent advocate for women's rights in the early 1900s .
 Despite passage of legislation protecting women’s property rights, women at the federal level was still only a dream, she began attacking Christianity for degrading the status of women in society .
 Her Womans Bible, in which she refuted the common interpretation of the Bible as sanctioning women’s subordination, became a source of friction within the suffrage movement . She refuted the idea that the Bible sanctioned women's subordination .
 Anthony, always the more activist of the two, cast a vote in the 1872 election and was promptly jailed for breaking the law . In the meantime, Anthony was always more activist . Anthony was jailed in 1872 .
 Both women ended their public lives by pleading one last time for woman suffrage . Both women died in their last moments pleading for the vote for women's rights .
 The Nineteenth Amendment was added to the U.S. Constitution in 1920 . It was the first amendment to the Constitution .
 Selections from the National American Woman Suffrage Association Collection, 1848-21 .
 Armand edited the Rabotnitsa newspaper and organized and chaired the First International conference of Communist Women in 1920 . Armand was a member of the First Socialist Party of Russia . He edited and chaired a conference of women in the 1920s .
 Her goals were to increase female participation in the labor force by relieving women of their duties in the home . Her goal was to encourage women to work in the workforce .
 Armand was born on May 8, 1874, in Paris to a French mother, Nathalie Wild, and an English father, Theodore Steffen . Armand died of a gunshot wound to the head in March 1883 .
 When her father died while Inessa was still young, her mother sent her to Moscow to live with her maternal grandmother . Her maternal grandmother worked as a governess for the wealthy French textile manufacturing Armand family .
 Inessa benefited from the change, because she attended tutorials along with the seven Armand children, learning languages and literature and how to play the piano .
 Inessa Armand joined the Moscow Society for Improving the Lot of Women in 1897 . Armand was a philanthropist who helped destitute and abandoned women .
 The experience opened up her eyes to a range of problems poor women faced, including prostitution and mental illness, she says .
 Members of the Moscow Society for Improving the Lot of Women elected her president in 1900 .
 Russian czarist government thwarted her efforts at opening a Sunday School for working women and editing a newspaper that discussed issues of concern to Russia’s working women .
 Lenin believed that a single, centralized parry of professional revolutionaries should lead a worker revolution in Russia . The party’s leader, Vladimir Ilich Lenin, believed that such a parry should be led by professional revolutionaries .
 She managed to escape to Finland, where she met up with her lover, Vladimir Armand, younger brother of Alexander Armand . She escaped to meet up with Vladimir, the brother of her brother, Alexander .
 Lenin and his wife Nadezhda Krupskaya were leaders of a group of Russian Social Democratic emigrants living in France and Belgium . In Brussels, Lenin's wife was also a Social Democrat living in Belgium .
 Lenin asked her to teach in his school for Bolsheviks in Longjumeau, south of Paris, in 1911 . The revolutionary leaders ignited a passion for radical political change in Armand .
 Armand sneaked back into Russia the following year, where she performed underground work for the Bolsheviks . Armand was a member of the Communist Party in Russia . The following year she returned to Russia to perform underground work .
 She was discovered and arrested again, and this time she was imprisoned . She was arrested again and imprisoned. She was imprisoned.
 Lenin and Krupskaya had moved to Cracow, Poland, where Armand rejoined them . Armand returned to Russia, where he was reunited with Lenin . The pair had been living in the Soviet Union for a year .
 Armand and Krupskaya became foreign editors of Rabotnitsa . Armand was editor of the Russian socialist journal published in St. Petersburg, Russia . He was a member of the Communist Party .
 In March 1915, she helped to organize the International Conference of Socialist Women, formed in Bern, Switzerland, to protest against the war . She was the founder of the Socialist Party of Switzerland .
 She translated many of Lenin’s writings into French during this period . She also translated Lenin's writings .
 Armand, Lenin, Krupskaya, and other Bolshevik leaders made a train trip back to Russia to topple the provisional government that had been erected after the February Revolution in 1917 . Armand and Lenin traveled to Russia in April 1917 to topple provisional government .
 The 1917 October Revolution, or October Seizure of Power, was the second, extremist stage of the Russian Revolution . The provisional government was replaced with the Soviet government .
 Armand joined protests against the Treaty of BrestLitovsk, ending Russia’s engagement in the First World War . Armand did not participate directly in the October Revolution, but she did join protests .
 The treaty was nullified when Great Britain, France, and the United States defeated Germany in November 1918 . Great Britain and France defeated Germany, Germany in 1918 .
 Armand returned to France in 1919 to help repatriate Russian prisoners of war . Armand travelled again to France to help with repatriation of Russian prisoners in 1919 .
 Armand set to work organizing Russian working women . Armand wanted to guarantee women equality in political and labor organizations. Armand felt it would help guarantee women's rights in political organizations .
 In the summer of 1920, she organized and chaired the First International Conference of Communist Women to coincide with the Second Congress of the Comintern, or Communist International . She was a prominent member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 Armand died on September 24, 1920, in Naltschik, while vacationing in the Caucasus Mountains, of cholera . Armand was a member of the Order of the Russian Revolution .
 Social and political activist Domitila Barrios de Chungara is best known for her work in the Housewives’ Committee of the Siglo XX mining camp in the Andean region .
 The women led protests in Bolivia’s capital of La Paz on behalf of their imprisoned husbands in the early 1960s . They led protests against their husbands . The women were jailed in the 1960s for refusing to give up their husbands' freedom .
 A decade later, Barrios was selected to represent the Housewives’ Committee at the United Nations Tribune of the International Women’s Year in Mexico City . Her actions brought to light the class, race, and ethnic differences separating the sisterhood of women .
 Insurrection and instability have marked Bolivia’s political and economic history since its independence from Spain in 1825 . Insurrection has marked Bolivia's political, economic and political history .
 In April 1952, an alliance between mine workers, peasants, and religious leaders resulted in the overthrow of the existing military regime and the beginning of the Bolivian National Revolution . The revolution began in April 1952 .
 The revolution produced universal suffrage, land redistribution and nationalization of the tin mining industry . The revolution also produced land redistribution to the indigenous population .
 In the late 1950s, social welfare programs were suspended in order to revive the failing economy . However, in the 1950s some of these programs were reinstated . The government suspended some of the programs in the wake of the recession .
 In 1961, Bolivian President Victor Paz Estenssoro instituted an agreement with the United States and West Germany that resulted in a decrease in the number of miners, wage freezes, and a plan to control the tin miners’ union .
 The reforms provided the mine owners with higher profits but meant degradation for the mine workers . The reforms were meant to provide profits for the owners . The mine workers say they are being degraded .
 Domitila Barrios de Chungara was born in the Andean highlands of Bolivia on May 7, 1937 . She is one of Bolivia's most famous women .
 She married her husband, a tin miner, in 1960, and over the next decade gave birth to seven children . She was living at the Siglo XX mining center near Lake Poopo in central Bolivia .
 In her autobiography, Barrios described the harsh conditions imposed on miners and their families .
 Bolivia, U.S., Germany, Bolivia and Germany reached agreement . The agreement was “all to their advantage’s advantage,” she said .
 When all the steps were taken against the people, there was fighting in the mines, and protests and demonstrations . The mines were attacked by the government in the 1980s and 1990s . The government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 A dysentery epidemic spread through the camp, due to unsanitary conditions, and exacerbated by lack of medicine . The outbreak of the disease was caused by a lack of sanitary conditions in the camp .
 The government responded by sending a group of performers to put on a show for the miners and their families, Barrios says . The government sent the performers to perform for the distressed miners .
 Women had been taught that their place was behind the scenes and in the home . Women decided to forge a plan that would enable them to travel to La Paz to voice their demands .
 They returned to Siglo XX XX and declared a hunger strike . Discouraged but not dispirited, they returned .
 A group of factory workers, college students, and women from surrounding villages joined in the crowd .
 After 10 days, the government relented and released the imprisoned leaders . The leaders were finally freed after 10 days .
 The Housewives’ Committee decided to work on a newsletter that it sent to managers and government officials . It presented conflicts in the mines from the wives' perspective .
 In June 1967, guerrilla organizations hoping to oust the military government sent the tin miners’ union a manifesto . The union had a right to protect themselves against the Bolivian government, the manifesto says .
 On June 24, government forces invaded Siglo XX and arrested people who, they surmised, had supported the guerrillas . The government forces said they were arresting people who supported the rebels . The guerillas have been fighting for decades .
 One of her guards kicked Barrios in the stomach, and she lost the child she was carrying as a result . She was kicked by the guard, and the child was taken to hospital .
 In 1974, a Brazilian cinematographer Aimed the Housewives’ Committee for a United Nations sponsored project on Latin American women leaders .
 Barrios was invited to come to Mexico City for the U.N. Tribune in 1975 . He was invited by the United Nations to report on Mexico City .
 Her participation in the Tribune underscored the difficulty faced by feminist activists from different cultures and socioeconomic backgrounds .
 For example, the Tribune’s leaders began a discussion on the need for birth control throughout the world .
 Such an agenda would be seen as completely alien to her companions in Bolivia, where the indigenous population was in decline . Barrios commented that such an agenda was seen as alien to Bolivia's indigenous population .
 Barrios and others defended the right of women in underdeveloped nations to continue to fight for justice alongside their men . Some of the women from industrialized countries spoke out in favor of peace .
 In 1977, Barrios and Moema Viezzer collaborated on his autobiography, Si me permiten hablar .
 Two days after she arrived in Copenhagen, the Garcia Meza coup, a military takeover, occurred in Bolivia . Barrio could not go home after the conference and could not return home .
 Martha Bol Poel was born in Ghent to a family of Belgian aristocrats . She inherited a sense of noblesse oblige from her parents and grandparents . She is the daughter of a former Belgian aristocrat .
 Martha's grandfather founded the Kerchove Institute of education . Martha attended classes throughout her childhood . Martha's grandmother founded the institute .
 In 1895, she moved to Paris to take courses in drawing and painting at the Academie Julian . She moved to France in 1895 to take art courses .
 Three years later, she married Bol Poel, an executive officer of a metal foundry in La Louviere, a village south of Brussels, Belgium . She is survived by her husband, a father-of-one .
 Martha Bol Poel formed a day-care center near the factory where women could see and spend time with their children during the course of the workday .
 Bol Poel also nurtured her husband’s political career . He became deputy and senator in the Belgian legislature . She was also a senator in Belgium's parliament .
 The couple’s home in Brussels served as a political and intellectual salon . The couple's home served as an intellectual salon.
 Officials discovered secret literary network between soldiers and their families . Bol Poel arranged the network after Germany invaded Belgium in August 1914 . She was arrested and sentenced to two years in prison in 1916 .
 When she became gravely ill while serving her term, she was exchanged for a German prisoner . She was released when she became ill and died in hospital .
 Authorities refused to allow her to stay in Belgium, and she lived in exile in Switzerland for the remainder of the war .
 Bol Poel threw herself into the growing women’s rights movement in Belgium . After she returned to Belgium she threw herself in to the women's rights movement .
 Bol Poel was elected president of the International Council of Women in 1934 . She was the first woman to be elected to lead the convention in Dubrovnik, Croatia, in 1964 .
 Bol Poel presided over the 15th anniversary celebration of the ICW in Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1938, at the 15-year anniversary of the organization's founding .
 Bol Poel noted the advances made by women since the ICW’s inception in 1888 . The ICW was founded by the International Women's Congress in 1888, with the first woman elected to the Congress in 1903 .
 Women could vote throughout much of the world, and many more careers had opened up for women . Women were able to vote in many countries, and careers were opened up .
 ICW members passed a resolution against persecution of persons on account of race, religion, or political views . ICW: To further the “high aspirations,” ICW passed the resolution against persecuting persons .
 Bol Poel’s status as a former political prisoner counted against her, she says . She belonged to an organization that espoused values contradictory to Nazism, she writes . Poel was a political prisoner and a former Nazi prisoner .
 As a result, the occupying forces banned her from all political activities . The occupying forces have also banned all political activity from her .
 The Belgian National Council of Women, however, continued to meet secretly in her home throughout the war . The council of women met secretly at her home in Belgium .
 Bol Poel handed over her laurels to Swiss physician Renee Girod who, as a citizen of a neutral nation, would not face persecution for her position . The ICW president will not be able to carry out her duties as president .
 Bol Poel resumed her presidency and chaired the first ICW meeting in Philadelphia in 1947, though she resigned her position during the course of the meeting . After the war she resumed her role in the ICW, but later resigned .
 Swedish writer and women's rights activist Fredrika was Sweden's first novelist . Town of Fredrika, in Bremer County, Iowa, was named in honor of Sweden’s first novel .
 Bremer was born into what her biographer calls ‘the most male chauvinist society in Europe’ She founded the women’s rights movement in Sweden, after a lengthy sojourn in the U.S. Bremer’
 Bremer had viewed traditional women's and men's roles in society as complementary . Once she witnessed racial and sexual inequality in the United States, she became an ardent advocate of women’s emancipation . In Sweden, Bremer viewed traditional men's and women's roles as complementary in society
 Fredrika Bremer Society used the title of one of Bremer’s novels, Hertha, as its own publication . Sweden's largest women's organization used one of the novels as its publication title .
 Fredrika Bremer was born in Turku, Finland, on August 17, 1801, to a Swedish merchant family . Bremer lived in a prosperous household, first in Turkus and then on a farm near Stockholm in Arsta, Sweden .
 Sweden had gradually conquered most of Finland during the 13 th century . Swedish became the official language of Finland . Much of the Finnish economy and politics came into Swedish hands .
 In 1808, Russian armies invaded Finland and made the nation a Russian protectorate . The nation became a protectorate of Finland in 1808 .
 The Bremer family escaped catastrophe just in time when Carl Bremer, Fredrikas father, sold his firm and moved his large family to his and his wife’s ancestral home in 1804 . Fredrika Bremer's father, Carl, moved his family to the Bre
 Both Carl Bremer and his wife, Birgitta Hollstrom Bremer, subscribed to the “children should be seen and not heard” philosophy of raising children . Not uncommon in the 19th century, the Bremer family lived in the style of raising their children .
 The Bremers did, however, provide their seven children with a good education through private tutors . The family is famous for their philanthropic work and charity work .
 Birgitta Bremer implemented a strict diet for her female children . They were allowed a slice of bread and milk in the morning and evening, with the main meal served in the afternoon .
 She hoped to raise elegant, thinwaisted daughters who would make advantageous marriages . She hoped she hoped she would raise elegant and thin-waisted girls .
 Fredrika Bremer stole food to staunch her hunger pangs, as the ugly daughter of her parents . Both parents viewed Fredrika as an ugly daughter . Fredrika stole food from her parents to fight back her hunger .
 Even as her mother fed her a paltry diet and stuffed her into impossibly tight dresses, Bremer schemed to eat more food and escape marriage altogether . Even as she ate more food, she wanted to escape marriage and escape .
 She viewed her parents’ union as confining, and her mother’s seven pregnancies in 10 years as ill-suited for doing anything other than serving her husband . She said she viewed her mother's union as a confining and her parents' seven pregnancies .
 The Bible taught Bremer that men's and women’s roles complemented each other, and therefore conformity seemed normal and natural . Bremer: "The Bible taught that men and women's roles complement each other"
 As a child who grew up believing she was ugly, Bremer began searching for an alternative to marriage . She rejected her mother’s life of servitude . Bremer grew up thinking she couldn't achieve society's ideal female form .
 By the age of eight, Bremer had discovered her love of and talent in the realm of literature .
 As a teenager, Bremer accompanied her family on a European tour from 1820 to 1821 . Bremer was a member of the Bremer family on the tour .
 When the family returned to Sweden, Bremer grew restless and sullen at the prospect of submitting to the dull routine of upper-middle-class country life .
 Sketches of Everyday Life was published in hopes of raising money for some of her favorite charities . She hopes to raise money for charities .
 The praise her writing received encouraged her to spend more time at her writing desk . The praise for her writing inspired her to write again .
 Always delighted to travel, Bremer embarked upon further sojourns in Europe . Bremer used her free time to write many novels, short stories, and travel books .
 Gently spiced with down-to-earth humor and domesticity, her novels had wide appeal . Her novels were soon translated into English .
 In Sweden, she became a celebrity, winning the gold medal of merit from the Swedish Academy in 1844 . She also won a gold medal for her work in Sweden .
 Her trip to America confirmed her faith in liberty, she noted later, though the young nation had not lived up to what it promised in its Constitution, Bremer said . Her trip confirmed her belief in liberty but she noted that the U.S. had failed to live up to its
 She became convinced that men and women could never really complement one another until society viewed them as equals . Furthermore, she was convinced that women and men could never complement each other .
 Bremer actively worked to improve women’s rights in Sweden . Bremer worked to help improve women's rights .
 She encouraged women to become involved in charitable activities . She believed that women’s legal and social stature would rise if their contributions to society were acknowledged .
 Hertha's next book, Hertha, will be a memoir about her life . Hertha is published by Hertha in Berlin .
 Critics ridiculed the book for its lack of plot and character development . Critics said it was a waste of time .
 In truth, Hertha seemed to be more of a political entreaty for equality for women than a story . Hertha was more of an entreate for equality than a political statement .
 Hertha, however, has been credited with changing people’s minds, which seems to have been its purpose . Hertha has been praised for changing people's minds .
 Bremer's book deals with a young woman’s desire to marry a man deemed unsuitable by her father . Bremer wrote the book about the desire to wed a man considered unsuitable .
 Hertha pledges to share everything equally with Hertha, including his dream of building a new school based on cooperation rather than competition . Hertha pledged to build the new school in a bid to build a new model of cooperation not competition .
 Bremer traveled in England and began voicing her opinions through newspaper editorials . As she was working on her book, Bremer began writing editorials for the first time .
 Her “Invitation to a Peace Alliance” appeared on the front page of the London Times on August 18, 1854 . Her invitation to a peace alliance was published in the same edition of this article .
 Her commentary appealed to all women in the world to unite after the Crimean War would end and to work together for the benefit of all aspects of society .
 War could be prevented, she argued, and children could be better taken care of if women’s nurturing instincts were allowed to inform politics, she said . War could also be prevented and children would be taken better care of .
 The piece provoked a variety of responses, including fear that if women became involved in politics, home life would suffer as a result . The piece was published in the Washington Post .
 Sor Juana Ines de la Cruz spent most of her life defending women’s right to pursue spiritual and ‘profane’ knowledge in an age when most women had little access to either . Sor Juanita Ines defended women in her own life .
 Juana de Asbaje was born out of wedlock on November 12, 1651 . She was born in San Miguel Nepantla, a village southeast of Mexico City . Juana was born to Pedro Manuel and Isabel Ramirez .
 Her father came to Mexico from Spain from the Basque region of Spain . Her mother was Mexican born . Her father was born in Mexico .
 At the age of nine, she went to Mexico City to live with an aunt and uncle, where she learned Latin . She learned Latin from her aunt, uncle and uncle .
 By 1667, she knew that the only place she could continue to learn was the convent . Otherwise she would have to marry, care for children, and surrender her intellectual pursuits .
 Three months later, she left the order because her superiors did not give her enough time for study . Three months after she left, she said: 'I don't want to study. I want to learn'
 Sor Juana’s collection is considered the largest of her time . She continued her self-study, accumulating as many as 4,000 volumes in her library . Sor Juan was a self-librarian .
 She studied theology, logic, rhetoric, physics, music, arithmetic, geometry, and geometry . She also studied theology and rhetoric .
 Her private studies soon provoked the wrath of her peers in the convent . Her studies provoked the ire of her fellow nuns .
 Sor Juana defends herself against accusations that her religious duties suffered because she devoted too much to ‘profane’ studies . Sor Juan defended herself in a letter to Father Manuel Fernandez de la Cruz, the bishop of Puebla .
 Since 17th-century Mexican women were not allowed to write to men, she signed this letter with a pseudonym, Sor Filotea . The letter was signed by a woman in Mexican women who was not allowed by men .
 Her desire for knowledge, she explained to the bishop, was innate and could not be purged . Her desire to knowledge was innate, she said .
 When her superiors at the convent had finally banned her studies completely, she replied by affirming the right of a woman to have access to knowledge .
 To support her position, she quoted the Bible and several theologians to arrive at her insistence that women should have a broader role in society, education, and the church .
 Her letter made it clear that, to her, a lack of wisdom was akin to heresy . Her letter was made clear that she wanted to know more about wisdom .
 Sor Juana had been writing poetry since the age of nine . Her theological poem “Loa Eucharistica,” has been lost . Sor Juan was a poet who viewed poetry as a way of serving God .
 Between 1691 and 1692, Mexico suffered a wheat blight, bad harvests generally, and a rash of fires, crimes, and unrest . Mexico also suffered a bad harvest in 1691, 1692 .
 Sor Juana had ceased writing philosophical and theological texts and poetry in 1693 . By 1693 she had stopped writing philosophical texts and poems .
 Sor Juana withdrew from her former intellectual life in 1694, secluding herself in prayer and contemplation . In 1694 she withdrew from intellectual life, secluded herself from her life .
 It is thought that she gave away her library and most of her scientific instruments . It was thought she gave up her collection of scientific materials .
 She reaffirmed her vows to the church and also of her desire to submit to God’s final judgment . She wrote that she reaffirmed vows to her church .
 She confessed her sins and stated her belief and faith in God’s forgiveness and grace . She said she believes in the faith of God .
 When disease swept through the convent in 1695, Sor Juana succumbed to it and died on April 17, 1695 . Sor Juan died at the convent .
 Sor Juana’s Complete Works were published in Madrid in 1689, and in 1690 in Mexico . Sor Juan's Complete Works published in 1688 and 1690 .
 A year later, the first volume of her Complete Works'w&s reissued in Barcelona . A year after her death, her first volume was reissued .
 The First Woman Theologian in the Americas,” The Church and Women in the Third World, eds. The Church .
 Ding Ling was dragged through the streets of China wearing a dunce cap during the Cultural Revolution . Ding Ling has been punished and humiliated for speaking and writing her mind for speaking out .
 Ding Ling’s written word liberated Chinese women from crippling tradition when the CCP did not . Ding Ling's short stories and novels liberated women's freedom when the party did not. Ding Ling, in the form of short stories, novels, liberated women in China .
 Ding Ling offered insight into the condition of women in China and the United States . A committed Communist despite the pain and suffering she lived through, Ding Ling was a committed Communist . Ding Ling is now a retired Communist Party leader .
 Ding Ling learned about protest from her mother while growing up in Hunan Province . Ding Ling is the pen name of Jiang Bingzhi, a Chinese writer and activist activist .
 Ding Ling was born in the county of Linli, Hunan Province, on September 4, 1904 . Ding Ling is one of the most famous Chinese women to be recorded in China .
 Ding Ling’s mother unbound her feet , took a job as a teacher, and began speaking out for women's rights . Ding Ling's mother was a teacher and spoke out for the first time in her own life .
 Her mother’s transformation occurred as China forsook the monarchy in favor of a republic in 1912 . Her mother's transformation occurred during China's transition to a republic .
 Ding Ling and her family soon found that the change brought only more heartache . Ding Ling's family was forced to move from their home to a new home in China . But Ding Ling found it difficult to find a new life in the United States .
 Westernstyle. Westernstyle, and decided to attend a boys’ school instead of the traditional girls’s school . Westernstyle is a British school for girls .
 Ding Ling’s uncles arranged a marriage for her to a man they chose, she promptly told them that her body belonged to no one, only to herself, and they would not decide what she would do with it . Ding Ling's body belonged only to her, and she
 She met a young poet named Hu Yepin, with whom she lived, and an older writer named Shen Congwen . She dropped out when she met another poet named Shen Yepin .
 Hu Yepin, Shen Congwen, and Ding Ling produced a literary supplement to the Chinese newspaper Central Daily, Red and Black, in 1927 . The supplement was published in 1927 by three Chinese writers .
 She returned briefly to Shanghai briefly to pursue an acting career but failed to find work . She moved back to China to pursue a career in acting .
 She based her short story Mengke on this experience . Mengke appeared in Short Story Monthly in 1927 .
 The Diary of Miss Sophie (original tide Shafei nushi de riji) established Ding Ling as one of the leading intellectuals of the May Fourth Generation . Ling established Ling as Asia’s foremost writer on women's issues in the early 20th century .
 The May Fourth Movement is named after the demonstration that took place on May 4, 1919, when 5,000 intellectuals protested the Versailles Conference awarding Japan the former German colony of Jiaozhou, in Shandong Province .
 In The Diary of Miss Sophie, the heroine, who suffers from tuberculosis, reads and admires the modern heroines of Russian literature . In the novel, Miss Sophie is inspired by a modern Russian heroine .
 Sophie's illness mirrors a horrifying reality in the 1920s, when thousands of young Chinese people lost their lives from the disease . Sophie’s condition is also a metaphor for the loss of traditional morality in China . Sophie's condition is a symbol for the . loss of . traditional morality
 She finally decides to leave her family and move south to Shanghai, where radicalism in literature and politics is pervasive . She finally leaves her family to live in the city .
 Ding Ling condemns Chinese society for the absence of a place for an independent young woman . Through The Diary of Miss Sophie, Ding Ling explores the role of women in China's society .
 Mother follows the transformation of a young widowed mother who leaves her gentrified life and embarks on a journey as a modern Chinese new woman . Ding Ling's novel Mother is based on Ding Ling’s own mother, who died in 2011 .
 Ding Ling’s works deal with women struggling to find an identity in a male-dominated world . Most of Ding Ling's works focus on women struggling for an identity . Ling's work includes works on women in search of identity .
 Mengke follows the life of a naive young woman from the countryside . She pursues her dream of becoming an artist in Shanghai but ends up selling her body and soul to the film industry instead .
 Ding Ling’s critique of the Chinese film world, which rejected her own talent, percolates through her prose . Ding Ling is a critic of the film industry, which she says rejected her talent .
 As Ding Ling began her writing career, China’s troubles intensified with the election of Sun Yat-sen as president of the republic and the creation of the CCP in 1921 . Ding Ling's troubles intensified in the early years of her career .
 Two months after the birth of the couple’s son in 1933, KMT thugs arrested and executed Hu Yepin . The couple's son was born in 1933 .
 Ding Ling joined the CCP and, shortly after, her works were banned by the Chinese government . Ding Ling's works have since been banned by China's government .
 Ding Ling made her way to Baoan in northeastern China to join Mao Zedong’s army in 1936 . She was kidnapped and later placed under house arrest in Nanjing on May 4, 1933 .
 When Ding Ling wrote several short essays in 1942 in which she accused Communist leaders of ineptitude and male chauvinism, she was removed from her position . Ding Ling was removed after she wrote about the Communist leaders' ineptitude .
 Her epic novel The Sun Shines Over the Sanggan River won the Stalin prize for literature in 1951 . She and her second husband, actor and writer Chen Ming, were sent to work on peasant farms .
 Ding Ling was head of the new Central Literary Institute in Beijing . After the Communist victory and the establishment of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, the CCP determined she had been rehabilitated .
 Ding Ling’s books were banned from 1957 to 1978 . The Cultural Revolution targeted Chinese writers and intellectuals who were thought to be perpetuating Western ideas . Ding Ling was banned in China from 1957 until 1978 .
 In 1966, Chen Ming watched as Red Guards dragged his wife, face painted black and wearing a tall dunce cap, through the village of Heilungkiang . Chen Ming's wife was dragged by Red Guards and paraded through village .
 In 1970, they locked her up in solitary confinement; she was released and reunited with her husband in 1976 . She was released from solitary confinement in 1970; her husband was also released .
 Two years later, the Chinese government issued a public apology and gave her the keys to a six-room apartment in Beijing . Two years after the apology, the government gave her keys to the apartment .
 When The Sun Shines Over the Sanggan River was translated into English in 1986, Ding Ling visited the United States . Ding Ling's book was translated in 1986 and has been translated since then .
 Ding Ling traveled to the U.S. to observe American society and culture . Ding Ling was asked to share her thoughts of the trip with CNN iReport .
 She admitted astonishment at the wealth of the U.S. She said it would take decades for Chinese citizens to be able to afford a car, household appliances, and televisions .
 Commercials teach young women empty-headed vanity, warns Ding Ling . Commercials focus on how girls look, rather than on what is inside, she says .
 A Chilean feminist and educator, Ana Figueroa was a U.N. delegate . Time magazine reporter described her as a "comely brunette"
 Ana Figueroa took such comments in stride, though she did draw the line during a 1951 UN committee meeting .
 A Saudi Arabian UN delegate gallantly offered apologies to her should debate turn nasty . She offered to apologise if the debate turns nasty .
 As a child, Figueroa had it in mind to become a physician, but women were barred from the profession, so she went into teaching instead . As a teacher, she decided to be a teacher instead .
 Figueroa taught at various high schools in Chile until 1938, when she accepted her first administrative position as principal at the Lyceum of Temuco . She became the first Chilean woman to become a school principal .
 In 1946, she became general inspector of secondary schools throughout Chile . In 1946 she was general inspector in Chile's schools .
 As a general inspector of high schools in Chile, Figueroa also observed schools elsewhere, including the U.S., he observed schools in the United States .
 Other students had asked her where her sombrero was, assuming that Mexican culture represented all of Latin America, she said .
 Figueroa charged U.S. schools with teaching Spanish as though it were a dead language . He said it was only spoken in Spain, and only Spanish in Spain .
 Figueroa presided over the committee that drafted Chilean women's legislation . He penned another piece, “Fair Deal for the Chilena,” in the May 1950 issue of the U.N. World .
 The article outlined her experiences as administrator of the Chilean Women’s Bureau . It also outlined the experiences of working with the Chilean government in Chile .
 She also headed the YWCA and the Federation of Women’s Organizations in Chile . She represented Chile at the 1949 Inter-American Commission of Women convention . She was also a member of the International Organization of Women .
 The same strong voice that called for woman suffrage in Chile also sharply criticized the United States for its neocolonial position regarding nations that had been colonized by the U.S. and Europe . The Chilean women's right to vote for women's suffrage came from a strong voice
 She praised Great Britain for its policy of gradually introducing self-government in African nations under British rule . Democracy in many of these nations has not fared well, however .
 Figueroa urged the UN to undertake education programs in these nations . Figoeroa said the UN should also help develop education programs for these countries .
 Figueroa advanced in the UN ranks from her appointment as a delegate plenipotentiary in 1948 to her election as head of the Social, Humanitarian, and Cultural Committee in 1951 . She was elected head of social, humanitarian and cultural committee in 1951.
 She was also the first woman to be elected an alternate delegate to the UN Security Council . She was first woman elected alternate delegates to the Security Council.
 In 1960, she became the first woman to hold the position of assistant director general to the International Labor Organization . She held a post that she held until 1967 .
 Ichikawa Fusae's varied working life enabled her to view women’s conditions in Japan from different perspectives . ICHIKAWAWA FUSAE was a Japanese suffragist and politician . She was a member of the Japanese House of Representatives and a politician .
 As a teacher, journalist, and political organizer, she became convinced that women should have the right to vote . She says society as a whole would view women as men's equals .
 Ichikawa Fusae was instrumental in securing suffrage for Japanese women in 1945 . He helped secure the right to vote for women in Japan . He was also involved in securing women's suffrage in the country .
 Japanese voters elected her to public office five times between 1952 and 1981 . She was elected to office in Japan five times before 1981 .
 In both the 1975 and 1980 elections, Fusae won by one of the highest number of votes ever received by a single candidate in Japan . He won one of Japan's highest votes received by one candidate in a single election .
 After she completed schooling to become a primary and secondary schoolteacher, she taught at a country school .
 Later, she held a variety of positions, including stockbroker’s clerk, reporter and reporter .
 During the years she spent as a journalist for a liberal Japanese newspaper, her editor asked her to report on conditions at factories . She was asked to do so by the editor of a liberal newspaper .
 It was this assignment that made her realize that women’s low status in society was not confined to marriage or to rural women, she said .
 She saw that factory managers abused women factory workers, and that women were paid much less than men for doing the same work . She saw factory managers abuse women workers .
 In 1919, she founded and directed the Women’s Committee of the International Labour Organization . She also directed the International Workers' Committee of Women's Committee .
 In the same year, she and HIRATSUKA Raicho organized the New Women’s Association . The group was formed to advance equal opportunities for women and men .
 In 1921, the NWA convinced the Japanese government to lift its ban on women attending political meetings . The NWA persuaded the government to allow women to attend political meetings in Japan .
 Fusae spent two years in the United States, studying the U.S. women’s movement . Later in 1921, she traveled to Europe to study the movement of American women's movement . She spent the last two years of her life in America .
 Ichikawa found several similarities in the struggle for women’s rights in both nations . Ichikawa said there were similarities in both countries' struggles for women's rights .
 Many in the U.S. had been advocating woman suffrage since the mid-1800s . It was only in the early 20th century that a nationwide political movement began to push for the vote .
 The phrase New Woman came into use by educators and writers in the late 19th and early 20th centuries .
 A New Woman was a younger, college-educated white middle-class woman who married later . She was often pursued a career during her early twenties .
 American women won the right to vote with the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1920 .
 Women’s participation in World War I advanced the suffrage cause in the U.S. The same thing would have the same effect in Japan . Japanese women's participation in WWII would have same effect there .
 When Fusae returned to Japan in 1924, she founded the Women’s Suffrage League . She campaigned for voting rights, and published a magazine called Womens Sujfrage .
 The Women’s Suffrage League became involved in consumer activism . Campaigned for full disclosure of ingredients on food containers .
 When Japan invaded China in 1937, the nation geared up for war and the Women’s Suffrage League disbanded . The League disbanded after the invasion .
 Fusae found new opportunities during the war to strengthen the move for women’s suffrage . The war was the first time women were allowed to vote in England .
 During World War II women took men’s places in factories and farms in Europe, the U.S. and Japan . Women took men's places in factory and farm work in Europe and the United States . Women were women in factories, farms and factories in Europe .
 The governments of these nations called upon women to work in wartime industries, to help the war effort . Women were called upon by women to help in war efforts . Women helped in the wartime industries .
 In Japan, Fusae saw that even though they had been recruited to work, women were still not paid the same as men for equivalent work . She saw that in Japan, even though she had already been recruited, she was not paid as much .
 Fusae argued that since women had participated in the war effort, they should be able to help determine which direction Japanese society should take after the war ended . After the war, he argued that women should help determine the direction of society .
 In 1945 women over the age of 20 were granted voting rights, and women over 25 could become candidates in elections . Her campaign paid off, for in 1945 women in the UK were granted the right to vote and run for office .
 In 1952, Fusae was elected to the House of Councillors, Japan’s upper house of the Diet . Japan is ruled by a constitutional monarchy, in which the emperor is head of state but has no executive power .
 Fusae's charisma and her work in women's rights won her the election, as she did not belong to a political party and had little financial backing .
 She continued her career in the House of Councillors from 1952 until she died in 1981 . She devoted her time to a research institute called the Woman’s Suffrage Hall .
 During her tenure in the Diet she resumed her fight for women’s rights . During her time in the diet she continued her battle for women's rights .
 Today, Japanese women are among the best educated in the world, but they remain a novelty in national government . Today, Japan women are the world's best educated, but remain novelty in government .
 Feminists continue to fight the fight to increase female participation in government .
 Swiss feminist and pacifist Marie Goegg earned a reputation as a petroleuse . Her words and deeds sparked a fire across European society . Goegg was a pacifist and outspoken advocate for peace .
 The French word derives from the women who lit fires during the 1848 revolt known as the Paris Commune . The word 'Paris Commune' was coined by the French women who set fire to the fires of the Commune revolt .
 Goegg called for a separate women’s peace organization, which, she insisted, should operate in tandem with men's groups, while still maintaining a separate identity . Goegg: Women's peace groups should operate with men’ groups, but maintain separate identity, while maintaining a
 Marie Goegg was born in Geneva, Switzerland, to a clock maker and his wife . She is descended from Huguenots, French Protestants who had suffered persecution for their faith in France . Marie's family is also descended from French Protestants .
 At the age of 13, Goegg left her public school to assist her father in his shop . Goegg continued to study on her own thanks to her maternal uncle, Benjamin Pautex .
 Pautex, a writer, penned the Dictionary of the French Academy . He may have provided Goegg with access to books on history and literature, her favorite subjects .
 Marie assumed custody of their son in 1845 . The couple divorced 11 years later, with Marie assuming custody . In 1845, Marie married for the first time .
 Goegg married the revolutionary exile Armand Goegg, who in 1849 escaped a life sentence in Baden, Germany, and fled to Switzerland . In the same year, Goegg was married to Armand, who was exiled from Germany . Goegg and Armand married in 18
 Armand Goegg adopted Marie’s son from her first marriage, and the couple had two more boys . Armand and Marie Goegg also had two boys together . Marie and Armand were married in 1970s .
 Italian nationalist Giuseppe Garibaldi presided over its opening convention . Giuseppo Garibald presided over the opening convention in Rome .
 The league began publishing a journal called The United States of Europe, for which Marie Goegg wrote an article in 1868 . The league published the journal for the first time until 1868.
 Goegg’s piece called for the creation of a separate peace society for women . Goegg also called for an equal voice within the International League for Peace and Liberty .
 At the IPL’s 1868 convention in Bern, Switzerland, Goegg articulated her ideas further . Goegg: "I'm not afraid to be afraid of the future."
 Next, she warned that the group would pay a price for continuing to ignore half the world’s population . She also said that the U.S. would pay for ignoring half the population .
 She insisted that the French Revolution of 1789 would not have failed had it not been for the support of France’s educated women . She said that the revolution would have failed if it had not been supported by educated women in France .
 Without including the entire population, the rebels managed only to replace one type of tyranny with another . Goegg says the rebels were no better than the former .
 Progress toward social justice, out of which would come peace, would never be realized without instituting equality for women . Peace would be realized if women were given equal rights to equal rights, the author says .
 The IPL saw the light, and duly elected Goegg to serve on its central committee . Goegg will serve as a member of the IPL's central committee in 2015 .
 The peace group also became the first peace organization to add women’s emancipation to its list of demands . The group also added women's emancipation .
 She founded the International Association of Women, the first international women’s organization, in 1870 . She was the founder of the first network of women's organizations throughout Europe .
 The outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War disrupted the International Association of Women . The war disrupted the organization .
 Goegg viewed the war as proof positive that women needed to play a greater role in society and politics . Goegg said the war was proof that women need to play more in society .
 Biographical Dictionary of Modern Peace Leaders, Harold Josephson, ed. ed. Biographical dictionary of modern peace leaders . Biography of Peace leaders .
 Chinese revolutionary andfeminist He Xiangning is known as the Mother of the Chinese Revolution . He worked in and through all phases of revolutionary politics and governments from the Republic of China through the Communist Revolution in 1949 .
 He remained committed to improving the lives of Chinese women through sexual equality . He remained steadfastly committed to helping women in China .
 He was among the first Chinese women to cut short her long, black hair in the 1920s and adopt a Western style of short hair . The gesture was designed to symbolize the onset of a new, modern womanhood .
 Born in Nanhai in Guangdong Province and raised in a middle-class, tea merchant family . Raised in the middle class, she grew up in a tea merchant .
 She married Liao Chung-k’ai in 1897, selling her bridal trousseau so she could accompany her new husband to Japan . The two went to school together in Japan .
 Sun Yat-sen joined the United League that Sun had founded in 1905 . The League was founded by Sun in 1905, and Sun founded the League .
 The group’s goal was nothing less than the ousting of the Chinese monarchy that had existed for thousands of years . The group's goal was to oust China's monarchy .
 From 1905 to 1911, the United League staged a series of unsuccessful uprisings against the Manchu Dynasty . The League staged an unsuccessful uprising against the Chinese dynasty .
 By the end of 1911, the southern and central provinces had declared their independence from Manchu rule . However, by the end, the central and southern provinces of China declared independence .
 In December 1911, revolutionary leaders met in Nanjing to establish the Republic of China . Sun was named temporary president of the republic, with Sun named as president .
 The Manchus called upon military leader Yiian Shih-kai to try to wrest the republic away from the revolutionaries, but instead, Yiian and Sun reached a compromise . Yiian became the new president of the republic .
 He Xiangning and Liao had returned to China from Japan from Japan in time to witness the change in government . Liao: "He Xiangning, Liao is a good friend of China's new government"
 With the resignation of Sun, He, Liao and Sun went back to Japan to reform a political parry that could challenge Yiian . Sun resigned as head of China's first major political party . Yiian is a former prime minister of China .
 The Kuomintang collaborated closely with Moscow and with Chinese communists . The Soviets and Chinese communists worked closely together in the 1950s .
 Back in China, Yiian died in 1916, the republic was crum367 WOMEN’S RIGHTS ACTIVISTS bling, and Chinese warlords, or local military leaders, were ruling most of the northern part of China .
 He and Liao returned to Guangdong Province, which was in the midst of a civil war . The two men were able to escape the civil war in China . Liao was killed in the war .
 He was elected to lead the Women’s Department in 1923, while at the same time she took charge of the women's movement in Guangdong . He led the Women's Department at the time .
 He described the purpose of the Women’s Department as drawing women into active participation in the revolution . He said it was to obtain from the government recognition of the rights of women .
 The primary task of the Women’s Department was to educate and train women leaders . The Women's Department was founded in 1903 .
 The Women’s Department established the practice of training the young at an early age .
 March 8 was set aside as Women’s Day, a time when women were to engage in collective consciousness raising and to build up solidarity among women . March 8 is the day of women's Day, when women engage in consciousness raising .
 In 1924, the Women’s Department organized a rally in Canton, holding up signs that read, “same work, same pay,” “abolish polygamy” and “prohibit the buying of female slaves” The group's goals were to
 When Sun Yat-sen died in 1925, leadership of the Kuomintang fell to Chiang Kai-shek . He brought most of China under the party's control .
 He Xiangning and Liao continued to advocate Sun’s policy of alignment with the CCP and the Soviet Union to achieve national unification . Liao and Xiangning were critical of Sun's policy of aligning with CCP and Soviet Union .
 Under Chiang, the KMT opposed the alliance, becoming increasingly conservative and dictatorial . Reactionist elements within the party assassinated Liao Chung-k'ai in 1925 .
 In 1927, Chiang broke entirely with the CCP and began a campaign to eliminate the party . Chiang began a fight to end the party in 1927 .
 He Xiangning moved back to Hong Kong, where she spent the next 20 years actively opposing the KMT . She was elected to the Central Executive Committee of the party in 1931 .
 He and others formed a committee called the Three People’s Principles, calling on the government to adopt its principles of nationalism, democracy, and economic well-being for the Chinese people . The committee calls on the KMT to adopt principles of democracy, nationalism, and democracy .
 During war between Japan and China He set up nursing services for soldiers and refugees in Shanghai and Guilin . During war, he nursed soldiers and refugee refugees . He died in his hometown of Shanghai in 1949 .
 Gommunist forces under Mao Zedong had effectively driven the KMT to the island of Taiwan . By 1949, the KMA had fled to Taiwan to join the Communist Party of China .
 He Xiangning returned to Beijing to work with the new government in many capacities, focusing primarily on women’s issues . The new government is focusing on women's issues .
 The Marriage Law, established in 1950, was designed to form a new basis for interfaith relations . It was intended to be a model for interfamily relations between families .
 Based on legislation passed in the Soviet Union, the Marriage Law opens with a declaration that the old feudal society was dead . With it, the idea of the superiority of men over women was dead, and with it, it was with it .
 The new marriage system was to be based on free choice of partners, monogamy, equal rights for women, and protection of women’s legal rights .
 Women were to have equal rights with men to develop their knowledge and skills . Women would be able to develop knowledge and develop their skills .
 The Women's Federation provided legal aid in implementing the Marriage Law, especially in cases of divorce . The Women’s Federation provides legal aid to implement the law .
 In addition to her extraordinary work within revolutionary political movements, she has also been involved in revolutionary movements . Her work has been described as 'extraordinary'
 Her reminiscences of the life of Sun Yat-sen were published in 1957 . Some of her paintings have been published .
 Biographical Dictionary of Republican China, Howard L Boorman, ed. ed. Further Reading Biographical . Dictionary of . Republican China . Howard L. Boorman . ed.
 Hiratsuka Raicho founded the ‘Seitosha’ or Bluestocking Society, a liberal organization that helped to change the status of women in Japanese society . Raicho was a liberal activist and publisher of Japanese women's rights .
 With FUSAE Ichikawa and other feminists, she founded the New Women’s Association in 1919 . She was calling for the reform of the social and legal position of Japanese women .
 After World War II, she took up the causes of peace and democracy . She was president of the Federation of Japanese Women’s Societies .
 Emperor Yoshihito, Taisho Tenno, ruled Japan from 1912 to 1926 . Emperor's reign was when Japan's economy continued to industrialize and modernize .
 Emperor Yoshihito was a sickly child and played almost no political role . He was sickly and had no political power and played no political part in his life .
 Historians refer to his reign as the Taisho, or “Great Righteousness” period . It was characterized by policies congenial to Western powers, especially Great Britain and the United States .
 Domestically, the Japanese Diet, or National Assembly, held broader powers during this period, extending the suffrage to more men, though not to women . Domestationally, the National Assembly extended the voting power to more people, but not women .
 Feminists used the term bluestockingio refer to the salon activities of 18th-century English women . The term was used by feminists to refer to salon activities .
 A group of London women hosted social soirees to discuss intellectual and philosophical issues of the day .
 They named their group after a man, Benjamin Stillingfleet, who attended their meetings . The group is based in London, London and New York .
 A poor man, Stillingfleet supposedly could not afford proper silk stockings for evening wear, donning instead instead of wool blue stockings he wore during the day .
 The term bluestocking was used derisively to refer to pretentious women who discussed issues supposedly reserved for men .
 In the early 20th century, women in Europe, the U.S. and Japan began using the term to assert their right to participate in all aspects of human endeavors .
 Hiratsuka Raicho was born in Tokyo to a government bureaucrat and his wife . Raicho is best known for his role in the television series "Kara Raicho"
 When she graduated, she entered the Narumi Women’s English School, where she and others, including Yosano Akiko, founded Seito in 1911 .
 Japan’s first publication written exclusively by and for women, Seito . Seito was initially meant to be a literary magazine . Eventually, it became the voice of feminism in Japan .
 Japanese intellectuals derided the New Women writers and publishers and their publication . The New Women were published in Japan in 1959 .
 The term New Woman was coined around the turn of the 20th century and still used by women’s historians . It indicated a woman who had shirked the trappings of the Victorian “separate spheres” ideology in favor of independence from home .
 In Japan, New Women were seen as selfish, immoral women who were out to destroy the family, their particular race, and their nation . In Japan and elsewhere, New Woman was seen as immoral women .
 Hiratsuka Raicho’s house was vandalized, while other Seito staff members were fired from jobs . Some women quit out of fear of reprisal, some women quit .
 Hiratsuka began living with an art student, H Okumura, with whom she had two children . She began living in Japan with a partner, a fellow art student .
 Like many unconventional New Women, she refused to marry under Japanese marriage laws . She refused to be married under the laws .
 Hiratsuka believed most men were sexually promiscuous and infected innocent wives and their children with venereal diseases . Hiratsawa believed that most men infected their wives and children with diseases .
 Social Darwinists were named for British scientist Charles Darwin, 1809-82 . Charles Darwin claimed that in nature, the fittest organisms are those that survive to reproduce . Social Darwinistists are named for their belief that evolution is based on reproduction .
 Hiratsuka called for state protection of women and children by prohibiting men afflicted with venereal diseases from getting married . Hiratsawa called for the state to protect women from men afflicted by venereals diseases .
 The Public Order and Police Law was amended, thus making women’s participation in political activities legal . The law was amended to allow women to participate in political activity .
 Hiratsuka and Okumura's relationship struggled along as the two lived in dire financial circumstances . The two were forced to live with each other through financial difficulties . The relationship became strained when Okumur became ill with tuberculosis .
 When World War II ended, Hiratsuka and other feminists felt vindicated by Japan’s new constitution . The constitution granted women the right to vote in Japan . Hiratsuk says she was vindicated when the constitution was passed .
 Dutch physician and women’s rights activist Aletta Jacobs was one of the first women doctors in the Netherlands . Jacobs came from a family of male physicians . Jacobs was a pioneer of Dutch medicine .
 In her practice as a pediatrician and gynecologist, Jacobs found that most health problems her patients suffered from were caused by social conditions . Jacobs: "Most health problems were caused not by disease but by social factors"
 Jacobs’s work with her female patients inspired her study of contraception . In 1882, she opened the first birth control clinic in the world in Amsterdam, Amsterdam .
 After retiring from medicine, she became president of the Association for Woman Suffrage . She was also a member of the National Association for Women Suffrage.
 Aletta Jacobs was born on February 9, 1854, to Abraham Jacobs and Anna de Jongh . She was the eighth child of a Jewish family of 11 children . Aletta was born in 1854 .
 Jacobs’s father allowed her to take Latin and Greek necessary for physicians . Most girls were not encouraged to aim for such lofty professional goals, but Jacobs' father encouraged her to study medicine .
 Her parents sent her to finishing school, customary for upper-class girls in the 19th century, where she learned proper manners and social graces . Her parents also sent her into finishing school .
 Jacobs studied the current laws to see if any legal restrictions existed that would prevent her from entering medical school . Jacobs says she has no legal restrictions that could prevent her entry into the medical field . Jacobs: "I want to be a doctor, not a doctor."
 At the age of 16, she passed an examination allowing her to become an apothecary . She then apprenticed with her older brother with her brother .
 Aletta Jacobs became the first woman in Holland to attend university classes . Jacobs attended university classes at the age of 18 . Jacobs was the first Dutch woman to go to university in Holland .
 Thereafter, universities all over Holland opened their doors to female students . Holland's first female university students were at the age of 16 .
 Jacobs found that her professors and her peers closely scrutinized her behavior on and off campus . Jacobs said that she was scrutinized by her peers and peers . Jacobs says she is proud of her work and her grades .
 One student advised students at Groningen to make Jacobs’s life so miserable that she would leave . Another student, in Leiden, tried to ruffle feathers by advising students there to make her life miserable .
 Jacobs’s own brother, Johan, declared that he would rather see her dead than study at the university . No one took the advice, although her own brother did .
 In 1878, she completed the three-week series of tests, which granted her the right to practice medicine . She was awarded the right in 1878 to be allowed to practice .
 Practicing medicine in Amsterdam presented her with challenges right away . She was inspired by her desire to be a doctor in the Netherlands .
 Single women customarily were escorted everywhere they went in public, at all times, lest they be mistaken for prostitutes . For example, single women in the U.S. customarily had to be escorted everywhere . Single women were escorted to all public places in the United States .
 Every time Jacobs went to and from her office, she had to find an escort . Jacobs: "Every time I go to my office, I had to have an escort. Every time I went there, I would have to get an escort"
 Jacobs found that many of her patients had problems that stemmed from social causes rather than illness . Jacobs: Many of the patients, all of whom were women and children, were children and women . Jacobs found many of them had social causes, not illness .
 Many of her female patients were shop clerks who spent long hours on their feet every day and suffered from back problems . For example, many of her patients were shops clerks who spend long hours .
 Jacobs began pressing for legislation that would limit working hours and that would require shop owners to provide chairs for use during breaks . Jacobs is pushing for legislation to limit hours and to require chairs for break breaks .
 Jacobs was ridiculed for her suggestions, so she took her campaign to the women themselves . Jacobs took her case to the medical community, which was ridiculed .
 Jacobs found that many of her patients’ health problems were due to social conditions . Jacobs: Many of the health problems are due to the social conditions of the patient .
 Many of the mothers that she saw complained of having too many children, she said . She said that many mothers complained that they had too many kids .
 Early in 1882, she obtained a pessarium occlusivium—a diaphragm— that she began prescribing for her patients . She began prescribing it in 1881 .
 Carel Victor Gerritsen was a radical journalist and politician who shared many of Jacobs’s views on social injustices . Jacobs was a member of a radical group of radical journalists and politicians . Jacobs died at the age of 92 on December 31, 1981 .
 Jacobs and her American counterpart, Jane Addams, had thrown themselves with full force into the women’s peace movement when World War I broke out in August 1914 . Jacobs and Addams were both involved in the peace movement .
 Both women based their desire for a women’s peace movement on the notion that if women voted, war would be less likely to occur, they said .
 When she tried, in 1883, to have her name added to a voter registration list, the word ‘male’ was promptly added to existing laws . The word “male” was added in existing laws to existing voter laws .
 In 1893, she helped draft the platform for the Association for Woman Suffrage . In 1903, she became the association’s president .
 Jacobs declared that, armed with the vote, women would now see to it that injustices would be removed from the law and society . Reflecting the sentiments of many turn-of-the-century female reformers worldwide, Jacobs declared .
 Jacobs declared in 1928 that, with her help, the political and economic independence of women had been achieved during her lifetime . Jacobs proudly declared that, . with her . help, women had achieved . independence during her . lifetime, Jacobs declared .
 Fatima Jinnah worked nearly all her life for the democratic rights and welfare of Indian and Pakistani people, especially women .
 The climax of her political career occurred in 1964, when she was 71 years old . She was 71 at the time of her death .
 Millions of Jinnah’s supporters mobbed her campaign train, known as the Freedom Special, along its route, cheering her victory . Jinnah was the first woman to be elected president of Pakistan .
 Her candidacy, however, ultimately failed; Khan won the election in 1965 . Khan was elected president of the United States in 1964 .
 Fatima Jinnah campaigns for president at the age of 71 in East Pakistan . Jinnah died of heart failure in Karachi, Pakistan, two years later .
 On July 9, 1967, her untiring devotees took to the streets again, singing her praises and promising to bring greater human rights to the nation . APWorldWide Photo. .
 Fatima Jinnah was born July 31, 1893, in Karachi, India . She entered the realm of public service through a male relative . Fatima was born in 1893 .
 After the death of her father, Jinnahbhai Poonja was eight years old, she traveled to Bombay to live with her brother, Mohammed Ali Jinnah, who was 18 years her senior .
 In 1929, she and Ali Jinnah went to England where he practiced law . She and Jinnah traveled to England in 1929 to see him practice law .
 Ali Jinnah became convinced that Muslims would be secondclass citizens in an independent India . Jinnah and Jinnah believed Hindus would constitute a majority in India . India was ruled by Britain from the 19th century until 1947 .
 The 1928 Nehru Report outlined a future India in which Muslims would be denied the right to separate electorates . Muslims would not be regarded as equal to Hindus, either socially or politically . The report was published by the Nehru government in 1928 .
 Ali Jinnah then went to work to revitalize the Muslim League . The Muslim League had been established in 1906 . Jinnah went on to revive it as a political organization .
 In 1947, Pakistan declared itself separated from India, and Muslims formed their own nation . Ali Jinnah was the only Muslim leader in Pakistan .
 Fatima Jinnah joined the Muslim League, protesting against the conservative position the organization took against women . Jinnah was a leader in the organization and protested against the organization's conservative position .
 She led the All-India Muslim Women’s Committee when it was formed in 1938 . She was one of the first women to lead the All India Muslim Women's Committee .
 Fatima Jinnah made a tour of India, forming branches of the committee, student federations and women’s educational cooperatives . Jinnah formed a medical college and a women's hospital in India .
 The All-India Muslim Women’s Committee also supported the demand for a separate Pakistan . The Muslim women's committee has also backed the demand . Pakistan is one of the most populous countries in Pakistan .
 Ali Jinnah claimed the position of governor general after Pakistan gained independence . Fatima Jinnah became his spokesperson and hostess . She was Fatima's hostess at the time .
 When Ali Jinnah died the following year, Fatima plunged into a period of depression, mourning, and seclusion from public life . Fatima was a member of the Jinnah family .
 Jinnah’s governance was followed by a number of short-lived administrations, and by 1956 politics had dissolved into factionalism . Ali Jinnah was succeeded by a series of factionalist administrations .
 On October 7, 1958, a presidential proclamation announced the imposition of marital law . General Ayub Khan assumed the presidency . The law was imposed in 1958 .
 Jinnah reemerged in Pakistan’s political life to campaign for Muslim League candidates in 1964 . Jinnah was a member of Pakistan's Muslim League . He re-emerged into Pakistan's political life in 1964 to campaign .
 The Muslim League must put forth a viable candidate in upcoming elections to oppose the regime of Ayub Khan . The experience of meeting with and talking to citizens convinced her that the Muslim League needs a candidate .
 She realized that the discontented electorate sought relief from the system of indirect election of the national legislature, imposed by Khan . Furthermore, she realized that . the . discontented voters sought relief .
 Under Khan’s system, called ‘Basic Democracy, voters chose 80,000 “Basic Democrats” who cast their ballots to choose the next president and representatives .
 Voters selected the electors in November of each election year, but the electors did not vote until the following spring . Khan had five months to “persuade” them to vote for him, giving him five months .
 Jinnah campaigned on restoring direct election of political representatives . Jinnah wanted to restore direct elections to Pakistan's representatives .
 Jinnah conceded that Khan’s economic reforms had improved Pakistan's economy . But she argued that people wanted to see freedom of the press, less corruption, and relief from the still wretched economy of Pakistan .
 Jinnah’s popular appeal, made clear during the campaign, would not be enough to convince voters to vote for a reform candidate . Jinnah's popular appeal would not convince the electors who benefited from the regime to vote .
 IChan had his own arsenal of rhetoric ready to deflect Jinnah’s popularity . Furthermore, IChan was prepared to deflect his own rhetoric .
 Jinnah’s fight for greater democratic freedoms in Pakistan was surely not in vain . Jinnah fought for greater democracy in Pakistan . He was assassinated in the early 1900s .
 Her challenge to Khan forced the Khan regime to grapple with the wishes of the Pakistani people . Although she lost the election, the worldwide publicity she generated forced the government to take a decision .
 Jinnah proved that, indeed, women are a political force to be reckoned with . Furthermore, Jinnah showed that women can be a powerful political force .
 President Ayub Khan resigned in 1969 and was succeeded by General Yahya Khan, commander-inchief of the Pakistani army . He was succeeded as President of Pakistan .
 French revolutionary writer and dramatist Olympe de Gouges wrote several controversial plays before she penned her best-known treatise .
 Her works championed equal rights for women, which plunged her directly into the male-dominated world of French revolutionary politics . Her works include works on equal rights and women's rights .
 A prolific pamphleteer, she authored more than 30 political tracts during the revolutionary period of French history . A prolific pamphlet writer, she was a French revolutionary during her youth .
 De Gouges spoke out against the dictator Maximilien Robespierre and against the guillotining of King Louis XVI . She was forced to climb the scaffold to her death in 1793 .
 The revolution shifted power from the aristocracy and the church to the middle class . The revolution began in 1881 .
 The French Revolution had multiple causes, but foremost was France’s costly wars abroad . France's costly wars overseas were the cause of the Revolution . The revolution was the result of the French Revolution .
 After the storming of the Bastille by an angry mob in 1789, and the subsequent exile of Louis XVf, a period of political turmoil ensued . Louis XVF was exiled from France after the fall of the French Revolution .
 The French Republic was formed and monarchy was abolished in 1792 . The French republic was formed after the French Revolution was formed .
 The slogan “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity’ left out France’s female population, however . The revolutionary slogan ‘Liberty’, Equality and Fraternity, left out French women, however, .
 The Jacobins instituted the radical Reign ofTerror in 1793, when 17,000 people were executed . The Committee of Public Safety executed about 17,00 people, including de Gouges .
 De Gouges’ declaration called for legal equality and equal education for women and men . The declaration also called for the abolition of the dowry and of marriage laws that discriminated against wives .
 de Gouges demanded a national theater where female playwrights could stage their performances . De Gouges also demanded that the national theater in France be a theater for women . The theater was also demanded to stage performances by women .
 Both men and women ridiculed De Gouges’ ideas, and her manifesto was never adopted . Her manifesto was not adopted .
 Following a marriage at the age of 16 to a wealthy man, she gave birth to a son . She married him at 16 and had a son with a wealthy family .
 After her husband’s death, she left for Paris to make a living at writing .
 Poorly educated, de Gouges suffered shame and embarrassment for her inability to spell and use proper grammar . She began using her mother’s name Olympe .
 Each work explored social problems and contentious political views for which she often heckled . Each work explores social issues and controversial political views .
 A Generous Man raised the issue of women’s exclusion from power . Black Slavery advocated abolition of slavery . The Convent illuminated the problems faced by women forced by family members to enter religious institutes against their will .
 De Gouges unflinchingly advocated women’s rights publicly, despite the vocal hostility her words incurred . She was a prominent advocate for women's rights in the 1980s .
 She broke new ground in the revolutionary period by being the first female to call for women’s equality . She organized women's advocacy groups, and published her views on women's rights .
 During a meeting of the Society of Revolutionary Republican Women, she directed members to form an army of 30,000 women warriors, to wrest teaching positions from men and give them to women, and to take the reins of government .
 de Gouges’ political view on the French Revolution caused her political downfall . However, it was her political views on the Revolution that finally caused her literal downfall .
 Her position vacillated wildly between supporting monarchy or republicanism . Her position fluctuated wildly between monarchy and republicanism during her life .
 At first, she welcomed the revolution, but then she backed Louis XVI when he was forced to leave his court at Versailles and live in Paris . She backed him back in 17th century when he left his court and moved to Paris .
 When the King was caught trying to escape France in 1791, she turned against him, only to change her mind and offer to defend him at his trial in 1792 . She changed her mind when she was forced to defend the King at the trial .
 She then threw her allegiance to the Republic, but opposed Robespierre’s Reign of Terror . She then fought for the Republic in France . She fought for France in 18th century .
 Committee on Public Safety viewed her as threatening and divisive . She wrote political tracts and made speeches that the Committee of Public Safety saw as threatening .
 The Three Urns, called for a federalist style of government in which power would be located in a central authority . The U.S. called for federalism .
 De Gouges defended herself as an upstanding citizen at her trial, but the Revolutionary Tribunal rejected her claims .
 Franciska Plamnikova made her way into politics via education . Like Ana FIGUEROA, she was a Czechoslovakian feminist and politician . She was a member of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia .
 She founded Czechoslovakia's first feminist organization, the Women’s Club of Prague, in 1901 . She went on to establish the Committee for Women's Suffrage in 1905 . She established the Committee of Women's
 Franciska Plamnikova touted nationalism as the means by which women could obtain equality in Czechoslovakia . She established organizations to promote patriotic feelings toward one’s nation .
 Her political activism, however, soon catapulted her onto the world stage . Her activism has seen her rise to fame .
 Ironically, her death came at the hands of the hyper-nationalist German Nazis, at whose hands she died in a concentration camp . Ironically, she was killed in concentration camp by Nazis .
 Franciska Plamnikova spent her early adulthood as a teacher and then an inspector of schools for the government . She spent her childhood as a school inspector .
 Plamnikova founded the Women's Club of Prague and Committee for Women’s Suffrage . She helped erode the power of the Austrian Imperial Diet . She also fought for women's rights .
 The women's groups, along with other liberal and nationalist organizations, hoped to establish independence from the empire . The women’s groups were among those who wanted independence .
 The Czech Lands united with neighboring Slovakia . Czechoslovakia arose from the ashes of the AustroHungarian Empire .
 During the interwar years, from 1918 to 1939, Czechoslovakia was among the most prosperous and politically stable nations in Eastern Europe, despite the ethnic diversity of people living within its borders . During the 1930s and 1940s, Czechsoslovakia had a long history of prosperity .
 After the creation of Czechoslovakia, Plamnikova served as a representative to the Municipal Council of Prague . She was also a representative of the Prague Municipal Council during the early 1960s .
 She and other suffragists celebrated extension of the franchise to women in 1920 .
 In 1923, she was elected chair of Czech Council of Women and vice chair of the International Council of women . She was also vice chair and chair of International Councils of Women .
 The International Council of Women was founded by Susan B ANTHONY, Frances WILLARD, and others in 1888 to support women’s emancipation throughout the world . Susan BANTHONY was Susan WILLARD .
 The council did not demand woman suffrage, since doing so would have alienated some of its more conservative members . The council didn't demand women suffrage since it did not want to alienate some members of the council .
 In 1925, Plamnikova became a member of the Czechoslovakian legislature, and in 1929 she was elected a senator . In 1929, she became a senator for Czechoslovakia .
 She lobbied for equal status for women in all professions, arguing particularly vehemently that women should be granted judicial posts . She lobbied particularly vehemently for women to be granted posts in the courts .
 Womens Equality in Czechoslovakia and The Political, Economic, and Social Position of Women in Czechsoslovakia . Women in the political, economic, and social position of women in the country .
 The Munich Agreement, signed September 30, 1938, gave the Sudetenland to the Nazi government of Germany . The area was an area populated by Germans but within Czechoslovakia’s borders .
 When the Wehrmacht occupied the Czechoslovakian state in March 1939, the Czech government fled to London . The Czech government continued to operate as a government-inexile in London .
 Plamnikova visited London in 1939 in an effort to secure Great Britain’s intervention on behalf of occupied Czechoslovakia . In 1939, she visited London to secure British intervention in her country's intervention .
 In May 1942, Reinhard Heydrich was shot by Czech resistance fighters in Prague . Reinhard was made protector of Bohemia and Moravia in 1941 . He had ordered the concentration of Polish Jews in ghettos .
 In retaliation, Nazi occupation forces arrested hundreds of Czechs in Prague . Franciska Plamnikova was one of the Czechs arrested .
 She and other Czechs involved in resistance were sent to concentration camps, where she died in 1942 . Plamnikova perished in a concentration camp .
 NWU combined women’s struggle for freedom from sex discrimination with their desire for Nigerian independence . NWU was formed by the Nigerian National Union of Nigerian women .
 Ransome-Kuti became a national figure when she forced a British official to abolish the tax he imposed on women traders . She forced him to abandon his office and to abandon the office .
 Following this success, RansomeKuti began campaigning for independence from Great Britain . Following the success of the campaign, the group campaigned for independence in Scotland .
 Within the African feminist community, she is best known for her egalitarian approach to organizing women regardless of ethnicity or class . She is the founder of the African Feminist Movement .
 Nigeria became a crown colony, directly controlled by the British government, in 1914 . Nigeria is now a British-controlled crown colony .
 The Nigerian struggle for independence began in the 1940s and ended with the establishment of a republic in 1960 . The struggle for freedom of expression in Nigeria ended in the 1950s and 1960 .
 She attended the Anglican Church Primary School and later the Abeokuta Girls’ Grammar School . She left for Manchester, England, to study in Manchester .
 There, she studied domestic sciences and music at Wincham Hall College . She also studied domestic science and music there .
 Upon receiving her teaching credentials, she returned to Nigeria and taught at the Abeokuta Girls’ Grammar School from 1923 to 1924 .
 She met the Reverend Israel Ransome-Kuti, an Anglican minister, who was also the principal of the Abeokuta girls’ school . She met him when she was at the school .
 Reverend Israel Ransome-Kuti became the first president of the Nigerian Union of Teachers from 1931 to 1954 . The NUT was the first multiethnic and nationalist association in the country .
 Funmilayo Ransome-Kuti's struggle for independence grew out of her agitation for women’s rights . She was a pioneer of women's rights in Kenya .
 In 1942, she founded the Abeokuta Ladies’ Club for educated women involved in charitable work . In 1942 she founded a Ladies' Club in the capital .
 She organized a club to help educate market women, called the Social Welfare for Market Women . Then she organized a group to educate women in the market .
 In Nigeria, women contribute much of the family income by marketing their palm oil and other products in public open-air markets . Women contribute to their families by selling palm oil in public markets .
 The ALC and the market women's club merged to form the Egba Women’s Union . Soon to be called the Nigerian Women's Union . The Egba women's union is soon to be known as the Nigerian women's Union.
 During its years as a British crown colony, much of its wealth came into British hands . Much of the country's wealth was taken into account by the British government .
 The Alake, Oba Ademola II, imposed a tax on the market women’s businesses . The tax was imposed on women's businesses in Nigeria . Oba was the ruler of Alake .
 Women employed in food processing plants began to complain of discriminatory wages . They joined the Nigerian Women’s Union, too .
 In addition to protesting the Alake’s abuses, the union began calling for suffrage . The union was also calling for women's rights .
 NWU confronted the Alake by petition, by bringing lawsuits, and by demanding audits of his records . The NWU says it will challenge him by petition and by bringing audits .
 10,000 women camped around his offices, singing and chanting anticolonial songs . When all these recourses failed, he was arrested .
 Alake abdicated his position in 1949 . As a result, the tax was abolished .
 Nnamdi Azikiwe, president of the NCNC, led Nigerians in the fight for independence . Ransome-Kuti disagreed with his tyrannical style of leadership and began seeking support for independence through women's organizations .
 She associated with the Women’s International Democratic Federation, an organization with socialist leanings . She was a member of the W.I.F. organization with a socialist leaning .
 Ransome-Kuti became convinced that only China and Eastern bloc countries were truly creating equality between the sexes . After traveling to China and the Eastern bloc, she became convinced .
 When Nigeria gained independence in I960, she was once again free to travel . She visited Europe and the United States, representing women's interests at international seminars and conferences .
 In 1977, while she was visiting her son Fela Kuti, government troops raided and burned his house in retaliation for his criticism of the military junta, raping several of his wives . She was killed in 1977 in a raid on her son's house .
 The intruders threw RansomeKuti from a second-story window; she died of injuries later . She was thrown from the window by the intruders; she later died .
 Fela Kuti, a musician, named his next album Cojfinfor the Head of State . Kuti's next album will be his first album to be released in Nigeria .
 Brockman, Norbert C An African Biographical Dictionary. Brockman was born in Africa . Brockman is the author of an African Dictionary .
 Nawal el Saadawi is an outspoken feminist and critic of the Egyptian government’s treatment of women . Once referred to as the Simone de BEAUVOIR of the Arab world, she is a critic of women's rights in Egypt .
 She has published more than 20 books in Arabic, which have been translated into English, Japanese, Indonesian, Persian, Persian and Turkish .
 Her popularity among English-speaking audiences has brought greater awareness of the plight of Arab women throughout the world . Her popularity in English has led to greater awareness for Arab women worldwide .
 She was born on October 27, 1932, in the village of Kafr Tahlah near the Nile River . An official in the Egyptian Ministry of Education insured the education of all nine of his children .
 Her nonfiction book alMar’ah tva-al-Jins was published in 1972, and the government fired her from her position . Then, a storm of controversy erupted .
 El Saadawi’s contention that women were equal to men at the dawn of humanity incensed political and religious authorities . He argued that women should have been equal at the start of humanity . The claim incensed religious and political authorities .
 el Saadawi: Men were able to subjugate women and deprive them of their status within the culture . Because of economic conditions, men were able, he says, to dominate women .
 Most inflammatory was her notion of women’s mental and biological superiority to men . Her notion of a woman's mental and physical superiority to women is inflammatory .
 Al-Mar’ah wa-al-Jins examined the double standard between men and women regarding premarital sex and sexual discrimination . The study also examined a double standard in the sexual harassment of women and men .
 el Saadawi lost her job as the chief editor of a health journal, and her position as the assistant general secretary of the Medical Association of Egypt .
 The outcry over her book actually advanced el Saadawi’s career in the medical and political realm . The outcry has actually advanced her career .
 From 1979 to 1980 she was appointed as the U.N. Advisor for the Women’s Programme in Africa and the Middle East .
 El Saadawi’s political activism began to eclipse her work in medicine, however, . She became an outspoken advocate for women's rights and gender equality .
 In 1981, she and several hundred other Egyptian intellectuals were jailed because of their criticism of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat’s domestic policies . She and others were jailed for criticizing Sadat's policies .
 Egyptian society in the 20th century has been divided by the question of whether it should become an Islamic state or remain a secular nation . Egypt is a secular state in which freedom of speech is protected and religious differences are tolerated .
 Egypt's population is about 90 percent Muslim, with a significant minority identifying themselves as Coptic Christian . Egypt’s population of about 90% Muslim, about a quarter of the population is Coptic .
 The Christians are remnants of those that remained after Egypt separated from the Roman Empire in the fifth century . The Christians remain in Egypt today .
 Some Islamic fundamentalists have resorted to violence to further their goals . The government has been accused of human rights abuses in attempting to quell fundamentalists’ actions .
 Islamic groups insist on women’s traditionally subordinate position to men, while feminists such as el Saadawi protest restrictions and discrimination against women . In the midst of religious frictions, the question of women's rights remains divisive .
 The government released el Saadawi and other inmates from prison when President Sadat was assassinated by Islamic fundamentalists in October 1981 . The government was forced to release the prisoners after Sadat's assassination .
 El Saadawi organized the Arab Women’s Solidarity Association in 1982 . The group is dedicated to educating women about women's issues in the Arab world .
 The Egyptian government shut AWSA down in 1991, after the organization denounced the 1991 Gulf War . Even as the U.N. supported AWSA, the Egyptian government closed AWSA in 1991 .
 El Saadawi attempted to sue the government over its action, but she lost her case . She was forced to leave the country after the incident .
 In 1996, its headquarters shifted back to Cairo, Egypt, its home office today . The company moved to Cairo in 1996 .
 El Saadawi’s book Memoirs from the Womens Prison is based upon her experiences in prison in the early 1980s . She offers a firsthand account of resistance to state violence .
 She recounts the solidarity formed among the men and women imprisoned . The greater understanding developed between Muslims and intellectuals, she says .
 The Autobiography of Nawal el Saadawi, tells of the gender discrimination she experienced while growing up in her family, and as an adult in the society at large . It tells the story of a woman who experienced gender discrimination .
 Some criticize el Saadawi’s diatribe against Egyptian culture . Others believe it must be read by anyone who wants to understand the Arab world .
 Independence and women’s rights both involved notions of freedom and liberty from oppressive forces . Independence is a form of freedom from oppressive, controlling forces . Women's rights both involve notions of liberty and freedom from oppression, freedom .
 The nationalist fight for independence brought women outside the harem and into the public to take part in actions against British rule . Women took to the streets to protest against the British government .
 Nominal independence from Britain in 1922 did not result in freedom for Egyptian women . Egyptian women were not allowed to vote in 1922 .
 Egypt's ruler Ismail forced to sell his stock in the Suez Canal Company to Britain’s Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli in 1875 . The canal deal gave Britain a vital stake in the strategic waterway .
 When Egypt suspended interest payments on its foreign debts in 1880, Britain and France assumed control of its finances . Egypt's finances were taken into account by the British and French .
 Egyptian intellectuals and members of the military rioted in Alexandria, which led to the British bombardment of the city in 1882 and the establishment of a British protectorate over Egypt . Egyptian intellectuals rioted, leading to a British bombardment .
 Nationalists gained independence in 1922, but Britain continued to dominate the government . Britain dominated the government until independence was achieved in 1922 .
 The new 1923 constitution conferred voting rights only upon Egyptian men . The new constitution granted voting rights to Egyptian men only .
 In 1952, a military revolution, led by Carnal Abdel Nasser, drove out the corrupt British-supported King Farouk . The revolution ended British rule in the Middle East, ending British rule .
 In the army, Nasser found a general sense of frustration at continued British dominance . Nasser was frustrated with British dominance in the army .
 Nasser organized a band of nationalists called the Free Officers’ Society . Nasser staged a nearly bloodless coup against the government in July .
 The coup brought a revolutionary council into power to govern Egypt . The council was unable to secure the support of the government because of its plans for land reform .
 The council controlled the press, declarred that until Egyptians could be educated in democracy, the Arab Social Union would exercise political control . The council was controlled by women's rights activists in Egypt .
 In 1956, Nasser unveiled a new constitution that gave all citizens basic human rights . Nasser became prime minister, and in 1956 he unveiled the constitution .
 Huda Sha’rawi was born in Cairo . She was the daughter of a wealthy administrator . Sha'rawi died at the age of 50 .
 She grew up watching her brother receive all the advantages of a good education and the ability to make career choices . She says she's proud of her brother's success .
 When she turned 13, Huda’s parents arranged her engagement to an older cousin as his second wife . Meanwhile, she was engaged to a cousin when she was just 13 . Huda's parents arranged an engagement to her cousin as a second wife to him .
 When Huda balked at the marriage, her parents reminded her that if she were to refuse, her father’s name and reputation would suffer . Huda's parents told her that her father's name would suffer if she did not accept .
 She relented to the marriage, although the couple lived apart for several years . The couple later lived apart, but she relented .
 Huda reconciled to her husband when sbe turned 21 and bore two children . She reconciled with him when she turned 21 . Huda was married to a man who died in 2006 .
 When in public, women were required to show their modesty by wearing a hegab, or veil, covering their faces at all times . The veil was required to cover women's faces when they were in public .
 Sha’rawi began organizing lectures on the topic of the hegab and on health and welfare issues related especially to poorer women . Sha'rawi organized lectures on health, welfare issues and health issues related to poor women .
 Sharawi beckoned women out of their homes and harems and into the streets to support independence . After World War I, Sharawi called for women to take part in the fight for independence from Morocco .
 She organized the largest women’s anti-British demonstration in Egyptian history . Egyptian women's anti-UK protest was the largest in Egypt's history .
 When she returned from a women’s conference in Europe, she stepped off the train and removed her veil .
 The women who had come to greet her were surprised, but soon many of them also took off their veils in a public demonstration of defiance . The women in the audience were surprised by the reaction .
 Later that year, Sha’rawi organized the Egyptian Feminist Union and became its first president, a position she held for 24 years . Sha'rawi was also the first president of the Egyptian feminist Union .
 Egyptian government created first secondary school for girls in 1927 . Under pressure from the EFU, the government created the school .
 The EFU organized the Arab Feminist Conference in 1944, with Sharawi acting as president . Sharawi acted as president of the conference . The conference was held in 1944 .
 The conference created the All-Arab Federation of Women to organize the efforts of feminists all over the Arab world . The conference was held in Cairo, Egypt .
 Sharawi did not live to see the new Egyptian state that resulted from the 1952 revolution . Sharawi died in 1952, but he was able to take part in the revolution .
 The new government granted women’s right to vote in 1956 but forced the closure of the Egyptian Feminist Union . The government granted the right to the vote in 1952 but closed the union in 1956 .
 Later, the women were allowed to reorganize as a social service organization under the name of Huda Sharawi Association . The women were later allowed to organize as social service organizations .
 Mariya Trubnikova founded a philanthropic charity that evolved into Russia's first women's organization . Mariya was one of three Russian women who were known collectively as the Triumvirate .
 Trubnikova’s philanthropic work and feminism illustrate one of the pitfalls of 19th-century benevolence that she managed to avoid . She avoided one of many pitfalls of the 19th century benevolences .
 Upper-class women tended to view themselves as the moral saviors of working-class girls . They often made their aid contingent upon the moral rectitude of their recipients . Upper class women often made aid contingent on moral rectitudes of recipients .
 Charity workers made housing for homeless women possible only if the needy pledged to attend church and stop drinking . Some charity workers also made housing available only if they attended church and stopped drinking .
 Mariya Trubnikova viewed those she helped as capable women who had simply been dealt a rough hand in life . She provided education, rather than moral lessons, as the key to their betterment .
 Ivashev and his French mistress Camille Ledentu, Mariya learned to love a rebellion early on in her life . Mariya was born in Moscow, Russia, and is married to Russian President Vladimir Putin . She is the daughter of Russian president Vladimir Putin, who is
 Her father had been a Decembrist and had been exiled to Siberia by the Russian government as a result . Her father was exiled to Siberian by the government and had to be sent to Siberia . She is the daughter of a former Decemrist who was exiled from Siberia .
 The Decembrists staged an unsuccessful uprising on December 14, 1825 . The group of aristocratic military men staged an uprising against the government .
 The rebellion provided inspiration for succeeding generations of Russian dissidents . The rebellion led to the death of many of the country's leaders .
 Mariya’s aunt and grandmother tutored her at home in European languages and literature and in Russian culture and history . Mariya was also tutored at home by her grandmother and aunt .
 Mariya married newspaperman Konstantin V Trubnikov, editor of the Stock Exchange News, in 1854 . Mariya was also married to newspaperman Konstantin V Trubkov, editor of Stock Exchange News .
 Konstantin Trubnikov wooed his wife-to-be by reading passages from Alexandr Ivanovich Herzen’s memoirs . Also a rebel, he read passages from Herzen's memoirs to woo his future wife .
 Herzen advocated a unique Russian path to socialism that he called peasant populism . Herzen was known for his views of peasant populism in Russia .
 St. Petersburg’s intellectuals with literary entertainment at the salon she held in her home . The salon was attended by a group of intellectuals .
 Like Inessa ARMAND, Trubnikova came to her feminist consciousness through her noblesse oblige desire to help St. Catherine's Hospital . Trubnickova was inspired by her desire to become a doctor .
 Trubnikova, d’Hericourt, and Marie GOEGG all corresponded regularly, forming one of Europe's first women’s rights literary networks . The network was formed by women's rights activists in the 1930s .
 In 1859, Trubnikova, Nadezhda Stasova and Anna Filosfova launched the Society for Cheap Lodgings . The Triumvirate would later develop into a feminist voice in St. Petersburg .
 The group focused particularly on women who had lost their husbands, or escaped abusive relationships, and orphaned children . The group was formed in response to a number of women who were involved in abusive relationships .
 The society’s members disagreed on the degree to which their organization should supervise and monitor its residents’ activities, particularly concerning drinking and prostitution . The society disagreed on how to monitor and monitor residents' activities, including prostitution .
 The founders, including Trubnikova, favored a less regulatory approach, while others desired nearly total control over the residents . The founders favored less regulatory approaches .
 Those who disagreed eventually withdrew and formed their own organization . The former won out, and those who disagreed agreed to form their own .
 In 1861, the society was formally chartered and turned its attention to the Vyborg Side, the most denigrated section of St. Louis Cathedral . The society was officially chartered in 1861 .
 The Bolshevik women's movement would glean its main supporters . It was from these quarters that the Bolshevik women’s movement would emerge .
 In the meantime, Trubnikova and her cohorts set to work in the Vyborg Side . In the future, the Russian city will host a series of events .
 Their first goal was to provide affordable housing . Next, they found work that would sustain the women through their difficult times . The women's first goal is to find affordable housing; next, they find work .
 The Society for Cheap Lodgings set up a dressmaking shop, a communal kitchen, and an evening school for working women . All endeavors were staffed by the Society .
 The workers learned various skills from copyediting to translating to bookbinding . The workers also helped to promulgate educational literature, including works by women, to younger readers .
 The Women’s Publishing Cooperative translated Charles Darwin's On the Origin of the Species and an edition of Jenny d’Hericourfs Society for the Emancipation of Women . The Women's Publishing Cooperative produced translations of intellectual works such as Charles Darwin’’
 Inspired by the opening of Vassar College in the United States, the women’s actions, they hoped, would eventually lead to the first European university for women .
 Two years later, the Russian Ministry of Education decided in favor of the women . Two years after the decision, the women were allowed to attend school in Russia .
 The courses were to be taught by university professors and would be open to members of both sexes .
 Men simply stopped attending, and a venue for women’s higher education was born . Women's higher education is now a national institution .
 By the late 1890s, Trubnikova suffered from ill health and dire financial problems . She was separated from her husband since 1869 and by then in her 60s, she was in the middle of financial difficulties .
 She had withdrawn from activism in the 1880s and had spent some time in a mental institution . She withdrew from activism and spent time in mental institutions .
 Her friend and comrade, Anna Filosfova, continued their work and brought Russian women's organizations to the international women’s suffrage movement before her own death in 1912 . Her friend continued their efforts and brought their work to international women's suffrage movements .
 Readers of Wollstonecraft’s works during her lifetime considered her—and sometimes dismissed her—as a polemicist, or one who writes argumentative compositions to provoke or respond to controversy .
 Critics deem her offerings essays, or short works of literary prose, written in an analytical, speculative, or interpretive style . Centuries later, critics deem her offering essays or short prose written in a literary style . Her works include works of fiction, essays and short prose .
 During the 18th century, women were commonly thought to be overly sentimental, weak, and devoid of reason . Wollstonecraft railed against social conventions against which she railed . The 18th-century novel is based on the idea that women were overly sentimental and weak .
 Her essays endure precisely because of their trenchant social analyses of women’s roles in society . Her essays include trenchant analysis of women's role in society and social issues .
 Wollstonecraft's celebrated Vindication of the Rights of Woman became the founding work of the British women’s rights movement . The celebrated work was the work of a British women's rights movement.
 Wollstonecraft was born on April 27, 1759, in Spitalfields, London, in 1759 . She was the daughter of a wealthy weaver and the son of an Irish weaver .
 The family wandered throughout England and Wales in search of regaining the older Wollstonecraffs lost fortune . The family's search for the lost fortune led to the death of the older family .
 Mary had little education and resented her parents' favor of their eldest son . Mary resented their father's preference for their eldest child . Mary was married to the eldest son, who died in 1918 .
 As a teenager, Mary Wollstonecraft took a job as a domestic servant to a wealthy widow in Bath . It gave her an early glimpse into the life of privileged dissipation in the city .
 She quit her job when her mother’s ill health beckoned her home . She soon quit her position when she was forced to return home .
 In 1784, Wollstonecraft helped her sister Eliza escape an unhappy marriage, and then she witnessed further sorrows a year later when her good friend Fanny Blood, a tuberculosis victim, died in childbirth .
 When she traveled to France in 1792 she fell in love with an American literary critic, Gilbert Imlay, and bore their daughter Fanny . Fanny was born in France and died in 1783 .
 In 1797 she married the radical author and philosopher William Godwin when she discovered she was pregnant by him . She died 10 days after giving birth to their child Mary, in 1797 .
 Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, her daughter, went on to write the famous novel Frankenstein in 1818 . Shelley's daughter, Mary, wrote the novel Frankenstein .
 Mary Wollstonecraft and Fanny Blood opened a school in Newington Green, England, in 1784 . The school was the hub of the Dissenters’ community, the group of Protestants who refused to conform to the doctrine and worship imposed by the Ghurch of England
 The Reverend Richard Price led the community and became an acquaintance of Mary Wollstonecraft . The Reverend Price became a friend of the author of the novel .
 Returning to England after Blood’s death, Wollstonecraft wrote her first book . She returned to England to write her first novel after Blood's death .
 A Fiction , told the semiautobiographical tale of the protagonist’s unhappy childhood and her resentment toward the frivolities of the upper classes . A Fiction .
 When the Kingsboroughs dismissed her, Wollstonecraft determined to make a living by her pen . She wrote a novel, The Child Child, and The Child of War, in which she became a writer .
 Between 1787 and 1790, Wollstonecraft authored cautionary tales for children . The cautionary tale was published in 1787 to 1790 .
 In addition, she penned an enthusiastic review of Catharine MACAULAY’s book on female education .
 Her mind engaged with the question of human rights when she read the intellectual exchange between Edmund Burke and Reverend Richard Price . Her mind first engaged with human rights in the book .
 Burke bitterly criticizes the upheaval as an attack on religion and individual rights . Burke bitterly criticized the upheaval for attacking individual rights and religion .
 Wollstonecraft argued that liberty is a birthright granted by God and thus cannot be undermined . In the former, which she published under a pseudonym, she wrote under the pseudonym . She argued in the latter that liberty can be undermined by God, not liberty .
 Wollstonecraft took issue with Burke’s assertion that “a woman is but an animal, and an animal not of the highest order” by agreeing with him . In the latter, she agreed with him by agreeing .
 Wollstonecraft went on to highlight the social conventions that rendered women helpless, aimless creatures . She said that women were helpless and aimless animals .
 Vindication of the Rights of Woman argued that the rights of men are not based on sex but rather on personhood . The rights of women were upheld on the basis of personhood rather than sex .
 Rather than mindlessly conforming to society’s notion of feminine beauty, women should cultivate their sense of reason and educate themselves . Wollstonecraft herself had done the same thing .
 Wollstonecraft believed that women’s sexuality, in the form of motherhood, controlled her destiny . Paradoxically, she still believed that . women's sexuality in the . form of . motherhood .
 Wollstonecraft’s ideas focused on individual rationality, not for altering social institutions . Gouges called for a female national assembly, not a woman .
 Wollstonecraft’s essays turned the intellectual wheels of feminist thinking in its earliest stages, a controversial step to take, indeed .
 Aidoo has been an outspoken critic of the African postcolonial culture in which she lives . Aidoo is a critic of postcolonial colonial culture in Africa .
 She contends that the colonial period of Africa’s history has negatively affected Africans’ views of themselves . These negative perceptions are still evident today, she says .
 She has criticized young Africans who proclaim their love of their homeland but then move elsewhere to enjoy the material benefits of wealthier nations . She has also criticized young educated Africans who move elsewhere .
 During Bill Clinton’s visit to Ghana in 1998, she ridiculed the local media for making the visit of a white politician look like the second coming of the Messiah . During the visit, she said the media made the visit look like like the Messiah.
 Aidoo was born on March 23, 1942, in the Fanti village of Abeadzi Kyakor in central Ghana (then called the Gold Coast) The Fanti are one of the major ethnic groups in Ghana . Aidoo is one of Ghana's most famous people .
 Fler's father, Nana Yaw Fama, chief of Abeadzi Kyakor, and her mother, Maame Abba Abasema, imbued their daughter with a strong sense of African traditions, even as they encouraged their daughter's Western education .
 After several battles with the Ashanti, another major Ghanaian ethnic group, the British proclaimed Ghana a British protectorate in 1901 .
 A protectorate was a British colony in which Great Britain established rule but allowed natives to retain some rights . The country was a protectorate in which the British established control but retained some of the rights of natives .
 White settlers were not allowed to own land and could not live in some areas of Ghana . White settlers could not own land or own land .
 Ghana became the first African nation to achieve independence from British rule in 1957 . Nkrumah’s party saw further gains in elections in 1954 and 1956 .
 Several military coups have hindered Ghana’s ability to peacefully maintain its constitutional democracy . Several coups since then, however, have hindered the country's ability to peaceful democracy .
 She had also won a short story competition during her college years, sponsored by the Mbari club in Ibadan .
 English is the official language of Ghana, but about 44 percent of the inhabitants, including the Fanti, speak Akan . The Fanti is an ethnic group in Ghana .
 Aidoo often incorporates words from her native language Twi, a dialect of Akan dialect, in her plays and stories . Aidoo's Twi plays and plays often incorporate words from Twi .
 From 1974 to 1975, she served as a consulting professor to the Washington bureau of the PhelpsStokes Fund’s Ethnic Studies Program . She served as an Ethnic Studies consultant from 1974 to 1976 .
 Her reasons for leaving are unclear . Some sources suggest that her activism resulted in her leaving, while others accuse the Rawlings administration of refusing to accept a woman involved in politics .
 She treats the challenges faced by African women as integral to the problems faced by Ghanaian society, before and after colonization . The challenges include the struggle to obtain independence within marriage and motherhood .
 Reflections from a Black-Eyed Squint is about the colonial past of Sissie, England, Bavaria and Bavaria .
 Aidoo’s traditional African roots are palpable in her most often produced play, Anowa .
 A woman, Anowa, marries a man, Kofi, against the will of her parents in the 1870s . Anowa marries Kofi against her parents' will in the 18th century .
 Anowa becomes alienated when Kofi begins bolstering his business by trading in slaves . Kofi becomes increasingly alienated when Anowa begins to become increasingly alienated .
 Anowas sanity slips when no one understands or heeds her moral position . Her moral position is not strong enough to keep her sanity in check .
 Husband and wife commit suicide in the end, when Anowa reveals that Kofi uses his success in slaving to mask his impotence . Kofi and Anowa commit suicide after Anowa finds out Kofi is impotent .
 Aidoo establishes a connection between the moral life of an individual and the morality of the society in which she lives . Aidoo thus establishes a . connection between an individual's moral life, an individual . and the morals of the . society that she lives.
 The tales in Aidoo’s short story collection No Sweetness Here address themes related to African postcolonial society . Aidoo's short stories include tales of African post-colonial society in Africa .
 Born in Peru, Allende has lived primarily in Chile, Venezuela, and the United States . Allende is a Chilean novelist and author .
 Her 1985 award-winning novel La casa de los espiritus {The House of the Spirits] combines a realistic narrative with surrealistic, dream-like, and mythological elements .
 La casa de los espiritus, Isabel Allende’s first major work, began as a letter to her dying grandfather . Allende's first work, La Casa, was a letter from her grandfather to her grandfather .
 One of her more recent books, Paula, was written for her daughter who slipped into a coma in 1991 and died in 1992 . Paula's daughter died in 1991 .
 In it, Allende places her own early childhood, adolescence, and adulthood against the backdrop of political upheaval in Chile and her family’s history in their homeland . Allende's first novel, "Chile," was published in 1973 .
 In Paula, Allende comments that magical realism is not only a literary device; rather, it is the essence of how she lives . Allende says magical realism isn't only literary device, but it's the essence she lives in her life .
 Allende was born on August 2, 1942, into an influential Chilean family . She was born into a powerful and influential family .
 She lived with her maternal grandparents, until her mother remarried another diplomat . She was raised by her mother, who was a diplomat . Her mother is now married to a former diplomat .
 She worked as a journalist after high school . She tried a variety of different aspects of newspaper reporting, including horoscopes .
 Salvador Allende was the first freely elected socialist president in the Western Hemisphere . Allende won the close presidential election in 1970 . He was elected president of Chile in 1973 .
 His party had pledged nationalization of 81 major industrial and other enterprises . His party, the Popular Unity, had pledged a rapid completion of the agrarian reform begun under former president .
 Hundreds of businesses were "temporarily" taken over by the state . The Allende government went beyond that program, taking over businesses .
 The United States sought to bring down the Allende regime in part by cutting off all aid to Chile . Meanwhile, the U.S. sought to end the regime by cutting aid to all aid .
 In September 1973, military forces led by General Augusto Pinochet Ugarte seized power in Chile . The military seized control of the country in 1973 .
 Thousands of political prisoners were tortured and “disappeared” during the aftermath of the coup . Thousands were tortured during the coup, including political prisoners, who were tortured .
 Pinochet declared himself president in June 1974, and ruled by decree . Backed by the military, Pinochet was backed by his military . Pinochet ruled in the 1970s .
 A plebiscite held in 1978 confirmed Pinochet's leadership and policies . A growing number of dissenters claimed that the vote was not valid . Pinochet was at the peak of his popularity due to the 'economic miracle'
 Christian Democrat Patricio Aylwin Azocar took office in 1990 as the first elected president since Allende in 1970 . Pinochet continued to wield much power as head of the armed forces . He could not legally be removed under the constitution until 1997 .
 In 1998, Pinochet was arrested in London, where he had sought medical treatment, on a warrant from Spain requesting his extradition on murder charges . Pinochet had been seeking medical treatment in London .
 He returned to Chile in 2000, where he has congressional immunity, but the Chilean courts are threatening to strip him of his immunity . He returned in 2000 to Chile, but he has been threatened by the courts .
 Isabel Allende was working as a journalist and scriptwriter when Chilean society broke apart . She was working at the time of the country's first democratic revolution .
 She remained in Chile to provide care for victims of the coup, helping many escape . She helped many of the victims escape .
 She remained, in part, because she wanted to better understand what her country was going through . She remained in part because of her desire to understand what it was going on .
 Allende contemplated direct action against the Pinochet regime but decided instead to flee . Allende was forced to flee the country in order to escape the regime's control .
 She and her husband, engineer Miguel Frias, had married in 1962 . She chose Venezuela for her country of choice, which she and husband were born in 1961 .
 Allende credits journalism and the theater with training her to become a writer . Allende says she credits both journalism and theater with helping her become an artist .
 Reporting taught her to control language, the basic tool that writers employ . She says she learned to use the language of reporting to control her writing .
 In very little space and time, she explains, journalists are forced to grab readers and involve them immediately in a story . She explains that in very little time, journalists must grab readers immediately in the story .
 Allende was also writing scripts when she was working at the newspaper .
 She looked for publishers in the yellow pages, sent it away, but everyone told her it was too long . She sent the book away from publishers, but they rejected it .
 Allende contacted a literary agent in Spain, where the book was published in 1985 . Allende's book is published in Spain and published in 1986 .
 La casa de los espiritus tells the story of the Trueba family from the turn of the 20th century to more contemporary times . The film is set in Spain and is set to be shown at La Casa .
 The patriarch, Esteban, is a volatile, proud man who passionately clings to his land and to his wife, Clara . Allende's grandmother represents Allende’s grandmother, and their daughter, Blanca .
 At a young age, Clara developed telepathic abilities . She developed telekinesis (moving objects by mental concentration) and predicting future .
 Her husband, the patriarch Esteban, tries desperately to hold onto the past and control Clara and the other women in his family, but he fails . Clara's husband tries to hold on the past but fails to control her .
 Critics have praised La casa de los espiritus as a novel that gives a voice to the feminine side of humanity . Critics have also praised the novel as a voice too often silenced by the masculine side .
 Allende admits that her story reflects a feminine point of view of the world . She wants her work to be judged on its literary merits, not on whether or not it represents a woman’s view .
 Cuentos de Eva Luna (The Stories of Eva Luna, 1991) feature the heroine relating several stories to her lover Carle . The stories feature several stories from Eva Luna relating to Carle's lover .
 After divorcing her first husband, Allende remarried and now lives in California . Allende is still married and has a daughter with a son .
 A Memoir of the Senses , a curious combination cookbook and sex manual, and two novels, is a book of sorts . The book also includes a sex manual and sex manuals .
 Angelou, like Jacobs, found relief in African-American spirituality, make-believe, and in the telling of her story . Angelou and Jacobs were both African-Americans and women of color . Jacobs: Angelou's story is one of the most enduring examples of African-
 Maya Angelou’s best-known autobiographical work, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, is used in American high schools and college literature courses to teach students about autobiography .
 The book begins with Angelou’s discovery of racism when her Uncle Willie, a cripple, hides in a potato bin to evade a white lynch mob . Angelou's Uncle Willie hid in a potty bin to avoid a white mob .
 Angelou reacted to the horror of the experience by refusing to talk for the next five years of her life . Angelou refused to speak for five years after the experience .
 I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings ends with the birth of Angelou’s son Guy . Angelou believes her son Guy may have saved her life .
 Her son’s constant questions about his background and heritage finally drove Angelou to the library . Angelou researched the answers to her son's questions . Her son was born in New Jersey .
 Her ability to know gave her an important sense of control of her life that she had previously lacked, she says . She says she now feels like she is in control of life .
 Maya Angelou given the name Marguerite Johnson when she was born on April 4, 1928 . Angelou was born in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1928 .
 Vivian Baxter was born in St. Louis, Missouri, to Vivian and Bailey Baxter, a nurse and a doorman . She was married to Bailey Baxter; he is now a father of two .
 When her parents divorced, she and her brother, Bailey, were sent to Stamps, Arkansas, and raised by their devout grandmother, Annie Henderson . She and Bailey were raised by Annie Henderson, owner of a general store .
 Angelou studied with Martha GRAHAM and Frank Silvera, who introduced her to the world of theater . Angelou went on to study drama and dance .
 She wrote Cabaret for Freedom in collaboration with Godfrey Cambridge . She appeared in Look Away on Broadway .
 In the early 1960s, Angelou traveled to Africa with her son and began applying her writing skills in a different medium . Angelou's work was published in New York, New York and New York .
 While living in Cairo she became the associate editor of The Arab Observer, the only English language weekly in the Middle East, and contributed articles to Ghanaian Times .
 She was asked by Martin Luther King, Jr., to lead the Southern Christian Leadership Conference’s northern division . Active in the civil rights movement, she was also asked by MLK to lead his northern division.
 In the meantime, she began working on / Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, which she adapted for a CBS television special .
 She was nominated for her acting in the television saga Roots . She costarred in the film How to Make an American Quilt its 1995 .
 Throughout her numerous writing and acting ventures, Angelou turned again and again to autobiography . Angelou's autobiography is one of her most popular works .
 Gather Together in My Name deals with her efforts to raise her son . Singin and Swingin’s and Gettin Merry Like Christmas describe her first marriage to Tosh Angelos .
 The Heart of a Woman recounts her work with Martin Luther King, Jr., and Malcolm X . She arrived in Africa in 1963 and worked with Malcolm X in Africa .
 All God’s Children Need Traveling Shoes is a memoir about African culture . The author describes her reaction to African culture, her desire to make Africa her home, and her reasons for returning .
 In 1982, Angelou’s teleplay Sister, Sister featured the story of the lives of members of a middle-class black family . Angelou's teleplay featured the life of a black family in the middle class .
 In 1988 she directed Errol John’s play Moon on a Rainbow Shawl, about the inhabitants of a tenement in Trinidad . In 1988, she directed a play about tenement residents of the country .
 She was named the Ladies Home journal'Womzn of the Year in 1975 . She was elected to the Women’s Hall of Fame in 1998 .
 In 1993, she was invited to read “On the Pulse of the Morning” at Bill Clinton’s inauguration . She won perhaps her highest honor yet when Bill Clinton invited her to read at his 1993 inauguration .
 The poem calls for an acknowledgment of humanity’s wrongs and for a united commitment to social improvement in the years to come .
 A Thematic Guide to Ganadian Literature explores the Canadian aesthetic and identity . The guide is a guide to literature in Canada .
 The gothic novel was most popular between the mid18th and the mid-19th centuries . It typically featured a combination of mystery, horror, suspense, and a passionate love story . The Gothic novel was popular between 18th and 19th century .
 The gothic setting, of utmost importance to the genre, often involves a cold, gray castle atop a dark, foreboding mountain . Gothic settings, of course, often involve a cold gray castle .
 Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein epitomizes all of the above, with the addition of a hideous monster, created by the troubled Dr. Dr. Frankenstein .
 Frankenstein is chased into oblivion by the creature, whose encounters in the world drive him mad . Frankenstein is finally chased away from the world by the monster .
 The Handmaid's Tale won the Governor General’s Award in 1985 . The award was Canada's highest literary honor . The novel is now published in Australia and Canada .
 Modeled after George Orwell’s novel 1984, the story is set in a futuristic world that sometimes seems too close for comfort to the contemporary world . The film is based on Orwell's novel 1984 .
 Women lose all their rights, are confined to a convent, and must be fully clothed in long, hooded gowns at all times . Women must also wear hooded dresses and long hooded clothing .
 The Handmaid's Tale is horrifying, primarily to those sensitive to the history of women’s rights and female seclusion . It's horrifying, but it's not the worst of the worst .
 Margaret Atwood was born on November 18, 1939, in Ottawa, Canada, to entomologist Carl Edmund Atwood and Margaret Killam Atwood . She was born in 1939 .
 She spent half of each year growing up in the north Ontario wilderness, where her father conducted research . Her father spent half each year in the wilderness .
 The Canadian backwoods forms the backdrop, both literally and psychologically, of much of Atwood’s writing . Atwood is best known for writing about the backwoods .
 Atwood was educated at home by her mother, until she attended Leaside High School in Toronto, graduating in 1957 . Atwood is best known for her role in the television series "Lara"
 Atwood gave birth to their daughter in 1976 . She and novelist Graeme Gibson moved to a farm near Alliston, Ontario, where she gave birth . Atwood and Gibson lived on the farm .
 The problems faced by contemporary women drive much of Atwood's fiction . Atwood’s fiction is based on the experiences of contemporary women .
 The Edible Woman explores the choices made by Marian McAlpin, the story’s narrator . The story is set in a fictional setting in New York City .
 While McAlpin has a wry sense of humor (instead of feeling consumed with lust and love) the engaged feels as though she is being eaten . Instead of lust, she feels like she's being eaten, she's consumed by lust .
 In Lady Oracle, the narrator, Joan, a writer of gothic novels, weaves her own troubled life’s story into the fictions she writes . Joan is a troubled woman who writes about her troubled life . Joan's troubled life is woven into her own fictions
 Ultimately, she tries to simulate her own death; whether she succeeds or not is left unclear . Whether she succeeds in the film is not clear .
 The novel features the friendship between three women, each of whom have befriended the same woman, Zenia, who has seduced their male lovers . Zenia seduces her male lovers and seduces the other three women .
 Alias Grace features a Ganadian housemaid named Grace tried for the murder of her employer and his mistress . The film is set in Ganadian society .
 Cat's Eye charts the course of artist Elaine Risley’s memory of her childhood in Toronto . Elaine's memory of the Toronto childhood is captured in a new book, Cat's Eyes .
 Atwood’s poetry volumes explore the Ganadian frontier, both geographically and psychically . Many of Atwood's books explore the frontier, such as his latest volume of poetry .
 The natural world is often the haunted Canadian wilderness, where humans are trapped by the interior of their minds and the uncontrollable landscape . The Canadian wilderness is often a haunted place for humans to be trapped .
 Atwood presents the historical Susanna Moodie , a genteel 19th-century English poet ill-prepared for life in the Canadian wilderness . Moodie is a poet who lived in the wilderness in Canada .
 Atwood reshaped the poet's own words in these verses to describe the immigrant’s experiences . The poet's experiences are described in these poems by Atwood .
 Moodie, through Atwood, reflects on the land’s power to define human life . Moodie's son was killed by a raging river in the book, and Moodie reflects on his mother's grief .
 Atwood has also been involved in a number of activist organizations, including Amnesty International, PEN, and Artists Against Racism .
 Mariama Ba’s career included teaching primary school and writing novels, essays, and newspaper articles .
 A second novel, Un Chant ecarlate (Scarlet Song), was published posthumously in 1981 . He died at the age of 92 .
 Throughout her life she actively participated in women’s rights issues . Throughout her career she also actively participated .
 Mariama Ba was born in Senegal, a nation on Africa’s west coast, also known as the Gold Coast .
 Senegalese first encountered north African Muslims in the 10th century . People in a center of international trade, they encountered Muslims in 10th Century .
 The ancient West African empires of Ghana, Mali, and Songhai controlled eastern parts of what is now Senegal from the 300s through the 16th century .
 Mali Empire (c. 1240-1500) was based on the lucrative north-south gold trade . Mali Empire was one of Africa’s richest and strongest civilizations .
 In the mid-15th century, Portuguese sailors arrived, followed by the French, English, and Dutch in the 16th century . The Dutch, Portuguese, French, and English arrived in the early 1600s .
 Slave traders purchased several million West Africans and shipped them to the American colonies . The French, who dominated the area, abolished the practice in 1848 . Slave traders were responsible for shipping slaves to the U.S.
 Senegal became an independent nation of Senegal in 1960 . By the end of World War II, activists throughout Africa resisted colonial rule . In 1960, Senegal became the first African nation to become independent .
 Close ties between France and Senegal remain deeply entrenched in the culture, however . Close ties are still strong in Senegal's culture .
 Senegal’s official language is French . Most Senegalese speak the language of the dominant native tribal group, the Wolof . The Wolof are also Mariama Ba's people .
 Poverty is widespread, with life expectancy for men at 48 years, and women 50 years . Life expectancy for women at 50 years and men at just 48 years .
 Educators speak French, but since most children cannot speak it, the dropout rate is high . The dropout rates are high in France .
 The government hesitates to discontinue French as the official language because of the fear that choosing one ethnic language over another would create tensions among the various peoples .
 The use of French also enhances international trade and aid to Senegal . Senegal is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Mariama's grandparents reared Mariama in a traditional Muslim household in Dakar, Senegal . Mariama was reared by her grandparents in traditional Muslim home in Dakare .
 Her father became the first minister of health appointed by the newly independent Senegal government . Ba’s mother died when she was very young . Her father was the first health minister of Senegal .
 Her grandparents discouraged her education; many Muslims see no reason for educating girls . Her grandparents saw her education as a child, but she was discouraged by her grandparents .
 Mariama wanted to learn more about her religion, so she studied the Qur’an, the holy book of Islam, under the direction of the Imam (a Muslim scholar) of the Central Mosque in Dakar, Senegal .
 She obtained her teaching diploma in 1947 and taught school for 12 years . She then took an administrative position with the Senegalese Regional Inspection of Teaching of Teaching .
 She married a member of Parliament, Obeye Diop, with whom she had nine children . She died at the age of 92 .
 While raising her children, Ba worked as a secretary and taught school . Ba has since raised her children and taught them at school .
 Une si longue lettre has been called “the most deeply felt presentation of the female condition in African fiction” by Africanist Abiola Irele .
 Both of Ba’s novels were written in a conversational style, a reflection of traditional oral-based Senegalese society . griot women are members of groups of traveling poets, musicians, and folk historians .
 Une si longue lettre presents the life of Ramatoulaye, a Muslim widow reflecting upon her life and marriage after her husband’s death . The Muslim widow reflects upon her marriage and life after the death .
 She recounts her experiences in a letter written to her friend, Aissatou . She recounts the experience in the letter to a friend .
 The revelations begin with a description of her anguish upon being told that her husband, Modou, had decided to take a second wife . She describes her anguish when she was told of her husband's decision .
 Ramatoulaye ultimately overcomes her anguish and jealousy and begins to sympathize with Binetou, whose father died, and whose mother saw no other alternative .
 Mariama Ba’s second novel, Un Chant ecarlate, traces the tumultous relationship between a Senegalese man and his young French wife . Ba's second novel is about the difficulties faced by interracial couples .
 Mariama Ba understood writing as a political act, especially in Africa . She understood that writing was a form of activism .
 In addition to fiction writing, she wrote and spoke extensively on feminist issues such as women’s legal rights in marriage, child custody, and the practice of polygamy in African society . She also spoke extensively about the need for women's education, and polygamy in Africa .
 Aphra Behn’s body was buried in Westminster Abbey in London in 1883 .
 Aphra Behn had died four days after she was born and that claims upon her as any kind of a writer were baseless . One scholar tried to make her disappear from England .
 Aphra Behn stepped beyond the bounds of proper womanhood, and in doing so, she threatened existing social norms . Like Catharine MACAULAY and CHRISTINE DE PIZAN, she stepped beyond social norms, and did so .
 Macaulay, Pizan, Behn, and Behn all experienced society’s censor as a result . Behn: “Macaulay and Behan experienced society's censors’ reaction to their work .
 Behn coaxed society beyond its outer limits that she, like the others, won both fame and fortune . Behn: "It was precisely because she coaxed people beyond their outer limits" Behn won fame by coaxing society beyond limits that won her fortune .
 Aphra Behn challenged the power that men held in the world of literature in her work and by achieving notoriety as a writer . Behn challenges the power of men in the literary world by challenging the power he held in her writing . Behne challenged the world's power in his work
 She traveled to the Dutch West Indies, became involved in a slave revolt, and spied for English King Charles II against the Dutch . She landed in jail as a result, landing in jail .
 Behn forced the men who jealously guarded their literary reputations to admit her success . Behn was the first English female writer to earn her living by her pen . She was also the first woman to earn a living by writing in the UK .
 Behn managed to roll three lives into one . Feminist, political activist, and abolitionist, Behn . Behn was an abolitionist and feminist activist .
 Behn was the daughter of Elizabeth Denham and Bartholomew J Denham, an innkeeper in Canterbury, England, and was poorly educated but well read . Behn died at the age of 91 in August 18, 1918 . Behne was born in Canterbury and died at age
 The British and Dutch fought a series of naval conflicts resulting from commercial rivalry between the two nations . The Dutch and the British fought a number of naval wars in the early years .
 The final battles confirmed the end of the Netherlands as a world power and the dominance of the British navy . The Dutch were defeated in the final battles of the Great War .
 Behn filed reports that the Dutch planned to invade England, which were ignored . Behn's reports still survive, including that she warned the Dutch were going to invade .
 She borrowed the money, and when she could not repay the debt, she was imprisoned . She was imprisoned for not being able to repay the money .
 The playwright published her first play, The Forc’d Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom, in 1670 . Her first play was published in the 1670s .
 The play explored the differing experiences of women in a male-dominated world . The play is set to be shown on BBC2 at 8.30pm tonight .
 Female figures confronted men and presented their own views to the audience . Her female figures confronted male figures and presented the own views .
 Behn's plays advocated education for women and suggested that men and women should love freely as equals . Behn’s plays were based on the idea of equality for women in order to be equal and equal .
 Some of her plays included homoerotic scenes involving both men and women . Some of the plays were homo erotic scenes .
 She readily admitted that some men and women would find her plays offensive and would likely seek revenge . The actress readily admitted some men would find the plays offensive . She also said some women would seek revenge for the offensive plays .
 The female characters in her plays often behave in ways that society deemed unladylike . The playwright's plays are often seen as 'unladylike'
 Male playwrights such as William Shakespeare often created feminine characters whose personalities pleased men . They portrayed women as evil cuckolders, such as Desdemona in Othello, or evil cucksolds .
 Behn's women characters were frank and open about women's physical and emotional needs, even though they acknowledged that women must barter and negotiate with men to get what they want . Behn’s women characters, on the other .
 Behn continued to write successful plays, poems, and political speeches . Despite ridicule from other authors, Behn wrote successful plays and poems . Behn continues to write a novel and a novel .
 Behn took on the issue of slavery in her most successful work, Oroonoko . Behn's most successful novel was Oro on the subject of slavery .
 The slave himself, Oroonoko, spoke only through his mistress, the narrator . The narrator had a critical view of slavery, despite the narrator’s views of slavery .
 The point of view of slavery was strictly from the European colonizer, not the colonized, says historian . The point-view of slavery in slavery was that of European colonizers .
 English playwrights insisted that educated writers need to know Latin and Greek in order to appreciate the classical dimensions of drama . The Greeks were the founders of western drama in the ancient world .
 Behn scoffed at this notion, dismissing it as a kind of secret code that enabled men to exclude the uneducated from achieving stature . Behn said it was not a secret code, but a code to exclude men from succeeding in society .
 All women together ought to let flowers fall on the tomb of Aphra Behn . For it is she who earned them the right to speak their minds, she earned her right .
 Pearl Buck, the first American woman Nobel Prize-winner in literature, wrote many realistic novels about peasants’ lives in China . Buck wrote about such taboo subjects as abortion and childbirth .
 Her lifelong concern for humankind, especially social justice and Asian populations, informed her social activism and writing . She is a lifelong advocate for humankind .
 In her essays Of Men and Women and American Unity and Asia, she prophesized that American racist and sexist attitudes would ultimately undermine the victory of the allied forces .
 The work brought her up to the level of Mark Twain as Americas most popular author abroad . The work . brought her . up to a level of . Mark Twain . Twain as America's most popular . author .
 The Good Earth offered Western readers a glimpse of Chinese peasant life . It was the first time Westerners had seen Chinese peasants in China .
 Pearl was born on June 26, 1892, in Hillsboro, West Virginia, to Presbyterian missionaries Absalom Sydenstricker and Caroline Stuffing, assigned to work in China .
 Her mother gave birth to her while on furlough from her activities in northern China . She was born in China . Her mother is now a mother of two .
 Pearl’s mother tutored her daughter at home during the Boxer Rebellion of 1900, an anti-Western uprising in northern China . Pearl's family was forced to flee to Shanghai, and her mother was tutored at home . Pearl was born in Shanghai .
 Her parents insisted that she receive a college education in the United States . She graduated from Randolph Macon College for Women in Lynchburg, Virginia, in 1914 .
 Her mother’s failing health required her immediate return to China . She enrolled in graduate studies, but she returned to China after her mother's illness .
 Pearl married John Lossing Buck, an agriculture economist also on a mission in China, in 1917 . Pearl married Buck in 1918 .
 John Buck and John Buck settled in rural northern China, where John Buck researched agricultural methods . Buck and Buck traveled to northern China to study farming techniques . Buck is now a successful businessman in China .
 In 1921, Buck accepted a teaching post at a university in Nanjing, where the couple remained until 1934 . Buck and his wife remained together until the end of the war .
 Pearl Buck cared for the couple’s mentally retarded daughter, Carol, and her parents . Pearl Buck taught English courses occasionally, but primarily she cared for Carol Buck .
 A revolutionary uprising against Western imperialism in 1927 threatened to drive them from China . A family of a Chinese family hid them, and they escaped harm . They escaped harm from a revolutionary uprising in 1927 .
 Buck’s first eight books, written between 1930 and 1938, earned her the prestigious Nobel Prize for literature in 1938 . Buck won the Nobel Prize in 1938 for her work . Buck's first eight novels earned her a Nobel Prize .
 Pearl Buck was the first American woman to receive the Nobel Prize in literature . West Wind was a cultural study of ancient and modernizing China as seen through the eyes of Pearl Buck . Buck was first American to win Nobel Prize .
 Perkasie, Pa. a traditional Chinese woman and her modernizing husband . The Pearl S Buck Foundation, Inc., Inc. is a modernizing family .
 Other books from the period include The Mother and The Exile . The Exile is a biography of her parents .
 In 1933, Buck returned to the United States where she earned a second M.A. from Yale . Buck also returned to Yale for a second degree in 1933 .
 She divorced John Buck and married her publisher, Richard J Walsh of John Day Publishers .
 In the 1940s, Buck continued to write prolifically, but her attentions turned more toward racial justice and, inevitably, to the war that threatened to destroy China . Buck's best known works include The War of China and The Great Depression .
 In 1949, she established the Welcome House, an Asian-American adoption agency . The Welcome House was established in 1949, and is now a national adoption center .
 During World War II, Buck worked for the Office of War Information writing radio plays broadcast to China . Buck also wrote radio plays for the OWP during the war .
 Buck supported the United States war effort against Japan and worked for the United China Relief Dragon Seed and The Promise . Buck unequivocally rallied to the Chinese cause against Japanese aggression . Buck worked for The Promise {X'AAy)
 Her support for the U.S. cooled when the nation dropped the world’s first atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 . Her support of the United States cooled, however, when the bombs were dropped .
 FBI memo hints that Buck’s concern for racial justice indicated that she was a communist . FBI memo: Buck was concerned about racial justice, not racial justice . Buck was convicted of being a communist, FBI memo says .
 Pearl S Buck Foundation secured food, clothing, and education for part-American children whose American fathers had abandoned them in the countries of their mothers . After Walsh’s death in 1960, Buck formed the foundation .
 The foundation soon expanded and built centers overseas, staffed by counselors, nurses, and teachers . The foundation is based in New York, New Jersey .
 The Pearl S Buck Foundation continues to be one of the world’s most successful humanitarian organizations . The foundation has weathered accusations of financial irregularities .
 Buck’s later novels lacked the social significance of much of her earlier work, but they continued to be best-selling works . Buck's later novels were best-sellers .
 Emily Elizabeth Dickinson is an American poet and author of the poem "There is no frigate like a book"
 Emily Dickinson's poetry won acclaim only after the poet’s death . Her friends and family acknowledged the brilliance of her imagination during her lifetime .
 In the originality of her imagination and in the free-verse form and impressionistic qualities of her poetry she resembled no other writers . Victorian America was perhaps unable to fully appreciate her character trait .
 Her life was reclusive—she was born, lived, and died almost entirely in the same house . Yet her emotional and mental life traveled with utter abandon through worlds of human experiences . She was a reclusive, reclusive woman .
 Emily Dickinson stands as one of America’s preeminent literary figures of the 19 th century . Emily Dickinson is one of the most famous women in American history .
 Emily Dickinson was middle child of Edward Dickinson, Edward Dickinson and Emily Norcross . Dickinson was a middle child . Dickinson died at the age of 92 .
 Edward Dickinson moved to Amherst in 1840 after Samuel Fowler Dickinson’s finances collapsed due to his generous support for the college . Dickinson moved his young family to a home on North Pleasant Street in 1840 . Dickinson's family moved to the home after his father's finances collapsed .
 Emily Dickinson died in 1886 . Edward Dickinson repurchased the Homestead in 1855 . The family prospered again .
 Dickinson studied at Amherst Academy and attended services at the First Church Congregational not long after the Second Great Awakening . Dickinson attended the church during a period of revivalism in which revivalism swept across the U.S.
 Dickinson, however, hesitated to commit herself to Christ as her family and society expected her to do . Dickinson's family, society expected Dickinson to commit her to Christ . Dickinson struggled to commit to Christ, but she committed herself to her faith .
 From 1847 to 1848, Dickinson left home to attend Mount Holyoke Female Seminary . Dickinson exhibited an intellectual curiosity, a preference for solitude and a pride in creativity .
 After college, Dickinson wandered from the Dickinson Homestead only twice . Dickinson wandered away from the Homestead twice .
 Emily and her sister Lavinia visited the Capitol in 1854 when Edward Dickinson was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives . Emily Dickinson and her sisters traveled to visit their cousins in Philadelphia . Emily was married to Edward Dickinson .
 Emily Dickinson's health required a trip to Boston to be treated by an eye specialist . Emily Dickinson’s health required her to visit a Boston eye specialist a decade later . Dickinson was diagnosed with an eye condition in 2006 .
 Dickinson began copying her poems neatly into little booklets called fascicles that she stitched together herself . Around 1858 Dickinson began sharing some of her poems with friends .
 Emily Dickinson, one of America’s greatest poets, as a child . Genteel Victorian Victorian Emily Dickinson .
 Jackson agreed to be Dickinson’s literary executor, but she died before Dickinson . Jackson was the executor of Dickinson's death .
 Emily Dickinson spent much of her time caring for her invalid mother and grieving over the passing of many of her friends and family . Dickinson spent most of her life caring for the invalid mother, and grieving .
 She suffered from kidney disease for several years before her own death on May 15, 1886 .
 A friend, and Austin Dickinson’s mistress, Mabel Loomis Todd, edited the poems, and Thomas Wentworth Higginson published and promoted them .
 Poems by Emily Dickinson appeared in 1890 and another slim volume by the same name was published in 1891 . Poems were published in the same volume .
 Emily Dickinson's niece Martha Dickinson Bianchi published more of her aunt's works in the 1910s and 1920s . Emily Dickinson’s niece Martha wrote more of the works .
 British novelist Mary Ann Evans, author of best-selling novels depicting English country life, kept her real identity in Victorian England as shrouded as the heavy chintz draperies .
 She adopted two different spellings of her name, then made up a new name altogether, George Eliot, which obscured her gender . George Eliot was born George Eliot and died in 1881 .
 She also worked under a pseudonym for a newspaper and a literary journal . She was also known for her work in a book and newspaper .
 Victorian period coincided with rise of industrial capitalism and new middle class . Upper-class Britons felt threatened by the rise of the new economic order . The Victorian period was dominated by industrial capitalism .
 Victorians emphasized proper behavior and manners, which many found repressive . Mary Ann Evans and the company she kept were among them .
 Her father, Robert Evans, made a living as a land agent and property manager . Robert Evans is a former property manager and land agent . He is the daughter of Robert Evans .
 Mary Ann was the youngest of five children, and she developed a close relationship with her brother Isaac . Mary Ann's brother Isaac was also a musician .
 Isaac left for Foleshill in 1824, while Mary Ann was sent to Miss Latham’s boarding school . Mary Ann left to be educated in 1823, while Isaac went to school in 1826 . Isaac and Mary Ann were married in 1828 .
 Mary Ann was lonely and isolated without her brother’s companionship, Mary Ann found comfort in books .
 She crawled out of her shell at another boarding school, where a teacher took an interest in her intellect . She soon crawled out from her shell and soon crawled back into her shell .
 She cultivated a sophisticated speaking voice and studied piano and the German language . Her voice was cultivated in a sophisticated voice .
 Mary Ann’s behavior strained the relationship between the two . Soon, however, Mary Ann and Mary Ann's relationship was strained .
 Mary Ann finds friends in a couple, Charles and Cara Bray, who doubted their Christian faith . Mary Ann found friends in the couple's home in Northampton, Massachusetts .
 In 1844, Mary Ann began working on a translation of the controversial German theologian David Friedrich Strauss’s Das Leben Jesu . The book became one of the most influential intellectual books in England .
 She received no credit for the translation in the English edition . Her reputation among England’s intellectuals grew .
 She also wrote articles anonymously for a newspaper, the Coventry Herald, which she also wrote anonymously .
 Through the Brays, Mary Ann also met John Chapman, a publisher and bookseller . The Brays also helped Mary Ann meet Chapman, who is now a publisher .
 He asked her to write an article for his scholarly journal, the Westminster Review . The Westminster Review is a scholarly journal by the author .
 When she finished the piece, she delivered it personally to Chapman’s home in London, where he lived with his wife and mistress . She delivered the piece personally to his London home .
 When Chapman and Mary Ann began flirting, his wife and mistress conspired to end their relationship . Chapman and his mistress were flirting with each other when they first met .
 Mary Ann’s father had died and she needed a place to live . In the meantime, Mary Ann had moved in to a new home . Mary Ann's father died .
 Chapman persuaded her to move into his house in London, promising that his wife and mistress would accept and consent to the living arrangements . Chapman persuaded the woman to move in to his home in London . He promised that the couple would accept the living arrangement . Chapman was married to his mistress,
 Mary Ann agreed, warning him that her relationship with him would be purely professional . Mary Ann told him that she would not be having an affair with him . She agreed, saying her relationship would be strictly professional .
 She edited Westminster Review for two years, although her name never appeared on the publication . She edited the Westminster Review, but never published her name .
 While living at the Chapman home, Mary Ann met writer George Lewes . Lewes, a married man, believed that married couples should be free to have affairs .
 By choosing to defy convention, Mary Ann faced public censure and the possibility of losing whatever editing jobs might come her way . Mary Ann's decision to take action was a bold move .
 She was also aware that, as Lewes’s live-in partner, she would be entitled to nothing if they separate or if he died .
 Her decision ended many of her friendships as well as her relationship with her beloved brother Isaac . Her decision to kill herself ended many friendships and her brother's relationship .
 When she had finished a story called “The Sad Fortunes of the Reverend Amos Barton,” she asked Lewes to send it to his publisher, John Blackwood . Blackwood was the publisher of the story .
 The story was published in 1857 under the name George Eliot, the name Mary Ann Evans chose as her nom de plume, or pen name .
 The next year, Blackwood published Adam Bede, which became a literary sensation . Blackwood's next novel, The Great War, became a major success .
 A humbly born, pretty girl named Hetty Sorrel gets caught between the honest devotion of her homely lover Adam Bede and the affections of an unprincipled but wealthy admirer .
 Sorrel becomes pregnant, lets her baby die, and is sentenced to death for infanticide . Sorrel was sentenced to the death of her baby, but was spared .
 Adam Bede author feared public would no longer continue to buy her books . Blackwood found out that a woman living out of wedlock with a married man was the author of the book .
 He reluctantly published Eliot’s The Mill on the Floss the next year; his fears proved unfounded . He reluctantly . published Eliot's The Mill On The Floss next year .
 Evans suffered from the publicity—much of it negative -- that her controversial life created . Nevertheless, Evans suffered much of the publicity that she had created .
 Two other novels, Silas Marner and Middlemarch, followed in 1861 and 1871, respectively . The novels were published in 1871 .
 By this time, Mary Ann Evans’s stories about rural English life had made her a rich woman . Evans's stories made her famous for their stories .
 Evans’s business manager, John Cross, proposed marriage in 1880 . Cross was 20 years younger than Evans, and Evans was 20 .
 Evans accepted, but the marriage did not last long . She died seven months later on December 22, 1880 . Evans accepted the marriage .
 Nigerian/British novelist, British novelist, scriptwriter, and publisher Buchi Emecheta is one of the most prolific and most acclaimed Nigerian writers today . He is best known for his work in Nigeria and Britain .
 She has written 19 published books, numerous essay, plays, and children's books . She has also written numerous essays, plays and plays .
 Her work deals mostly with tribal cultural norms that prevent women’s full participation in society, against a backdrop of clashing colonial and native cultures before and after Nigerian independence .
 Emecheta’s books mark a turning point in Nigerian literary history, as no writer had treated the subject of women’�s subjugation before . No Nigerian writer had written a book on the subject before .
 Great Britain directly controlled Nigeria as a crown colony from 1914-1960 . Great Britain controlled Nigeria from 1914 to 1960 .
 After independence, tensions between various ethnic groups heightened . After independence and the Republic of Nigeria was formed, tensions heightened .
 Two coups resulted in attempts by the eastern region, dominated by the Ibo people, to secede and form the Republic of Biafra . The eastern region is dominated by Ibo, who make up about 17 percent of the Nigerian population .
 After three years of civil war and a million deaths, the Ibo were forced back into the Republic of Nigeria . A million people were killed in the three-year conflict .
 Buchi Emecheta was born on July 21, 1944, in Yaba, a small village near the capital city of Lagos, into the Ibo tribe . She was born in a village near Lagos .
 Emecheta’s tribal heritage played an important role in her adult life and career . Although both parents died when she was young, both her parents died . Both parents were from the same tribe .
 The oldest woman in the traditional Ibo household is the matriarch . She gathers the young children around her and tells stories about ancestors and tribal origins . The oldest Ibo woman is a traditional Nigerian woman .
 As a child, Emecheta sat on her aunt’s knees as she told stories nightly to all the village children . She sat on the aunt's knees as a child . She now lives in a village in the Philippines .
 Emecheta has remarked that she could not imagine a job more important than that . She has said she is proud of her job as an artist .
 The couple had five children, but they separated permanently after Onwordi burned the manuscript of her first novel . The couple split after she burned her manuscript of a novel .
 Other than guest speaker appearances at various American universities, she has lived in London . She visits relatives in Nigeria frequently .
 Since 1986 she has operated her own publishing company, Ogwugwu Afor Company, named after an Ibo goddess . She has operated the publishing company since 1986 . She is the founder of the company named after a goddess of Ibo .
 In the Ditch —a British term meaning “on the dole” — is written as diary entries that recall Emecheta’s own failed marriage and struggles raising her children .
 While overall the tone of the book is morose, it is infused with moments of humor . The book is a dark, dark book with a dark theme .
 The Joys of Motherhood discusses the role of mothers in Ibo society . Motherhood is a key part of the culture of Ibo culture .
 The protagonist, Nnu Ego, marries, but she is sent home in disgrace when she fails to have children quickly enough . The protagonist was sent home after failing to have a baby quickly enough enough .
 Her father arranges another marriage to an unknown man . This time, she bears several female children, but poverty and pregnancy wear her down . Poverty and a futile attempt to produce the desired boy .
 Although women’s role as mothers is crucial to Ibo life, tribal society also teaches women to be slaves to their male offspring as well as to their husbands . The title is thus ironic; although women's role as . mothers is . crucial to . life, it also teaches
 A Novel relates the story of Nigeria’s move for independence through the collapse of the Biafran secessionist movement . The novel is based in Nigeria and is published by Nigeria's National Institute of Education .
 The collision of Western values with a traditional agrarian society forms the backdrop of the upheaval . Western values and traditional agriculture are at odds with each other .
 Unlike Emecheta’s other individualistic works, this book tells the story of entire societies and cultures caught up in a bloody, gut-wrenching civil war . Unlike the author's other individualist works, the book is about entire societies caught up .
 Emecheta remains objective as she recounts atrocities committed by all sides of the war, both military and civilian . She says she remains objective and remains objective in recounting atrocities .
 The London publisher of Destination Biafra, Allison & Busby, elected to reduce Emecheta’s text by half, resulting in a clumsy, uneven narrative .
 The Slave Girl earned her both the Jock Campbell Award and the Best Third World Writer prize . Her second novel, Second-Class Citizen, won the Daughter of Mark Twain Award .
 Emecheta has scripted television movies for the British Broadcasting Company . She has written children’s books, including Titch the Cat and Nowhere to Play . She also has scripted children's books inspired by her children's writing .
 Hayashi Fumiko is one of Japan’s most prolific and most popular writers . She has more than 70 books to her name, with over 70 novels published .
 Much of her work is autobiographical, some of it is controversial, and nearly all of it deals with society’s alienated outcasts . Her work is often autobiographical .
 Hayashi has won only one literary prize in Japan, the Joryu Bungakusho . Hayashi's short story Bangiku was published in English in 1956 under the title Late Chrysanthemum .
 Hayashi's work, and its reception, breach two different eras of Japanese literature . Hayashi’s work and reception of his work have been treated as though they are of two different generations .
 Until the 1980s, the writing of Japanese women was relegated to the ‘sentimental writing’ category, never receiving much critical scrutiny or acclaim . Until the 80s, Japanese women writers were relegated to "sentimental" writing .
 Sentimental writing, popular in the 18th and 19th centuries, exploited readers’ sympathy for the destitute, such as orphaned children and innocent and vulnerable women .
 More recently, literary critics have begun to integrate women’s writing into the general canon of Japanese literature .
 Hayashi’s writing, however, cannot be separated from its flamboyant author, Hayashi . Hayashi's writing is not separated from the author, but from the writer himself . The novel is set in Tokyo, Japan, and is set to be published in October
 Hayashi made the most of her status as a female writer, positioning herself in the “sentimental writing” category that, for her, meant financial, if not critical, success .
 Hayashi also employed a descriptive travel narrative in her journalistic writing . Hayashi used the term sentimental to describe her fiction .
 Hayashi drew upon the rollicking waves of her own personal life for her literary work . Hayashi's literary work was inspired by her personal experiences .
 Hayashi was born in Shimonoseki, a port city in between Kyushu and Honshu islands, on December 31, 1904 . Hayashi grew up an illegitimate daughter of her 22-year-old father, Miyata Asataro, and her 36-year
 Hayashi Kiku left with her daughter and moved in with a former employee of Miyata’s, Sawai Kisaburo, in 1910 . The three traveled around Kyushu island, selling wares from their cart, selling their wares .
 Hayashi began working her way through Onomichi Public Girls High School, graduating in 1922 . Hayashi was born in Hiroshima, Japan, with her family in Japan .
 After a few years she moved back south to Hongo on Kyushu island, where she waitressed at a cafe . She met and mingled with a group of anarchist poets .
 The work was first serialized in Nyonin Geijutsu and was an immediate success . It was serialized for the first time in a Japanese magazine .
 A sequel to Horoki appeared later in 1930, and a third was published in 1949 . Horoki is published in Japan .
 Collections of Japanese literature most often choose Horoki to represent Hayashi’s work . Horoki is often associated with Horoki .
 Hayashi's book traces the hardships and struggles of a young aspiring writer . The book is modeled on Hayashi’s own experiences, modeled on his own experiences .
 Horoki is written in the form of diary entries, interspersed with letters and poems . Horoki was born in Tokyo, Japan, and is published in Japan, Japan .
 Hayashi presents her readers with ‘truths’ about her liaisons with various literati . The book is confessional in content; Hayashi gives her readers the "truths" Hayashi's "truth"
 World War II coincided with the height of Hayashi’s popularity in Japan . Hayashi was a popular figure in Japan during the war .
 In 1931, Japanese army units invaded Manchuria, a northern region of China, as part of an aggressive program of territorial expansion . The invasion was part of a plan to expand China's borders .
 The Japanese then moved south, attacking the cities of Beijing and Shanghai in 1937 . They then fought their way on to Nanjing and fought for control of Nanjing .
 When Nanjing fell, Japanese troops went on an orgy of killing, known as the Rape of Nanjing . The Japanese troops then went on to punish the Chinese for holding up the army by their resistance .
 War between Japan and China caught the attention of the West . Criticism of Japanese aggression caused the departure of Japan from the international peacekeeping body of the time .
 Hayashi’s reaction to the war depended on the fortunes of the Japanese army, he says . Hayashi: ‘I’m not sure how much of the war will be affected by the outcome of this war.’
 Hayashi became severely critical of the war after the defeat . Hayashi was critical of his military campaigns .
 In December 1937, Hayashi became the first Japanese woman to enter Nanjing after it had fallen to Japanese troops . Hayashi won attention when she was the first woman to visit Nanjing in December 1937 .
 Hayashi is the first Japanese woman to enter the city of Hankou after it fell to the Japanese military . Hayashi escaped the notice of her supervisor and hitched a ride with another group of journalists to Hankou .
 This book is largely descriptive rather than interpretive or analytical . It was written in the style of a travel journal .
 When the war ended in defeat for the Japanese, Hayashi denounced the destruction and personal devastation caused by the war . Hayashi was a Japanese politician who died in Japan in 1945 .
 Critics have described Bangiku as a tale of a former geisha and a ruined ex-soldier, anti-war in its tone . Critics have called it antiwar .
 The determination, perseverance, and resilience exhibited by her female characters in the face of life’s unyielding hardship account for her success as a writer . Hayashi's success is due to the resilience exhibited in her characters .
 Her popularity stems from her own ability to make the most of what life gave her . Her popularity comes from her ability to get the most out of life .
 Islam is a religion that was founded in the early seventh century in the Arabian Peninsula . Islam is the first religion to be established in the Middle Ages . Islam was founded by Muslims in the 7th century .
 Prophet Mohammad based the intensely monotheistic religion on revelations he received from Allah . Prophet Mohammad was a shepherd, trader, and selfproclaimed messenger of Allah .
 Mohammad and his followers unify nomadic Bedouin tribes that inhabited the peninsula . Monotheism enabled Mohammad to unify the rival nomadic tribes . Mohammad believed in only one god .
 Muslims believe Mohammad was the last of the prophets sent by Allah, from the biblical Abraham to Jesus of Nazareth . Muslims, as those who practice this religion, are called .
 Islam did not dominate the Arabian Peninsula until 630, when the Muslim army defeated forces at Mecca, and the city came under Muslim rule . Islam dominated the Arabian peninsula until 630 .
 Al-Khansa reached adulthood before the religion was thoroughly established . He reached adulthood .
 Al-Khansa was a member of the Sharid clan, a powerful family, of the Banu Suliam people of west central Arabia . He was a powerful member of a powerful clan of the powerful family . He is believed to have been the most powerful family in the world
 Al-Khansa turned down Durayd Ibn al-Summah’s marriage proposal . Her poems mention a husband and child, though Islamic tradition indicates she had three husbands and seven children .
 Her refusal of marriage provides historians with evidence that pre-Islamic Arabian women may have had more independence in marriage and divorce .
 Arabs trained their daughters to excel in these competitions and in the compositions of the verses themselves . Arab girls were trained to write their own verses in the competition .
 Al-Khansa’s elegies earned admiration and fame throughout the Arab world . Al Khansa's elegies were among the most famous in the world .
 Most of al-Khansa’s poems deal with the lives and deaths of two of her four brothers, named Sakhr and Muawiya .
 His brother, Sakhr, was obligated by tribal custom to seek revenge for the death of his brother . He was wounded in the attempt and later died of his wounds . His brother was wounded .
 Al-Khansa’s elegies exalted the ‘manly’ virtues of battlefield courage, endurance, and leadership . Al-Khanas: The "manly" virtues of “battlefield courage and endurance are the manly virtues of leadership .
 Although elegies were considered the special domain of women, male poets still ruled the literary world in Arabia .
 According to Arabian scholar Joseph Zeidan, female elegy composers were judged by criteria set up by al-Shurara al-Fuhul, the male master poets . The criteria was set up for female poets .
 In fact, the word for literary excellence, juhulah, was derived from fahl, which originally meant a sexually superior male .
 The poetry judge Bashshar ibn Burd praised the masculine qualities of al-Khansa’s elegies, according to Zeidan . He noted that women do not write without a trace of feminine weakness .
 Some Islamic scholars claim that al-Khansa converted to Islam later in life but kept the pagan funeral traditions . Others say she referred to Allah in her poems; others acknowledge that such references were added by Muslim copyists . Some claim she met Mohammad and converted later to Islam .
 The collected poetry of al-Khansa, called Diwan, was first published outside Arabia in France in 1889 .
 American writer Maxine Hong Kingston attacks themes of racism, sexism, family history (particularly the mother/daughter relationship)
 The Woman Warrior , treats all the above in a multilayered, autobiographical narrative broken into five sections . Each section has its own theme and characters .
 Kingston wrote her story as an act of protest against the oppression of Chinese women, particularly those within her own family . Kingston wrote the story as a protest against oppression of women in her family .
 Maxine Hong Kingston was the first of Tom and Ying Lan Chew Hong’s American-born children . She was born in Stockton, California, on October 27, 1940, in 1940 .
 Kingston's father had been teaching school in Sun Woi, near Canton in Guangdong Province . He decided to leave China for the “golden mountain,” the Chinese term for America .
 He sent money that he made at a laundry home to his wife, who used the funds to pay for her training in midwifery . He sent the money to her to the To Keung School of Midwiferery in Canton .
 Tom Hong named his daughter after a blond customer who came in frequently to gamble . Tom Hong moved to Stockton to take a job in a gaming hall and named her after a customer .
 Tom and Ying Lan Hong bought another laundry in a Chinese neighborhood in Stockton, California . After the birth of their six children, they bought a laundry in the Chinese neighborhood .
 The Hong business became the social center of the Chinese-American community within Stockton . The business became a social center for the Chinese American community .
 Maxine Hong Kingston heard the ‘talk-stories, or myths and legends, at the laundry where she and the rest of the family worked in China .
 Kingston soon had a repertoire that would feed her own literary passions . Along with the talk-stories told to her by her mother, Kingston learned from her mother's stories .
 In 1962 she married Earll Kingston, an actor, with whom she had one son . She also had a son with Earll, who she married in 1962 .
 Section one of The Woman Warrior, titled “No Name Woman,” recalls the chilling tale of Kingston's father’s sister back in China . Section one is titled ‘No Name Women’ .
 After she gives birth to an illegitimate child, the family’s home is raided by masked men . The aunt's sexual indiscretion is judged as an unforgivable crime during times of deep poverty .
 No Name Woman drowns her child to purge the family of the curse she has brought upon them and commits suicide . She commits suicide to purge her family from the curse .
 In divulging the secret by writing the story, the narrator breaks generations of silence and complicity in keeping No Name Woman a nonentity . "No Name Woman" is the title of the novel, which is published in New York .
 Kingston also makes use of the ancient Chinese tale of Mulan, the girl who disguises herself as a male warrior . Like XIANG JINGYU, Kingston also uses the tale of the female warrior .
 Kingston’s heroine, Fa Mu Lan, has a husband and child and does not need to transform herself into a man to perform heroic deeds . In the second part of The Woman Warrior, “White Tigers,” ‘White Tigers’, "Fa Mu Lan
 Kingston’s young Fa Mu Lan goes up into the mountains to learn to be a warrior from two kung fu teachers . Kingston's young fa Mu Lan learns from two teachers in the mountains in a new documentary .
 She leads her army into Beijing and beheads the emperor in retaliation for causing the death of her father . She then returns to her life as a housewife and mother .
 Kingston avenges the perpetuation of the stereotypically weak Chinese female . In portraying a strong female figure like Fa Mu Lan, Kingston avengers the perpetuating of the stereotypeically weak female .
 The middle chapter of The Woman Warrior, called “Shaman,” relates the story of Kingston’s mother . Kingston's mother is the woman he writes about .
 Kingston contrasts Brave Orchid’s life in China, where she was a healer, medicine woman, exorcist, and storyteller, to her life in America . Kingston contrasts her life with that of a healer and medicine woman .
 The relationship between Brave Orchid and her daughter, and their attempt to reconcile their differing perceptions of national and self-identity, are interwoven throughout the story . The relationship is the result of the story being told by the author's daughter .
 The fourth section of The Woman Warrior deals with Brave Orchid's sister Moon Orchid’s sojourn to America and her victimization at the hands of her husband .
 The final section, “A Song for a Barbarian Reed Pipe,” treats Kingston’s own battles against sexism and racism in the U.S. The final part of the book is a song about Kingston's battles against racism and sexism .
 Kingston has also written China Men , a fictionalized history about male heroes from a ChineseAmerican perspective . Kingston also wrote China Men .
 Asian-American Women Writers, edited and with an introduction by Harold Bloom . Harold Bloom is Harold Bloom's new book, "Asian American Women Writers"
 Gabriela Mistral is a leading authority on popular education in Latin America . She is a poet, journalist and educator .
 Since her death, literary critics have remade her in the image of a saindy yet coquettish Chilean goddess, according to Elizabeth Horan . Horan: Literary critics have made her image of the saintdy yet sassy goddess, an image that she shunned
 The political and social content and message of much of her poetry and prose contradicts a saintly image . Much of her prose contradicts an image of herself as a saint .
 She represented her country abroad for almost 20 years, first as Chile’s delegate to the League of Nations, then the United Nations, and in consulates in Lisbon, Naples, and Madrid .
 In 1945, she became the first Latin American to win a Nobel Prize in literature . She was also the first woman in Latin America to win the Nobel Prize .
 Mistral was born on April 7, 1889, in the northern Chilean village of Vicuna . Mistral’s birth name was Lucila Godoy Alcayaga .
 Lucila’s mother, Petronila Alcayaga, had a 13-year-old daughter, Emelina, by a previous relationship .
 Petronila Alcayaga and Emelina Villanueva supported the family on meager teachers’ earnings . Her father was a vagabond poet, unemployed schoolteacher and sometime seminarian .
 Lucila Godoy spent her childhood and adolescence wandering from village to village in the Valle de Elqui, a farming and mining region north of Santiago, Chile’s capital .
 Lucila's mother and half-sister moved often in hopes of improving their lives, all the while encouraging Lucila to become a teacher as well . Lucila was inspired by her mother to be a teacher and mother .
 Lucila’s formal education ended at 14, and she took a series of lowwage jobs in Coquimbo and La Serena . Lucila was born in Peru and moved to the United States at age 14 .
 She was already writing poetry and prose, publishing some of it in local newspapers . She was also writing poetry .
 The early 1900s were propitious times for a young woman of talent in Chile . Chile was one of the world's most successful women artists .
 Social movements were ripening in Santiago, with a politicized working class, and women’s groups mobilizing to achieve advanced education and the vote . Women's groups were mobilizing in Santiago .
 Mistral’s resourceful personality surely contributed to her success as well . While the progressive flavor of the era was in her favor, Mistral's .
 Gabriela Mistral became headmistress at one of Chile’s most prestigious public schools in just 15 years’ time . Despite her lack of academic training, Mistral moved from working as a teacher's assistant in 1903, to obtaining a teaching certificate in 1912, to
 Mistral is best known for her rich but simple, unadorned lyrical poetry . Mistral's poetry has been translated into film and television shows .
 Fler's first forays into verse writing came after the tragic suicide of her fiance in 1900 . Fler first began writing after her fiance committed suicide .
 Mistral’s national reputation came in 1914 with the publication of “Sonetos de la Muerte” (sonnets of death), which won first prize in literary contest in Santiago .
 She drew parallels between the life of a poet and that of a religious believer . She said she drew parallels with the lives of a believer and a poet .
 She personified poetry as a haughty queen who demanded that her supplicant—the poets—perform arduous tasks to win her approval . Poems were personified by her as a queen, demanding that she perform tasks for approval .
 In “The Flowers of Air,” the Queen of Poetry instructs Mistral to climb the steepest mountain, cut flowers for her .
 In 1917, Mistral used her pen to improve education by authoring 55 entries in a series of school textbooks . Mistral's work was distributed throughout Chile and other Latin American countries .
 Mistral’s prose, poetry, and stories offered an antidote to the social and economic injustices affecting Chile at the time . Mistral's prose and poetry was an antidote for Chile's social and political injustices .
 In 1922, Jose Vasconcelos, Mexico’s secretary of education, invited her to collaborate with him in a program of educational reform that he was about to embark upon in Mexico . She was invited to join him in Mexico's educational reform .
 There she became interested in the teaching of Indian Mexicans in rural areas . She introduced mobile libraries to rural areas, where she introduced mobile library .
 Her work in Mexico, Mexico, won her the title ‘Teacher of the Nation’ in Chile, Chile . Her reputation in Mexico was also established in her homeland .
 In 1922, she published the first volume of her collected poems called Desolacion . Her poems deal with love, passion, motherhood, justice, and the natural beauty of Chilean landscapes .
 The Precursors, Delmira Augustini, Gabriela Mistral, Alfonsina Storni, Alfonina Stornsi, fuana de Ibarbourou, are the co-authors of the book "The Precursursors"
 The Tale of Genji reflects the aristocratic culture that marked this period . It was written by Genji, who was born in Japan .
 It is the cultural flower of a distinctively Japanese literary tradition, removed from the influence of Chinese hegemony . It is also a cultural flower .
 The Heian period takes its name from the imperial capital at Heian-kyo, in the city now called Kyoto . The city is now known as Kyoto, Japan .
 Historical records date the beginning of a united Japanese state in the late fourth or early fifth century . A united state of Japan was formed in the early fifth and early tenth century .
 During the Yamato period (c.0-710; also called the Kofun era), the Japanese borrowed extensively from the Chinese system of government, including the Chinese writing system . During the Japanese period (also called the Yamato era), dead Yamato rulers were buried in large tombs called
 By the ninth century, Japan began severing its links to the mainland and developed a unique culture . By the 9th century, however, Japan had begun severing ties with the mainland . Japan developed its own unique culture and its culture .
 Poetry, especially women’s poetry, was written and spoken in Japanese . Poetry—especially women's poetry -- was written in Japanese, especially in Japan .
 In early Japanese history, young and inexperienced Japanese emperors were most often controlled by a ruling aristocratic family . The spiritual center of Japanese life was still the spiritual and psychological center of life .
 Like other monarchical forms of government throughout the world, families maintained power through marriage alliances . Families maintained power by marriage alliances.
 He designed an impressive network of marriage ties to the imperial family, through which he became brother-in-law to two emperors, an uncle to one, uncle and father to another, and grandfather to two more . He also became the grandfather of two more emperors and grandfather of
 This achievement had its drawbacks, however, however; it caused internal strife and internecine warfare . This achievement was achieved in the early 1900s .
 Infighting struggles led to the demise of three emperors and the enthronement of Emperor Ichijo at the tender age of six . Infighting struggled led to Ichijos' enthrronment in 969, when he was six .
 He remained under the influence of his grandfather, Fujiwara no Michinaga . He remained in influence under his grandfather .
 In 999, Michinaga’s elevenyear-old daughter, Shoshi, became a favorite of Emperor Ichijo . Shoshi became the favorite of the Emperor in 999, becoming an 11-year old favorite .
 Murasaki Shikibu became companion and tutor to Shoshi, later Empress Akiko . Murasaki became companion of Shoshi in 1005 or 1006 . He was later companion and tutor to Akiko, who died in 1004 .
 She kept a diary, in which she provided a vivid account of court life . However, she revealed little of her own life .
 She recorded her diary in Chinese, a language normally reserved for Japanese males . Knowledge of Chinese was seen as a sign of robust masculinity in Japan .
 She described her father’s alarm at her ability to learn quickly . He expressed regret that she had not been born a boy, she said .
 Her name is a combination of part of a title that her father once held (Shikibu means “Bureau of Ceremonial”) and a nickname, Murasaki, which refers to her main female character in her novel . Murasaki means "Murasaki" and
 Her father seems to have lost his position as ceremonial master, however, as her immediate family had been sent to a province north of the capital .
 Murasaki Shikibu’s husband died two years later . The couple had a daughter in 999, but Murasaki died in 999 . Murasaki and Murasaki had a second daughter together .
 Much of the novel was written during her years as Shoshi’s tutor . While it appears she started writing before she arrived at the imperial court .
 The Tale of Genji takes place during the late 10th and early 11th centuries . Written in 54 chapters, it is set in the 10th, 11th century .
 It is composed of several story lines, each of which overlaps the others . Each of the story lines overlaps with the others, and each of them intersect .
 Prince Genji represents the ideal Japanese male aristocrat of his time . Genji was the son of an emperor and was the first Japanese prince to be born in Japan .
 At court, contests were held in which courtiers competed with one another for prizes in poetry .
 Competition involved the ability to improvise a poem by replying to someone else’s poem using the same imagery, but in a different way .
 A serious poet memorized a vast number of poems, so that he or she could compete effectively, says the poet . A serious poem memorized by a serious poet can help him compete effectively in the world .
 Best male poets won the admiration of women, who played a role in marriage politics that were ubiquitous throughout the Heian period . Of course, the best male poets .
 Murasaki Shikibu wrote it in Japanese, and not Chinese . Its popularity signaled a new appreciation for the Japanese language, and for women who used it .
 Madame Palatinate, wife of Philippe d’Orleans, was sister-in-law to King Louis XIV of France .
 She spent much of her life at the French court, witnessing one of France’s most glorious periods in history . She witnessed one of the most glorious period in history.
 As a foreigner, she wrote about 40 letters a week to friends and relatives in Germany, for at least 50 years of her life, for a total of approximately 100,000 letters . She wrote approximately 40 letters per week for about 50 years .
 Writing letters helped Madame Palatinate keep in touch with distant friends and relatives at home . Writing letters was an antidote for homesickness .
 Madame Palatinate commented on royal French ceremonies, furnishings, clothes, and political events without the biases of one who was born into that culture . As a foreigner, she commented on French ceremonies and furnishings .
 Her letters provide important and interesting details about the monarchs, mistresses, and ministers of the Royal French Court . Furthermore, her letters provide us with important details about monarchs and mistresses .
 Perhaps Palatinate herself can best explain the excitement of Louis XIV’s court . Perhaps she best explains the excitement that the court was experiencing .
 After the war ended, von der Pfalz married Charlotte von Flessen-Kassel and had two children . He had a daughter born on May 27, 1652, in Heidelberg, and Karl .
 After years of squabbling, von der Pfalz rejected his wife and contracted a marriage “to the left hand’s left hand,” meaning a marriage whose offspring would not be allowed to inherit the princely title . The marriage was contracted to a left-hand
 Liselotte von der Pfalz sent to live with her aunt and uncle in order not to expose her to the conflict between her parents . The seven-year-old was sent away from her parents in order to avoid the conflict .
 Von der Pfalz wanted his daughter to marry into the royal French family in order to protect his land and his people from the powerful and land-hungry French . He wanted to protect the land from the French .
 Philippe d’Orleans was a 31-year-old widower when he married Liselotte . Many people said that his first wife had died by poison .
 When one of her sons, Louis, died in 1682, Madame Palatinate asked to be allowed to retire permanently to a convent . She asked for permission to retire to the convent .
 King Louis XIV, however, would not permit it; he feared a public scandal would result . King Louis XV feared it would lead to a scandal .
 Palatinate and her children faced an uncertain future, since d’Orleans had squandered the family’s money . Palatine and her family faced uncertain future after d'Orleans squandering their money .
 Palatinate’s son the Due d’Orleans then became the regent, or substitute ruler of France, until Louis XV came of age . In 1715 , the King himself died, survived by his five-year-old son, Louis XV . Palat
 Writing letters became a way to reduce her homesickness and voice her frustrations . Writing letters was a way of reducing her home-sickness, she says .
 Madame Palatinate’s correspondence delights the modern reader with tales of life in 18th-century France .
 Perhaps of most interest is discovering how the royal family dealt with illnesses . Perhaps of the most interest will be discovering how they dealt with illness .
 Palatinate said that whenever she felt unwell she cured herself by exercise, diet, and simple remedies . She met her doctor soon after she arrived at court and said that she did not need him .
 A few spoonfuls of wine can cure a headache . English flannel can be used to heal arthritic knees . Black bread with laurel baked into it and held against a throbbing ear to cure an earache .
 Madame Palatinate’s prejudice against doctors irritated her royal French relatives . Her prejudice against the doctors irritated many of her relatives .
 All of the king’s courtiers—royal family members, . the king's advisers, advisers, visitors, . visitors, servants, and councillors—obeyed his wishes in all matters . The king's courtiers, all of whom he was with, followed his wishes
 Louis XIV preferred “modern” methods of medicine, administered by court physicians . Louis XIV forced his court to comply with his preference .
 Historians believe purging and bleeding may not only have been understood as cures for illnesses but may also have served as a cleansing ritual designed to enhance royal power . Historians now believe that purging may have been used as a cleaning ritual .
 No matter how often Madame Palatinate felt trapped by life at court, she did harbor a deep awe and respect for the majesty of royalty .
 Sappho understood her importance within the broad context of the literary world . Sappho was a lyric poet of the Greek lyric poet .
 Sappho's verses helped change the tone, context, and purpose of ancient Greek literature . Sappho’s verses helped to change the tones, purpose, and purposes of ancient literature .
 Homer’s Odyssey gave way to the shorter, intimate, and emotional lyric poetry composed by Sappho and her followers . Sappho's poetry was composed in the ninth and eighth centuries B.C.E. The grand epic style of poetry was popularized by Homer's Odyssey .
 Lyric poetry was sung and accompanied by a lyre . It described personal feelings of the poet toward herself and her lovers . The epic poems related tales of heroes and their exploits .
 Sappho’s poetry illuminates ancient Greek life and culture, but it reveals little about the poet herself . We do not even know whether she wrote her poems down herself, or others recorded them for her .
 Sappho was born into an aristocratic family at either Eresos or Mytilene on the island of Lesbos in the northern Aegean Sea . Sappho is one of the most famous men in Greek history . He is believed to have been born in the same place as
 She had two other brothers, including Charaxus, a merchant, and Eurygyus . She scolds her for buying the freedom of an Egyptian prostitute .
 Some scholars believe the tyrant Pittacus exiled her to the island of Syracuse for political reasons . Others believe she was exiled by Pittacus to Syracuse .
 She married a merchant from Andros named Cercolas and gave birth to a daughter, Cleis . Cleis was born in Andros and died in the same year of her birth .
 Legend has it that Sappho threw herself off the Leucadian cliffs on an island between Corfu and Ithaca . Sappho was overcome by her love for a ferryman named Phaon, according to legend .
 One of her poems, however, hints that she died at home, tended by Cleis .
 Sappho initiated a group of young girls into the rites of womanhood at Mytilene . Sappho was the first woman to be initiated by Sappho in the ancient Greek goddesses .
 She taught her girls how to sing, dance, compose poetry, and play the lyre . She also taught them how to compose poetry and compose poetry .
 The girls and their mistress formed a thiasos, or a religious association around the worship of Aphrodite, the Greek goddess of love . In addition to the girls' religious association, the girls formed a  religious association .
 Some of Sappho’s students came from long distances, such as Phocaea and Colophon, along the coast of Asia Minor, so it is assumed that Sappho's reputation as a teacher was far-reaching .
 Sappho wrote many poems detailing the nature of her erotic feelings toward some of the girls, including Anactoria, Atthis, Gongyla, Hero, and Timas . Sappho also wrote poems about the girls in her poems .
 In the late 19th century, the word lesbian, derived from the island of Lesbos on which Sappho lived, came to mean female homosexuality . The word lesbian was used to refer to female homosexuality in the early 20th century .
 In Greek culture, adolescent boys and girls spent considerable time with others of their own sex before reaching marriageable age . Intimate relationships between members of the same sex were not taboo . Sappho and her female pupils were compared to Socrates and his male students .
 fragments of her poetry were recovered in Egyptian papyrus, we assume that she and her poetry became widely known . Considering that fragments were found in Egypt papyrus we assume she was known .
 Her intimate and erotic style was considered obscene in the Middle Ages and again in the Victorian period, resulting in the loss of most of her poems . Unfortunately, most of the poems were lost .
 Sappho’s poetry is making a comeback in the late 20th century, and in our own time, Sappho's poetry is being made a comeback . Sappho was a poet of the Greek poetessessess .
 Sappho wrote in her native Aeolian dialect, using ordinary vocabulary that expressed her thoughts in a direct, unrhetorical style . Sappho used ordinary vocabulary to express her thoughts using ordinary words . Her work was published in the 18th century .
 Sweet Mother, I cannot weave my web, broken as I am by longing for a boy, of soft Aphrodite’s will. Sweet mother, I can’t weave my net, I am broken .
 Sappho’s poems are valued for their fine craftsmanship, depth of emotion, and for the glimpse they offer into Greek women's lives . Sappho's poems offer a glimpse into the Greek woman's lives, says the author .
 Bowra, Sir Cecil M. Cecil M Greek Lyric Poetry from Alcaeus to Simonides . Bowra was a Greek poet of ancient times .
 Norwegian writer Sigrid Undset won the Nobel Prize in 1928 for her historical novel Kristin Lavransdatter . The 1,400-page book explores the spiritual and earthly lives of 13th-century Norwegians . Undset's historical novel is written in three volumes
 The author's characters compel the reader to continue reading . Her characters are tragic tragedies, joys, and foibles .
 Undset interweaves the complexities of family loyalty, the pitfalls of gossip in a small rural community, and the variety of religious beliefs and practices evident in 13th-century Norway . Undset is set in the 13th century Norway .
 Kristin Lavransdatterwzs made into a film in 1995, directed by Liv Ullmann . Liv is an actress and director of Norwegian actress .
 Undset’s childhood experiences with her archaeologist father clearly affected her decision to write a historical novel . The writing of Kristin Lavransdatter affected Undset's life perhaps more markedly . Undset was inspired by the writing of her father, an archaeologist .
 Biographers and literary critics look for ways in which an author’s life shaped the fiction she produced . Often biographers look for the ways an author's life shaped her fiction .
 Undset's life was shaped by the writing of her book, rather than the other way around, she says . Undset: "In the case of Undset, however, it seems that it was the writing that shaped her life"
 As faith overtakes fate in Kristin Lavransdatter, so faith intervened in Undset's own life . Undset’s own life was the inspiration for Undset, as was his own .
 Her Christian faith directed her toward Rome, Italy, in 1909, and led her to conversion to Catholicism in 1924 . The church became the bedrock of much of her work after Kristin Lavransdatter .
 Her choice of setting her novel in 13th-century Norway, before the Protestant Reformation of the I6th century, rests on her admiration for the steadfast Catholic faith .
 In 1882, the Undsets had lived in Rome, where Sigrid’s father, Ingvald Undset, studied archaeology . The Undsets' father was an archaeologist who studied in Rome .
 Sigrid Undset was born in Kalundborg, Denmark, on May 20, 1882 . Undset became gravely ill at the time of his daughter's birth .
 The little girl had studied history and archaeology with her father until his death . Her father died at the age of 92 .
 The death of the breadwinning man meant hardship for the family members he left behind . As for so many other women of her time (see CHRISTINE DE PIZAN and Nadia BOULANGER), the death of so many others meant hardship .
 Undset’s plans to obtain a university degree had to be altered, and she became a secretary to an international company in Kristiana, Norway, instead . Undset's plans to study abroad were altered after she was told she would not be allowed to do so .
 Undset wrote novels in evenings and weekends during her 10-year stint as a secretary . Undset was a secretary during her time as a writer .
 Her first book, Fru Marta Aulie, was published in 1904 . She tried writing a contemporary story instead, and wrote a contemporary novel .
 Undset followed Fru Marta Aulie vtnLv several other contemporary novels, includingin 1911 and Vaaren in 1914 . Undset was published in 1911 and in 1914.
 In Rome, she found a circle of Scandinavian writers and intellectuals, and among them she would marry . She married the man she would later marry in Rome .
 Anders Castus Svarstad, a Norwegian painter, was already married with three children in Norway . He was the father of three children .
 The two married after Svarstad’s divorce and left for London in 1912, where they stayed for six months . The two were married in 1912 .
 Undset’s life revolved around her husband and her growing family, including her own two children and those from her first marriage . During the next seven years, Undset lived with Svarstad and his family .
 She also became acquainted with the woman suffrage movement in England . She opposed the movement that she opposed .
 When the First World War broke out, Undset took her two children back to Norway . Norway remained a neutral country during the conflict, which was neutral during the war .
 Undset Undset gave birth to their third child alone in Lillehammer, Norway . Svarstad was to follow, but he did not, and Undset died in childbirth .
 The Great War had caused a breakdown in religious faiths for many people, for Undset the war had the opposite effect . Undset was the only survivor of the Great War .
 Undset, like her parents, had been a freethinker, tied to no particular faith . After the war she discovered a religious faith that would intensify with time, Undset .
 She joined the church in 1924, at a time when the dividing line between Protestant Norwegians and Catholic counterparts was securely drawn . Having received instruction in the Catholic faith, she joined in 1924 .
 Undset’s Christian faith is reflected in all the works she produced after 1920 . Undset's Christian faith reflects in all her works .
 In Gymnadenia and Den Braedende busk, Undset depicts her protagonists’ gradual conversion to Catholicism . Readers sense the autobiographical tone in both works .
 Undset finished another massive tome in four volumes, Olav Audunsson, also set in 13th-century Norway, in 1929 . After completing Kristin Lavransdatter in 1922, Undset completed another tome set in the 13th century .
 Her eldest son, Anders, was killed in battle in 1940; her daughter had died shortly before the war began . Anders died in battle .
 Undset and her youngest son went to the U.S. in 1940, returning to Norway when war ended in 1945 . Undset returned to Norway in 1945, when the war ended, and her son died there .
 Undset’s work is characterized by a brooding sense of the role that sexuality plays in human life, and the role . passion plays in dictating human destiny, Undset says .
 In her later works, there is a constant tension between the flesh and the spirit . If humans are to be good, she insists, the spirit must dominate . Her later works show a tension between flesh and spirit .
 Sigrid Undset’s work paints a somber portrait of human life . Unyielding in tragedy, and uncompromising in morality, Undset's work is uncompromising .
 First African American to publish a book and the first American female author to try to earn a living by her pen . Wheatley was born in West Africa and sold into slavery as a child .
 The woman who once had a reputation with General George Washington in 1776 died penniless and alone eight years later in a shack .
 19 of her 55 extant poems are funeral poems . She may have written from memories of her native West Africa .
 She was sold as a child of seven or eight to John and Susanna Wheatley of Boston in July 1761 . Her recollection of Gambia, however, must have been rather dim .
 The Wheatleys named their slave Phillis after the ship that delivered her, the Phillis . The Phillis was a slave who wore nothing but a rug wrapped around her bare torso . She was named Phillis by the Wheatleys .
 Wheatley learned to read and write under the tutelage of Susanna Wheatley . She learned to write and read under Susanna's guidance .
 In 1770, Wheatley published an elegy to George Whiteheld that fueled her career as a writer . Wheatley died in 1770 at the hands of her husband .
 Known as the Great Awakener, the famous Whiteheld spawned a religious revival in the American colonies . Known as 'The Great Awakeener', the Whiteheld was known for its religious revival .
 Whitefield corresponded regularly with Selina Hastings, the countess of Huntingdon, Whitefield’s employer . Wheatley may have heard the minister preach in Boston and may even have met the orator in Boston .
 Phillis Phillis’s spirited prose, resplendendended with quotes from Whiteheld's most celebrated preachings, became a huge success and was frequently reprinted . Phillis's spirited prose became a hugely popular book and was often reprinted .
 Through the Whiteheld elegy, Wheatley earned the support of the countess of Huntingdon, who ensured that the poem was reproduced several times in London . Wheatley's poem was published in London in 1883 .
 Her Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral ztp’pcuKA in 1773, published by Archibald Bell and hnanced by the countess . The countess' Poems were published by the Countess .
 Wheatley, still a slave, traveled to London to oversee production of her book . Wheatley traveled with her slave to oversee the production of the book .
 She had attempted several times to have the work published in Boston, but the city’s white male publishing establishment rejected her . Wheatley's work was published several times in Boston but was never published .
 Susanna Wheatley sent some of Phillis’s poems to local papers, including the Newport Mercury, for publication . The Boston ministers Mather Byles and Samuel Cooper, however, encouraged Wheatley's work, and some of his poems were published .
 Phillis Wheatley was to travel to court to meet the British royal family, but Susanna Wheatley fell ill and required Phillis’s return to Boston in August 1773 . Phillis returned to Boston, Massachusetts, in 1773.
 Wheatley was a staunch patriot in the conflict between the American colonies and Great Britain . John and Susanna Wheatley remained loyal to the Crown, while Susanna remained loyal .
 Phillis Wheatley, enslaved in Senegal, Africa, brought to Boston at the age of eight, became famous as an 18 th-century poet . Wheatley was brought to the U.S. by slave owners in 18th century Boston .
 Wheatley's fame in the former colonies rivaled writer Philip Freneau’s claim of being the poet of the American Revolution . Wheatley was the son of William Wheatley, who died in 1777 .
 The letters and elegies Wheatley wrote during the last 10 years of her life betray the frustrations and difficulties she experienced in trying to continue her writing career in the face of racial prejudices . Wheatley died at the age of 81 at her home in London .
 Wheatley married John Peters in 1778, a free African-American storekeeper . Peters was a defender of African Americans before the courts . Wheatley was married to John Peters, a storekeeper and defender of blacks .
 In 1779 she circulated verses for a new volume of poems to several publishers . But the book never appeared, and the poems are lost .
 Phillis Wheatley died with her newborn child, apparently of an infection from childbirth, on December 5, 1784 . The baby was born in 1784, and Phillis died in childbirth .
 French novelist, poet, and essayist Marguerite Yourcenar was born June 8, 1903, in Belgium . She spent most of her life in France and the United States .
 Yourcenar translated numerous European and American masterpieces into French . In addition to writing her own works of literature, she translated numerous works of art .
 In 1980, she became the first woman elected to the French Academy since its founding in 1635 . She was also the first female member of the Academy since it was founded .
 Marguerite Yourcenar’s father educated her in languages and literature by making her read aloud, in their original languages, the literary masterpieces of France, England, Greece, Greece and Rome .
 Yourcenar’s vast knowledge would become the bedrock of her prodigious literary output, including numerous novels, books of poems, short stories, plays, essays, and translations .
 Many of her characters rebel against the sexual, social, and moral limitations set by human societies . Many of the characters in the novel rebel against those limitations .
 Born Marguerite de Crayencour, she was the daughter of aristocratic parents . She was born in 18th Century France .
 Her mother, Fernande de Cartier de Marchienne, died a week after Marguerite was born in 1903 . Her mother is the heiress of a long line of wealthy Belgian landowners and industrialists .
 Her wild and unruly father, Michel de Crayencour, tried a variety of occupations, including enlisting in the French army . Her wild father was constant companions until his death in 1929 .
 He deserted soon after, traveling to England where he became the lover of his landlord’s wife . He proved his devotion to her by mutilating his left middle finger .
 Marguerite’s mother too, had flouted the moral standards of her aristocratic class by running off to Germany with her soon-to-be-husband . The Duchess of Cambridge's mother also ran off with her husband .
 Marguerite successfully passed her baccalaureate exams in Nice, France, at the age of 16 . She is now a mother-of-one .
 The poem tells the story of the legend of Icarus, the Greek mythological figure who escaped Crete with his father, Daedalus, by wearing a pair of wings that melted .
 Marguerite and her father concocted her pen name “Yourcenar’s” an almost-anagram of the name Crayencour . The name is an almost anagram of that of the writer's name, which is an anagram .
 Marguerite liked the idea of creating an authorial persona, comparing it to a nun taking a new name when she joins an order . Marguerites said she wanted to create a new persona for herself .
 She legally adopted her literary persona in 1947 when she opted to become an American citizen . She adopted her American citizenship in 1947 .
 Yourcenar and her father traveled together to European centers of gambling and horseracing until his death in 1929 .
 In that year, Marguerite published her first novel, Alexis ou le trade du vain combat [Alexis] set in Central Europe . In that same year, she published a novel set in central Europe .
 Reviews were favorable, especially toward the literary device—the confessional letter—that Yourcenar employed . Reviews were favor of the book .
 Yourcenar settled in 1930 on a small Greek island in the Aegean Sea . He died in 1953 .
 La Nouvelle Eurydice, in 1931, and then an essay on the Greek lyric poet Pindar in 1932 . In 1932, he wrote an essay about the poet's poetry .
 History of all genres and all time periods interested Marguerite Yourcenar, and her next work . History of the genres and time periods was also a topic of discussion .
 La Mart conduit I’attelage (Death drives the team; published in 1934) revealed her expertise in art history . The author also revealed that she had a passion for art history.
 La Mart comprises three short stories, each exemplifying the particular manner and style of a painter . La Mart is published in the UK and Australia .
 This work depicts the lives of several Italians under fascist rule in Italy . This work was created by the Italian fascist government .
 Henrik Ibsen composed Coup de Grace in the same hotel room in Sorrento, Italy, where he composed his play Ghosts . The Norwegian playwright had composed the play .
 German fdm director Volker Schlondorff made the novel into a motion picture in 1977 . Yourcenar detested the film, which was released that year .
 She began experimenting with dramatic writing and published her first play, La Petite Sirene . Her first play was based on a Hans Ghristian Andersen fairy tale . She also published a play based on an Andersen fairy story .
 Yourcenar and her partner, Grace Frick, bought a house together off the coast of Maine . When she became a U.S. citizen in 1947, she was a United States citizen . She was married to a professor at Barnard Gollege .
 While living in Maine, she received a trunk that had been sent from Switzerland after the war . She received the trunk from a trunk she received from Switzerland in the 1930s .
 The Prix Femina-Vacaresco for best historical novel of the year . This fictional first-person narrative of the second-century Roman ruler won the prize .
 At the same time, she received news that her name had been chosen to replace Roger Gaillois’s seat at the Academie Fran^aise . At the time of the announcement, she was also told that she had been named as the new member of the Acad
 The French Academy is a literary society dedicated to the purity of the French language . The society is limited to 40 members at a time .
 She had become a United States citizen, argued some . But by official application she regained her French status, rebutted others .
 The biggest stumbling block, however, was her sex; on this matter her backers argued that it was time the Academie chose a woman .
 She refused to wear the sword that new inductees traditionally wore to the formal ceremony held in 1981 . The sword was the sword worn to the ceremony .
 European Women in a Globalizing World, 1500 to the Present, Marilyn J Boxer and Jean H Quataert, ed. eds. Marilyn Boxer, Jean H Boxer . Jean Boxer: European Women are in a globalizing world, 1500-1500 to the present
 Essays on Women in the Third World, Cheryl Johnson-Odim and Margaret Strobel, ed. eds, eds. Essays On Women in The Third World . The book is published by the same authors as the book "Women of the World"
 A Select Chronological, Geographical, and Topical Bibliographical Bibliography from Antiquity to the French Revolution . The French Revolution was the first French Revolution to be fought in France . The Revolution was fought in 1777 .
 Profiles of Women Playwrights from the Middle Ages to Contemporary Times . Profiles are of women playwrights who have written for generations .
 From the Bra to the Bomb: Forgotten Women and Their Unforgettable Ideas . From the bra to the bomb: Forgotten Women and their Unforgotten Ideas .
 Studies in Social and Economic Change, Nancy J Hafkin and Edna G Bay, eds. studies in social and economic change . The study was published by Nancy Hafkin in 2010 .
 The Theory, Practice, and Writing of Feminist Auto/Biography, Pauline Polkey, ed. The Theory of the Autobiography . The Theory and Practice of Autography is a form of autobiography .