 Thirteen Days details the many meetings of the John F Kennedy cabinet and Joint Chiefs of Staff during the tense period after the Soviet missile build-up on Cuba was discovered . The film is based on the book "Thirteen Days" about the Kennedy administration .
 Race armament and space race are characteristic of the Cold War . Race armaments and space arms race are key features of the conflict .
 The gap kept widening as a hundred or so new U.S. ballistic missiles became operational each year . The Soviets could barely produce 25 of these missiles, equipped with rather rudimentary guidance systems . The United States was able to produce 100 new ballistic missiles each year, while the Soviets barely produced
 Then, the CIA found out that Il-28 bombers and MiG fighters were arriving . Then, they found out they were arriving in the Soviet Union . Then the CIA had to deal with the threat .
 By then, their conclusion was that the Cubans were building up an anti-aircraft defence system to Soviet standards .
 Confirmation came from the CIA that launch sites are under construction . Confirmation comes from a CIA source who said launch sites were under construction.
 SAM-2 missiles could destroy aircraft flying at high altitude . They could also be used to shoot down aircraft in the air . The missiles could also target aircraft flying high altitudes .
 USS Oxford, fitted with listening devices, patrolled the Cuban zone in order to intercept radio communications . USS Oxford was the first ship to intercept Cuban radio communications from the US Navy .
 The NSA detected the presence of airtraffic controllers speaking Spanish with strong Slavic accents . The agency also detected a Russian accent on air traffic controllers .
 CIA persisted in thinking that the Soviets were not prepared to run the risk of a clash by deploying nuclear warheads in Cuba . And yet the CIA continued to think that the Soviet Union was not prepared .
 The French intelligence services have been involved in the hunt for the Russian president . Russia has been conducting an anti-Russian forces operation in Russia since 2003 .
 A Colonel Houel informed the Americans that major earthworks were under way in the north of the island . A United States Air Force spy-plane soon confirmed the operation .
 Medium range ballistic missiles with 1000 miles with 3 megatons nuclear warheads . Medium-range ballistic missiles can reach 1000 miles . Medium range missiles can travel 1000 miles and have 3 megaton warheads . High-tech missiles can also carry nuclear warheads.
 Discovered by Columbus in 1492, the island remained under Spanish rule until 1898, when it became independent with the help of the United States whose influence became predominant . 40% of the sugar production was under United States control, 80% of island's exports, was under U.S
 Thirteen days were given to the United States in 1903 as a token of gratitude for its help in the war against Spain . At the south-east end of the island, 45 square miles of Cuban territory was given to U.S. in 1903 . The Cuba missile crisis was a
 During WWII Guantánamo was strategic in the fight against German submarines . During WWII, the base was strategic for the defense of the US Navy .
 It is the main US logistical base and training camp in the Caribbean . The base is an essential part of its antisubmarine defence system .
 During the missile crisis, it took only a few hours for the 2,811 members of the military personnel's families to be evacuated . The garrison was substantially strengthened during the crisis . During the crisis, the families of military personnel were evacuated .
 Guantánamo has its own desalination plant and supplies are shipped from nearby Florida . All supplies are sent to the island's desalinating plant .
 In 1953, Fidel Castro, a young nationalist leader helped by peasants, took arms against Batista who was finally ousted in January 1959 . Fidel Castro was helped to oust Batista, who was ousted in 1959 .
 The Castro revolution challenged U.S. influence in Latin America where it could easily spread . From then on, Cuba became a hot issue in the Cold War, since it challenged United States influence .
 On 21 May 1962, Nikita Khrushchev decided to install in Cuba 36 SS-4 medium range missiles with 24 launch vehicles, and 24 SS-5 intermediate range “Skean” ballistic missiles with 16 launch vehicles .
 Mig-21 fighter-bombers and long-range 42 Il-28 bombers were assembled . SAM-2 missiles were deployed . SAM 2.0 anti-aircraft missiles were used .
 The west coast up to Washington DC could be destroyed with only 5 minutes warning . 80 million American killed, military bases destroyed limiting U.S. retaliatory options . Washington DC .
 Given the distance of 2000 km, this would have required an average speed of 7000 m/s, a speed missiles at that time could not reach . This would have been a speed missile could not have reached .
 Cuba and the Soviet Union had resumed diplomatic relations in May 1960 . In May 1960, Cuba and Russia had resumed their diplomatic relations .
 In July, Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara declared that Cuba had joined the Socialist bloc . Ernesto "Che" declared Cuba joined Socialist bloc in July . Che was by then Castro's second-in-command .
 The medium-range missiles deployed in Cuba would have almost doubled the Soviet offensive force, since most of the United States territory was within range . Most of the U.S. territory is within range of the missiles .
 U.S. radars would have been unable to detect an intercontinental Soviet strike over the Pole . United States radars, located in Canada in order to detect the strike, would not have been able to detect them .
 Khrushchev could hope for the North Atlantic Treaty to be weakened, for the Alliance to be loosened, and for concessions over Berlin . Having balanced the scales, he could have hoped for weakened treaty and loosened Alliance .
 Khrushchev plan was approved by the Soviet Defence Council on 24 May, and by Castro on 29 May . Castro approved the plan by the Soviets Defence Council and by the Castro regime .
 U.S. influence in the world would be shattered if the Soviets show that they can do whatever they want wherever they want . United States influence would be broken if they showed that they were able to do what they wanted wherever they wanted .
 ICBM missile launched from Moscow could hit Washington DC also . ICBM launched from Russia could hit D.C. also .
 It was also a question of political and military influence on certain parts of the world, he says . "It was also an issue of political ... influence," he adds .
 In America, it would be considered as a Munich attitude, a policy of appeasement which would embolden the Soviets . In America it would have been considered as the Munich attitude . It would have emboldened the Soviets, but would have led them to a victory .
 In 1962, some of Kennedy advisors even thought that if the missiles were not removed, the President could face an impeachment procedure . Kennedy advisors thought that the missiles could be removed .
 JFK’s father, Joe Kennedy had been an appeaser in 1938, and his sons were always suspect of being like him . Joe Kennedy was a popular appeaser, but his sons are suspect of him .
 If USA didn’t react, apart from diplomatic consequences, there could be a war anyway . NATO would be attacked . If U.S. did not react, there would be war anyway. But if USA didn't react, the war would be inevitable .
 The Kennedy administration was sure that the Soviets wanted to get hold of West Berlin, that it was a Berlin crisis . In fact, the Kennedy administration believed that the Soviet Union was trying to take control of the city .
 The soviet plan was to start a confrontation with the USA, on their border . It was planned for a confrontation on the U.S. border . The Soviet Union was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Cuba wasn't important, it was just a war camp, a strategic place to install missiles in order to have a diplomatic leverage on the USA to force it to withdraw its soldiers from west Berlin . Cuba wasn’t important, he said, but it was a strategic location to install
 Executive Committee consisted of senior members of the National Security Council established by President Truman in 1947 . Committee was called EX COMM .
 Vice-President Lyndon B Johnson from Texas was elected to the House of Representatives in 1937 and a Senator since 1949 . He has served in the U.S. Senate from Texas since 1949.
 Robert F Kennedy was the President's younger brother, and his closest aide . Robert F. Kennedy was President Kennedy's closest aide and brother .
 Kenneth O'Donnell was a member of the President's inner circle . He was a most important adviser, often in the background .
 Reputed to have been Kennedy's most loyal collaborator . He advocated a blockade and wrote the statement which the President issued on 22 October .
 General Maxwell Taylor had been Chief of Staff of the United States Army in the Eisenhower administration . He was the first President of the U.S. Army under Eisenhower . Maxwell Taylor was a member of the Eisenhower Administration .
 A trusted friend of Kennedy's, he was nominated Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and was a hardliner during the Cuban crisis . He was a close friend of JFK and was nominated chairman of Joint Chiefs .
 Castro retaliated by nationalizing all U.S. assets in Cuba . Cuba joined the socialist bloc in 1960 after the United States imposed a trade embargo on the island . Castro responded with nationalization of all US assets .
 Eisenhower administration agreed to a recommendation from the CIA to equip and drill Cuban exiles for action against the new Castro government . On March 17, 1960, Eisenhower agreed to the decision to arm exiles against Castro .
 The CIA began to recruit and train anti-Castro forces in the Sierra Madre mountains in Guatemala . The CIA was involved in recruiting and training anti-Chavez forces . The agency began to train and recruit forces against the government of Guatemala .
 The CIA was initially confident that it was capable of overthrowing Castro, having experience assisting in the overthrow of other foreign governments such as Iranian prime minister Mohammed Mossadegh and Guatemalan president Jacobo Arbenz Guzmán in 1954 .
 Under Kennedy's orders critical details were changed that removed any chance of success of the mission without U.S. help . The mission was changed to ensure the mission was successful .
 This failed because the airstrikes were not continued as was originally planned limited by decisions at the highest level of U.S. government . "This failed because it was not continued," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Castro also had prior knowledge of the invasion, thanks to KGB agents . Castro had moved the airplanes out of harm's way and had moved them out of danger .
 Four 2,400-ton chartered transports transported 1,511 Cuban exiles to the Bay of Pigs on the Southern coast of Cuba . 4,511 exiles were transported to the bay of Pigs .
 They were accompanied by two CIA-owned infantry landing crafts, called the Blagar and Barbara J, containing supplies, ordnance, and equipment .
 The small army hoped to find support from the local population, intending to cross the island to Havana . They hoped to cross to Havana.
 The CIA assumed that the invasion would spark a popular uprising against Castro . The invasion was thought to have sparked an uprising against the Castro regime .
 Castro executed some who were suspected of colluding with the American campaign, and imprisoned the others . However by the time the Invasion began, Castro had already executed some of the prisoners .
 It soon became evident after contact with Cuban reinforcements that the exiles were not going to receive effective support at the site of the invasion and were likely to lose . The exiles' defeat in Cuba was likely to be a major loss for the country .
 Reports from both sides describe tank battles involving heavy USSR equipment . Reports: Both sides were involved in heavy Soviet equipment .
 Kennedy decided against giving the faltering invasion U.S. air support because of his opposition to overt intervention . Four US pilots were killed in Cuba during the invasion of Cuba .
 Kennedy also cancelled several sorties of bombings on the grounded Cuban Air force, which might have crippled the Cuban Air Force and given air superiority to the invaders . Kennedy cancelled sorties on Cuba that might have given the invaders superiority .
 United States Marines were not sent in, even though there were support ships off the coast ready to land at a moment's notice . The United States was not involved in any of the violence in the region .
 Castro thought that the U.S. would try again and intervene directly, he drew closer to the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union provided ample economic and military backing .
 More longer range missiles have been shipped in Cuba . The whole country (except the western coast) is threatened . More longer-range missiles have also been shipped .
 Soviets will react because air strikes will probably kill soviet soldiers . Air strikes likely will kill Soviet soldiers, but air strikes probably kill many more .
 The army never forgave Kennedy for his attitude during the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy's attitude was a mistake, and he was never forgiven .
 They didn't think it was a Berlin crisis but an opportunity to act against Cuba and Castro . They didn’t think it . It was a chance to act, they said, but they wanted to act .
 ORTSAC Kennedy-Gromyko meeting was planned before the crisis began . The American press is sniffing something especially since the army baptised the military exercises in Puerto Rico .
 Kennedy took the opportunity to remind that according to a previous declaration, soviet military assistance is only defensive . Kennedy also reminded that the military assistance to the Soviet Union is only a defensive .
 The media were beginning to report troop movement and there were rumours of a possible clash . The media was reporting troop movements and rumours of possible clashes .
 The President had accepted the idea that airplanes bomb the missile sites and troops land in case the crisis was not over by the end of the month .
 Kennedy was still thinking in World War II terms and had hoped to hide everything . Kennedy was hoping to hide his plans from the public .
 Beijing used to challenge Moscow's leadership of the international Communist movement . Beijing used the crisis to challenge Russia's leadership in the world Communist Party .
 The crisis fed the rivalry between the Soviets and China, as they were both engaged in gaining preponderance in Asia and Africa . The crisis did indeed feed the rivalry .
 A blockade is an act of war and the USA don’t want to appear aggressive, says CNN.com's John Defterios . The U.S. doesn't want to be seen as aggressive, he says .
 A quarantine is a sanitary measure but in facts, the result is the same. A quarantine means quarantine is not a quarantine but a quarantine is sanitary .
 These ships are to be inspected and those carrying missiles or weapons are to sail back . Those carrying missiles and weapons will sail back to the UK .
 It stops new missiles coming in Cuba but doesn't remove those already there . The U.S. military says it won't remove new missiles from Cuba . The Cuban government says it will not remove missiles already in Cuba .
 In case of air strikes, there can be no sneak attack . Soviets could decide to launch some missiles instead of taking a chance of loosing them .
 The United States base in Guantanamo is evacuated and given back to Castro . Castro: The base was evacuated and the U.S. base is evacuated . Castro says the base is now a base in Cuba .
 Kennedy rejected it waiting until Monday to decide quarantine or air strike . Kennedy rejected the decision and said quarantine would be a quarantine .
 JFK told three national TV networks that he wanted broadcast time in the evening on Monday . JFK told the three national television networks he wants broadcast time on Monday night . JFK was assassinated in 1968 in Washington, DC .
 Until then they have been asked to withhold information concerning Cuba . Until then, they will withhold information about Cuba .
 JFK kept on his schedule and hadn’t cancelled any meeting in order to avoid arousing nd suspicion . Until then, JFK had kept on . schedule . JFK hadn't cancelled any meetings in . order to . avoid suspicion .
 JFK decided to stand all US forces around the world on DEFCON 3 . JFK wanted to be sure that all missiles would be destroyed and he decided to stay .
 General Le May decided to bomb all buildings large enough to hide a missile . Le May had decided to target all buildings in order to prevent a missile attack .
 While military forces prepare themselves, the Kennedy administration lost Congress support . The Kennedy administration was losing Congress support for the military .
 Kennedy: "I think we’re ready" Retaliatory response against the Soviet Union . "We think we're ready"
 When seeing a soviet ship they put on radio contact to ask them to reduce their speed and accept an inspection team on board . When seeing the ship they asked them to slow down and accept inspection .
 If weapons were found the soviet ship has to turn back or accept to be towed to the next port . If weapons are found the ship must turn back, or accept being towed to another port .
 If refusal shots were fired before the rudder was shot, that was the long-time normal procedure during a blockade . That was the old practice . If refusal was fired before a rudder shot, shots would be fired .
 Kennedy wanted to be informed of everything and decide each move in case a ship didn’t stop . Therefore, Kennedy decided each move must be made if a ship did not stop . Kennedy said: “I wanted to know everything about the ship’s fate .
 An airforce is ready to respond to any possible attack on this plane . But an air force is not ready to attack this plane, it says .
 The army is setting a trap to force the administration to order the air strikes and get rid of the missiles and invade Cuba . The government is trying to get the president to order air strikes . The Cuban government is planning to invade Cuba.
 Some people in the White House wanted war at any cost . We don’t know today if it’s true (although the Cuba missile Crisis – Thirteen days – had a harder position)
 The Chief of the Air Force is in charge of a spy plane . The mission is to find out what the Chief says and does to ensure the plane is safe .
 To take good pictures they had to drop brilliant flares which could be mistaken with bombs . They were dropped from the sky to capture the best pictures of the day .
 Organisation of the American States created in 1948 by 21 American states in order to promote democracy and promote human rights . Organisation of American States was created by 21 U.S. states in 1948 . Organisation was formed by 21 states to promote democratic and human rights and promote democracy .
 Quarantine, a concept listed in the OAS pact and less drastic than blockade, did not mean total isolation of the enemy nation . Quarantine is listed in a pact signed by the U.S. and is less drastic .
 quarantine could be considered as an act of war if any state disapproved of it . Quarantine could be seen as a 'act of war' by any state in the world .
 Throughout Latin America there were antiAmerican demonstrations followed by rioting . Anti-American protests followed by riots in Latin America .
 Public opinions could not understand how the Cuban regime could strike an alliance with the U.S. But, generally, public opinions couldn't understand how it happened .
 The quarantine became effective on Wednesday 23 1962 . Media fuelled their doubts, insisting on the danger of nuclear war .
 Cuba's government has been excluded from participation in the OAS since 1962 . Cuba remains a member of the organization, but its government has not been allowed to participate in the organization . Cuba has not participated in the Organization of the Arab world since 1962.
 In fact, there were 3 submarines equipped with nuclear heads and they were instructed to launch their missiles in case of American attack .
 The order to go on DEFCON 2 signalled an escalation unwanted by the Kennedy administration . Provoke the Soviets by ordering military exercises next to their vessels .
 Fire the major Chief but that would let think that the invasion threat wasn’t real or that a coup d’etat was possible . Fire the Major Chief but not fire the major chief .
 Accuse the USA of wanting a new war although there were no evidence of missiles in Cuba . Rally round their allies . Accuse US of wanting new war but there was no evidence that missiles were in Cuba.
 The representative of Chile gives his time to the USA who present evidences with photos . Chile's representative is in Chile to present evidence to USA .
 The blockade is a language, a new vocabulary, JFK communicating with Khrushchev . The blockade was a language used by JFK to communicate with the Soviet Union . It is a new language for the blockade .
 The Kennedy administration looked for a peaceful issue . Because the army wanted to attack ( an American small-boat is sent to inspect a Lebanese ship to show the Soviets that they would go on with their policy)
 Khrushchev wrote a letter to O’Donnell Kennedy, urging him to consider this deal . Kennedy and O'Donnell Kennedy met in Washington, D.C. to discuss the deal . O”Donnell Kennedy: "Consider this deal. Consider this deal"
 It looks like Fomin was a ploy after all . Now gentlemen, if anyone has a great idea, now is the time to come up with a new idea .
 He asked the army to prepare the air strikes on Monday morning, followed by the invasion, he said . He asked for the military to prepare air strikes and the invasion .
 We’re presuming Major Anderson there is phone call for you the pilot is dead . The pilot is believed to be dead .
 U.S. reconnaissance flights had been sent over Cuba since the beginning of 1962 . Intelligence was more than necessary to help the Kennedy administration decide on the course of events .
 Send a United States U2 over soviet territory . It was escorted back to the frontier by MIGs. U2 was escorted to the border by the MIG .
 It was one of the few flights which was responsible for air analysis after nuclear tests . In fact it was also responsible for analysis of the air after tests .
 The plane was armed with nuclear missiles because the army was on DEFCON 1. It was equipped with nuclear weapons because of the army's readiness for the first time ever .
 The United States plane was escorted back to its aerial space . But the Soviets didn’t realise it and the U.S. plane didn't realise it . It was escorted by the United States back to the air space .
 In 1958 General De Gaulle refused that they be deployed on French soil . In 1958 he refused to deploy them on France .
 The 15 Jupiters were installed in July-August 1962 on the Cigli base, near Izmir . Their installation was the result of an agreement reached with Turkey in October 1959, but they soon proved obsolete .
 JFK had decided to dismantle them without warning the Turks, who were not consulted either when they were actually removed in April 1963 . JFK's decision to remove them was made without warning .
 Those in Italy were dismantled in 1963, thus meeting the demand of the Rome government . Rome had shown cautious solidarity with the United States in so far as Italy was within range in case of Soviet retaliation .
 The 60 intercontinental Thor missiles, deployed on 20 British bases since 1958, were also removed from British bases between November 1962 and August 1963 . The 60 Thor missiles were deployed in Britain since 1958 .
 Propose to withdraw Turkey’s missiles 6 month from now and demand that this condition remains secret . Propose for withdrawal of missiles from Turkey 6 months from now .
 Both countries had to get out of this potential nuclear conflict without loosing face . The U.S. and China had to work together to avoid a potential nuclear war .
 This version of Bobby and the Ambassador’s meeting was described in Bobby's book . The Ambassador's visit to Bobby was described as Bobby's first meeting with him .
 Ambassador Bobby came to see him twice, telling him that the Kennedy administration was loosing ground against the army and the public opinion who wanted to invade Cuba . According to the Ambassador Bobby .
 Khrushchev was upset because the Soviet general in Cuba had shot down an American U2 . Khrushvic was upset that the U2 had been shot down by a Cuban general .
 One of the soviet spy had said that Kennedy was to make a speech on 5 P.M. and said that would be on Moscow’s time . Finally, one of the spy had . said that . one of them had said . that Kennedy . was to speak
 Khrushchev felt he had to answer very quickly to Kennedy’s proposal through ambassador Dobrynin . Kennedy felt it had to be quick to respond to the proposal .
 Since Khrushchev accepted the United States deal, Kennedy’s advisors felt they could do anything in the world . Kennedy's advisors felt that they could have done anything with the deal . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The Soviets began dismantling their launchers the very next day . Only 1 person died during the dismantling of the launchers .
 Kennedy had insisted that the Soviet Il-28 bombers given to Cuba be removed too . Kennedy also insisted that Soviet I-28s be removed from Cuba .
 Castro refused to submit because he had been kept out of the negotiations by his Soviet allies . Castro was angered that he had not been allowed to participate in the negotiations .
 It took him 22 days to come around, during which time U.S. nuclear forces remained on alert .
 On 21 November, the Ilyushin bombers were taken back to the Soviet Union . The quarantine was over and the quarantine was lifted .
 The last Combat Brigade troops sent to Cuba in 1962 were withdrawn from Cuba in 1993 . 30 years later, in 1993, when the last combat brigade troops were withdrawn .
 China reaped the benefits and rivalled the Soviet Union in the eyes of Socialist and Third World countries . China's economic success was seen as one of the world's most successful economies .
 The crisis, confirming the De Gaulle-abhorred Soviet-US condominium, widened the transatlantic gap, since the USA had not consulted with the Europeans . The crisis was confirmed by the Soviet-U.S. condominium .
 In West Berlin, there was public concern about a backlash that might have an impact on the status of Berlin . Berlin residents were concerned about the impact of the backlash . Berlin's West Berlin has a history of anti-West Berlin protests .
 Der Tagesspiegel endeavoured to prove that ""Cuba and Berlin" could not be ""swapped" Unlike missiles deployed on bases in the Caribbean and in Turkey, missiles are deployed in Cuba and Turkey .
 22 October 1962 had turned the tables after 13 August 1961, he wrote . JFK's firm stand, JFK's stand, he said . The Wall was erected in the face of indifferent Allies .
 JFK's pusillanimous attitude when the Wall was built had taught Chancellor Adenauer a bitter lesson . JFK had refused to take responsibility for building the Wall in Germany .
 He was worried that Berlin might bear the brunt of a backlash and lie exposed to a Soviet operation comparable to the 1948 blockade . Berlin was worried about a similar operation similar to a similar blockade .
 The Cuban crisis confirmed his opinion that the security of the Federal Republic should not depend on the United States exclusively, he says . He says the Cuban crisis confirms his opinion .
 He came to the conclusion that political and military ties with France should be strengthened .
 This was materialized by January 1963, when the Élysée agreements were signed . This was the first time the French president had been in office in France .
 From a didactic point of view, the crisis taught U.S. and Soviet leaders how to cope with extreme tension that could end in thermonuclear war . The crisis taught them how to deal with situations of extreme tension, historian says .
 Cuba was a vital issue for the USA whereas it was only a side one for Khrushchev who could, thus, afford to show some restraint .
 The idea that there ought to be a hotline between the White House and the Kremlin was a direct consequence of the Cuban crisis . The idea of a hotline was a result of the crisis in Cuba, CNN's John Avlon says .
 It wasn't a telephone but a teletypewriter was activated on 30 August 1963 . It wasn’t a telephone or a telephone . It was activated in 1963 .
 RFK explains that his brother would withhold opinions in meetings, knowing others would tend to parrot his ideas rather than offer honest appraisals . RFK says he often withhold opinions because he feared others would parrot their ideas .
 It is also the second movie in which Steven Culp plays Robert F Kennedy, the other being Norma Jean & Marilyn .
 Kenneth O'Donnell plays a much larger role in the film, than what he did in reality . The role of the actor has been greatly exaggerated in the movie . The film is based on the life of Kenneth ODonnell .
 The real Kenneth O’Donnell’s son contributed with a lot of money for the production of Thirteen Days . This is because he requested that his father's character would be given a more important role . Kenneth O'Donnell's son contributed to the production, while requesting that
 In real life history, O’Donnell was never present at the top level White House meetings with Kennedy during the missile crisis . O'Donnell was not present in the meetings .