 A new area 21 miles to the southwest of Havana has been labeled a probable MRBM/IRBM launch complex . The area is a new area hitherto never seen by us, says President Obama .
 The two sites, sir, Nos. and 2, are 2 1/2 miles apart and enlarging this one we look at it and we see for the first time a pattern of Medium/IRBM sites that looks like the things we have been seeing in the Soviet Union . The
 There's a control bunker with cable scars going up to small buildings in board at each of these pads . There's also a control bunk with cable scarred walls going up into small buildings .
 We've never identified as irrevocably the signature of a Soviet intermediate medium range ballistic missile, which is estimatedly a 2,000 mile missile . The security fence has been superimposed around the place .
 At the moment, it has been labeled as such and let the guided missile intelligence analysts come up, finally, with the true analysis of what the range of these missiles might be that are eventually accommodated on this set of pads .
 Mr President, we reported to you a number of what we call cruise missile sites, that's short range coastal defense type missiles . Yes sir. Mr President. Yes .
 The Banes site is located at Santa Cruz del Norte, up in the Havana area . Another is located in Santa Cruz de Norte and located in Havana .
 At the time of that reporting, there were 2 launchers at this position here and here .
 Since the coverage of that day, 2 more launching positions have been added upward/up north of those 2 positions . Since then, the number of launching positions has been increased .
 The launcher here is uncovered, you can actually see the launcher itself . The launcher itself is uncovered .
 Air-breathing missile will go on a winged type of air-breathable missile, says Pentagon .
 The short, stubby winged fellow which conforms to the cruise type of missile that we have seen before . The short-stubbed fellow is a short-winged winged missile . The missile is the latest in a long line of missiles that have been launched by the
 We had not found anything like the MRBM sites in any of the photography up to this l5 October bit. Well sir . Well sir, we had not . found anything . like the . MRBM site .
 We had found and added to it last night 1 more surface-to-air missile site, so that made a total of 23, as of this location .
 One of the tallest buildings in the world has been pulled up and moved away . One of them has been moved away, at Santa Lucia, in a bid to protect the environment .
 We don't know where they pull these things up and move them to, but we have seen 23 surface-to-air missile sites . We have not been able to find out where the missile sites are located, officials say .
 Joint Committee made estimate that between 16 and 32 missiles would be operational within a week or slightly more . Joint Committee estimates that the missiles could be operational in a week .
 Cuba is not going to be just an instrumental base for fielding these things, but bases are going to pop out like measles all over the world . Cuba is going to become a major base for baseball .
 Cuba could become just part of the goal, a military problem, and any contest with Soviet Union could get tense any other part of world . "Any contest we would have with [Soviet Union] could get tension any other parts of the world," he says .
 I do think when the full scope of this becomes known that no action would undermine our alliances all over the world, very promptly . I think also we have to think of the effect on the Soviets, if you would do that. But, I do ... we have also to think also
 This would free them for almost any type of adventure they might want to try out in other parts of the world . Now suppose that they would consider this a major back down and that this would allow them to explore other countries .
 If we are unable to face up to the situation in Cuba against this kind of threat, Cuba would be encouraged to go adventuring, he says .
 They all know that we have an almost unmanageable problem getting any support for foreign policy that we would need to pursue, if we're going to sustain the cause of independence and faith here .
 We've got a million men in uniform outside of the United States, we've got fine programs, says President Obama . "We've got major major effort we're making in agriculture," he says .
 It seems to that inaction in this situation would undercut and undercut the long support we need for the kind of foreign policy that will eventually ensure our survival . Now action involves very high risks indeed. It seems that inaction, in this case, wouldundermine and undercut .
 "I think that additional information increases the risk because challenge is much more serious," he says . "Counter action would have to be heavier ... ... talking about talking about," he adds .
 "You would have to have in the back of your own mind, whatever decision you take, the, uh, possibility or/not the likelihood of a Soviet reaction somewhere else," he said . "But, uh- uh, you would have ... to have ... the possibility of a
 With the first missiles you're talking about that a quick strike, a quick success a matter of a couple of hours time, 50 or 60 Soviet missiles ... ... where it is obvious then the matter is over and finished and that was the purpose of our engagement .
 The action also has to be thought of in connection with alliance solidarity, there we're faced with conflicting elements. That would have much more reduced threats from a military response on the other side. ... ... ... these other installations and getting involved in various parts of the island, I think would
 "Unannounced, unconsulted quick action on our part" could well lead to disunitiveness the Soviets could capitalize upon, he says . Unless we're in a situation where it is clear that the alliance has worked to understand the problem, then unannounced, quick action could well
 Britain and France get themselves isolated within the alliance over Suez . The two countries were allied over the Suez Canal .
 The U.S. is the central bone structure of the alliance and this is a different kind of problem that we have to think very hard about . But it's quite another thing for the United States to get itself in the same position, he says .
 I think that as far as I am concerned I would have to say to you if we enter upon this path of challenging the Soviets what the Soviets do themselves have to embark tactically dangerous course that no one surely can foresee the outcome of the outcome . Now I think as far . as
 "I think the American people will willingly undertake great danger, if necessary," says President Obama . Obama says the U.S. is willing to take great danger if necessary for something .
 If they have a deep feeling that you've done everything possible possible to determine whether or not this trip was necessary, it's a good sign that it's not necessary to take a trip .
 The first point is whether this trip is necessary, we all of course, remember the Guns of August . We all remember the guns of August. We all need to remember August .
 "We've got the time now that we've gotten ... ... ... and this, this question I think is something that's pretty important. We're certainly convinced of the general situation"
 In the case in Korea, we had an organized, large-scale aggression from North Korea and we were going in as part of the United Nations effort . In the Korean War, the U.S. went into North Korea in response to North Korean aggression .
 The Korean aspect of it ... ... ... general support of the American people before it was over . The implication because the ... ... possibility, only a possibility Khrushchev might realize that he's got to back down .
 We can't be, we have no reason to expect that, as far as we're concerned. We can be, as well as we hope, we're not going to be disappointed. We're not, we can be disappointed, we'll never be disappointed .
 I'd like to hear my colleague comment on this, whether the, uh, the actual action we would take, that you have to . I'm not sure if it's possible, but I want to hear it from my colleague .
 It seems to be essential that this be challenged and be tested out before military action is employed . No one can guarantee that this can't be achieved by diplomatic action, but it seems that this is needed .
 "I can see no danger in communication with Khrushchev privately, worded in such a way that he realizes that we mean business. And if our decision is firm, and it must be, he must be," he says .
 "This is an essential first step, no matter what military course ... ... ... we determine on, if he replies unsatisfactorily," he says . "We determine on" if he answers unsatisfactoryly. This is a first step," he adds .
 I don't believe the threat of general nuclear war should be ... ... sole reactive, even if the strike should come first . "I don't think the threat ... should be the sole reactive," he says .
 A strike without a diplomatic effort would eventually lead to war with Cuba, says President Obama . "It would not be neat, quick disposal of the bases as was suggested," says Obama .
 I'm reasonablycertain the allied reaction would be very hostile. Furthermore I'm reasonably prepared to face a hostile reaction from the allies . I'm not sure how much of the world would be interested in the project .
 The Soviets could retaliate locally and take the area beyond Berlin . Especially if the Soviets retaliate locally .
 Communication with Khrushchev would be useful for the record in establishing the record, our case for action, says the BBC .
 A declaration of war would open up every avenue of military action, air strikes, invasion, blockade, blockade. In general, I feel that a declaration of . war would be valuable .
 We would have to make a case to our allies to justify such a declaration of war . But we would need to make an argument to justify it, he says .
 There are a series of alternative plans, ranging from Roman numeral 1 of about 50 sorties directed against solely against the known MRBMs, known as of last night . The alternative plans cover the alternative invasion plans, which are also available .
 That we would attack with conventional weapons against an enemy who is not equipped with operational nuclear weapons. That would be the first time we would use conventional weapons . That is not the case, it is the case that we would be using conventional weapons, says President Obama .
 "Ifthere is any possibility that the enemy is equipped with operational nuclear weapons, I'm certain the plans would have to be changed," he says . Ifthereisis said he is certain that the plans must be changed .
 Last night we were discussing the relative merits of military action, assuming that at some point military action was required . This week we looked at the merits of both military action and not military action in the US .
 Last evening, it was my personal belief that there were more targets than we knew of, and that it was probable that there would be more targets that we could know of at the start of these strikes .
 The information of this morning I think simply demonstrates the validity of that conclusion, last evening . The information from this morning simply demonstrates that that conclusion of last evening, last night .
 It would have to be larger than shown now because of the additional number of targets required and it fits very closely, to alternative 3 in terms of the number of sorties .
 I would agree with that particular scenario, that really 2 is hardly possible now. It's not quite possible now, it's a very difficult time to think about it. I would say that .
 Well under 2 you don't need to take up the SAM sites before they become operational . Unidentified voice says they may be operational at any time .
 This is why I emphasize a point here, that I don't believe the Soviets would authorize their use against the U.S. But they might nonetheless be used, he says .
 All these cases are premised on the assumptions there are no operational nuclear weapons there. Therefore, I underline his assumptions that all of these cases were premised . Therefore, he underlined his assumptions, which he underlines .
 If there is any possibility of that, I would strongly recommend that these plans be modified substantially . I would also recommend that they be modified significantly .
 The U.S. has been criticized for its stance on Cuba . President Barack Obama has been critical of the U.N. alliance with Cuba .
 Most allies regard the U.S. as a fixation of the United States and not a serious threat . Which is, most allies regard as . not a . serious military threat .
 The U.S. is "delighted" on Cuba, says President Obama . Cuba is a key ally of the Cuban people, Obama says . Obama: "You have to apply conditional tactical tactical ... before they would accept or support our action against Cuba"
 If we gave say this 24-hour notice, get in touch with Khrushchev, get a touch with him, he says . If we did, we would be taking no action with our allies, he said .
 I say that because if they were equipped to do that they would have been equipped to erect them more quickly, they would've been able to do it more quickly . I say I say because . If they were . equipped to . do that, I say . I . say that .
 If they were to move them in 24 hours I think we could keep enough reconnaissance over the island during that period to have some idea of where they've moved . We could also keep an eye on where they have moved .
 An actual text could be in hereand transmitted and that would get to Khrushchev straight away . Put it this way, it might be answered ...infinite delays on their end .
 So far we know there is no stated relationship that makes these Sovietmissiles or Soviet bases . So far there has not been stated relationship between these missiles and Soviet bases.
 Castro tried to ally himself with the Warsaw Pact or join the Warsaw pact or even to engage in a bilateralwith Moscow, apparently he ... and failed . There is the attempts that Castro made to ally .
 He sent Raul andChe Guevara to Moscow a few months ago apparently for that purpose, otherpurposes . He sent them to Moscow apparently for . that purpose .
 If we were to take action with the present status, the Soviets would have some latitude and might want to respond, if they did at all . Hence, if we took action, we would be more likely to respond .
 As a result of warning or communication with them, they declare their bases . On theother hand, as a . result of warnings or communication, they declared their bases. On the other hand, the . government declares bases .
 "We would have a problem of committing action against a stated base there," he says . "Because we would have to commit action ... there," the Pentagon says .
 The important factor there is that if you do this first strikeyou would kill a lot of Russians, it would be Russia's first strike . "The important factor" is that the first strike would kill many Russians, the Russian president says .
 Demand their dismantlement and say that we are going tomaintain constant surveillance, and if they are armed, we would then take them out, and then maybe do it . Demand their dismantlement and say we will maintain constant surveillance .
 I think we should be under no illusions that this would probably in the end lead to the same thing. I think it would probably lead to a similar thing. It would be a disaster for the country, not for the world, but for the U.S.
 The Russians have a curious faculty of wanting a legal basis, despite of all the outrageous things they've done, they attach a lot of importance to this . But we would do it under an entirely different posture and background, and much less danger of getting up into the big war .
 Llewellyn Thompson: "If they're prepared to say,if you do this, then this is nuclear world war, then you do that anyway" Thompson: Bomb 'em. Bomb 'them"
 "If we just made the first strike I think his answer would be, very probably to take out one of our bases in Turkey, and then sit down and talk," says David Cameron .
 I think the whole purpose of this exercise is to build up to talk with you, in which we try to negotiate out the bases, says President Obama . Obama: "I think we're going to have a long way to get back in touch with you"
 Cubans asked us for us to deal with emigre bases which are threatening, have attacked and are threatening to attack . We have, the Cubans . asked us . for us for . us to . deal with these emigres bases which . threaten to . attack and are
 Robert Kennedy: If we act, it better be Cuban missiles . Unidentified voice: I think our action is aimed at Cuba, just as much as possible. Well, that would be patently false on its face .
 I think almost certainly it leads to his answer would be also this is so serious, I'm prepared to talk to you about it. I think it will almost certainly lead to him saying this is a serious thing .
 The blockade wouldn't be sufficient, he could go on developing the things he's got there, he says . The blockade won't be enough, he said. He says .
 He would, uh, you impose a blockade, imposed a blockade on Cuba, and then you start to talk, he says . He says. He would. uh,  impose a blockade . Berlin, Cuba, Berlin, and Berlin are all targets .
 "I briefed him ... ... careful, I think, not to take any position, because I had no position," he says . I briefed him carefully, he says, "not to take a position"
 'He felt that limited actions, such as strafing, as anticipated, in 1 or 2 or even 3 of this paper would not be satisfactory. Secondly, I think that he felt that . limited actions such as . strafing ... would not . be satisfactory, he said .
 He felt, really, that if a move was made, and I think I pinned him down, he would recommend it, it should be an all out military action . Turkey or Pakistan or elsewhere .
 He felt that this was done, probably the thing ... ... could be done with the minimum loss of life, he says . And he felt that it was done . And that he felt it could ... be done .