 Kennedy made clear to Soviet dictator Nikita Khrushchev that basing missiles 90 miles off the coast of Florida was intolerable . Kennedy made it clear to Nikita that the missile base was 90 miles from the coast .
 U.S. and Soviet forces also came head to head in the divided German city of Berlin . Less retrospective is paid to what might be called the Tanks of October the year before, when United States and Soviet troops also fought in Berlin .
 1961 was not a good year for President Kennedy, especially in terms of the Cold War . Despite favorable polls extending him a 70% approval rating, he had a low approval rating .
 The wall was erected in August of that year to curb flight to democratic West Berlin . East Germany erected the wall around East Berlin to curb migration to the West . The criticism became more acute when the Soviet-backed communist government erected it .
 An estimated 10,000 refugees per week were fleeing East Germany for the democratic west at this time . The West was then dominated by East Germany's East-West Berlin .
 Khrushchev had made threats to close East Berlin . He had also insinuated that he would unite Berlin into one city and grant East Germany exclusive power over access .
 Kennedy was accused by many of being indecisive for not making clear how far he was prepared to go to secure West Berlin and maintain access to East Berlin . He was accused of not going to go far beyond what he was willing to go .
 In other words, the question was whether Kennedy would resort to nuclear war . The question was "whether Kennedy would use nuclear war," the author says .
 He said he was committed to maintaining the democratic integrity of West Berlin and ensuring western access to the communist sector in East Berlin .
 U.S. at an acute disadvantage in conventional forces in Europe implied that Kennedy was prepared to use nuclear deterrence . And the fact that the United States was at a disadvantage in European forces implied that he was prepared .
 It's not clear how far Khrushchev was prepared to go, it was really not clear what he was willing to go .
 He made the mistake of viewing Kennedy as weak, a mistake Kennedy’s critics in the west had also made in the wake of the Berlin Wall being erected . Kennedy's critics also made the same mistake in the aftermath of the Wall .
 Khrushchev was smarter than both the press and Kennedy’s western critics . But he was smart enough to win over the press, and he was smarter to win .
 Khrushchev garnered from the Vienna Conference that West Berlin was to remain free and within the orbit of the democracies . Kennedy had received low marks from the media for his performance at the conference .
 We must remember that Khrushchev envisioned for Berlin not just a maintenance of Soviet domination of East Berlin, but a Soviet advance into West Berlin . We must also remember that he envisioned for East Berlin was a Soviet invasion of West Berlin.
 Most retrospectives treat erection of the wall as the culmination of the Berlin Crisis . The wall was erected in 1961, and the Berlin Wall fell in 1968, during the Cold War .
 United States officials and their British and French allies still maintained the right to enter and leave East Berlin . The U.S. and its allies maintained the rights to enter East Berlin in the early 1950s .
 By October 1961, East German authorities resorted to harassment of western access into East Berlin . And by October 1961 it had begun to harass the west into Berlin .
 Khrushchev ordered his tanks to retreat and access to East Berlin was restored in full . The incident took place in the early hours of September 1, 1962 .
 The U.S. and the democratic west were in good hands in the 1980s, writes David Gergen . And in retrospect, it was clear that the United States and the west were good hands .