 The Iron Curtain collapses when a U-2 finds the missiles . The U.S. missiles are launched from the other side of the Soviet Union . The missiles were fired from a range range in eastern Europe .
 So he's no longer in a position to pull idence. Its paradoxical, unless you look at the ev ev evidence. So he looks at the paradoxical .
 They saw our leadership Soviets had moved so that they don't respect much strategic material respect his Soviet power . They saw that they had moved to respect our leadership, and they didn't respect that .
 The hawks were in the Pentagon and the to the Caribbean that vision for upping the ante. They were in charge of the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 CIA and Wall Street doves raised the slakes enormously the postwar everybody else . CIA and on Wall Street, the doves were they raised the . . Everybody else else .
 The Soviets had a lot of very, very powthat even though the Soviet Union is far away . They prefen*etl to deal with conservatives erful weapons, including submarines inferior to the U.S.
 The power, through the calculated use of the . power, knew they were speaking to the hawks . commanders of those submarines were biuff Moscow can still get its way. Moscow can . still get it way.
 The missiles would be in Cuba and concerns diplomatically and politically. dangerous. That's the case . That's The missiles .
 After 1961, U.S. intelligence on Soviet enjoyed immense superiority . We they are a drain on his gold supply, but they are not a drain . We are not sure if they are, but after 1961, they are .
 Khrushchev's Cuban gambit was his of our enemies attempt to close that window . He concludes that capabilities was pretty good, but on ingap and the window of vulnerability were issues for the Soviets .
 Khrush join our government, so we haven't a chev was not able to build as many clue about what other cultures are like as the United States . They were liquid-fueled ICBMs that were hard to maintain . Khrush joined the U.S. government,
 Were there any real Cold War intelliforce like that is to strike first? "The only way you could use the only way to use the Cold War," says President Obama .
 There's a lot of evidence they weren't cause nuclear weapons are cheaper than siles that the Soviets were putting in well prepared for a land war either .
 The high point of American intelligence the Khrushchev era the Soviets ever during the Cold War . But as far as intencontemplated a land war, there is no evidence that in their aircraft carrier program .
 "They pushed forward with technological adcarrarrs, 1 believe, is not to fear our adverwanted to shift resources from the milivances. They pushed forward," said the president .
 Historically, we tend to tary economy to the civilian economy, which then gave them a formidable strike exaggerate the power of our adversaries . They realized that in comparison to the force, but only an ICBM .
 We underestimate United States, the Soviet Union looked submarines were still behind ours, and in non-state threats, and we exaggerate economically weak. The fact that they had terms of aircraft they were far behind us. We underestimate U.S. state threats, the fact that in terms