 On four separate occasions in 1960 and early &apos;61, war scares shook the island . On 4 separate occasions, the island was shaken by war scares .
 Cuba mobilized thousands of soldiers to combat an imminent U.S.-backed landing in October, 1960 . Cuba mobilized troops to prepare for the landing in Cuba in October 1960 .
 Despite a lack of evidence, the Soviets, who were then wooing Cuba, accepted the idea of a looming invasion, too . But no attack materialized .
 Fidel Castro and his inner circle believed that Soviet threats of retaliation had caused the United States to back down . Elated, Fidel Castro believed that the U.S. had backed down .
 In fact, neither the KGB nor the Cuban security forces knew much about U.S. plans . Neither did they know much about the United States plans .
 Playa de Giron was taken completely by surprise by the invasion of Cuba . The small Cuban garrison was surprised by the surprise attack .
 President John F Kennedy&apos;s ambivalence about the operation and the fatal lack of air support for the Cuban-exile invaders allowed the Castroites to triumph . President Kennedy &apos.;s ambivalent about operation .
 The book is a trove of fresh information, partly gleaned from newly accessible Soviet archives . The book also includes interviews with surviving players .
 In October, high-altitude U.S. reconnaissance flights revealed the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . In October the United States flew reconnaissance flights to Cuba .
 In ensuing U.S. National Security Council meetings, participants debated a response ranging from air strikes to blockades to outright invasion . Participants debated a United States response to the situation .
 Kennedy opted for a Navy-enforced &quot;strict quarantine of Cuba . The quarantine was announced in a dramatic speech on national television .
 Khrushchev refused to call back ships steaming toward the island with additional nukes aboard . The Soviet Union refused to back ships with additional nuclear weapons aboard .
 Castro mobilized 350,000 soldiers, and the United States Strategic Air Command was placed on nuclear alert . The U.S. Strategic Air command was also placed on alert . Castro was the first president of the Cuban republic .
 The Soviets would remove the missiles; Kennedy would end the quarantine and pledge not to invade Cuba . Kennedy would also pledge not invading Cuba . The Soviets removed the missiles, Kennedy ended the quarantine .
 From the earliest days of the revolutionary regime, Raul was working to engineer closer ties to the Soviet Union . We also learn that during the missile crisis, the world came very close to holocaust .
 The Kremlin signed orders allowing the Soviet commander in Cuba to use tactical missiles in the event of a U.S. invasion .
 Following the Bay of Pigs fiasco, he settled for covert action against Cuba . He settled on covert action after every other approach seemed problematic . The U.S. went to war with Cuba in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev believed it would answer the American threat but...also avoid war, since he expected Kennedy simply to swallow a fait accompli . The book offers fly-on-the-wall excitement .
 At times the source material seems to be writing the book, as the authors fail to counter their biases and flaws . At times, the author fails to counter his documents&apos; biases, flaws .
 Kennedy Administration materials portray outgoing President Dwight D Eisenhower as tired and unimaginative in foreign affairs . Authors offer no more balanced perspective than the Kennedy Administration .
 Quotes from Castro appear as English translations of Russian translations of the original Spanish quotes . Quotes are from Castro's book, which was translated into Spanish . Castro was a member of the Communist Party of Soviet Russia .
 Bloomberg Green brings you the news, science, and data to understand it in full . CNN.com will feature iReporters from around the world .
 Every week, Bloomberg's Kailey Leinz speaks to thought leaders and innovators . This week's featured CNN Tech Heroics .
 Rhuigi Villaseñor grew up as a global citizen . He settled in Southern California and found his twin passions: clothing and hustle . He is proud of his work as a fashion designer .
 Kendrick Lamar wore a t-shirt design of his, the bandana tee, on stage at the BET Awards . Lamar wore the design on stage and everything changed .
 Rhuigi would go on to create a unique language at the intersection of Americana, Luxury and Streetwear that would drive the brand to the pinnacle of cool and also to commercial success . RHUDE would be born shortly thereafter, and RhUigi would be created shortly thereafter
 Get uninterrupted access to global news for $1.99/month. Cancel anytime. "Explore Offers"
 Get uninterrupted access to global news for $1.99/month. Cancel anytime. Subscribe to unlimited access.
 Get uninterrupted access to global news for $0.50/week . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on iReport .
 Get uninterruped access to global news for $1.99/month. Cancel anytime. "Explore Offers"
 Get uninterrupted access to global news for $290/year. Cancel anytime .
 Get uninterrupted access to global news for $1.99/month. Cancel anytime. "Explore Offers"
 "Global news that uncovers a new tomorrow, for $199/year. Limited time offer.\"", "Claim This Offer", "Sub" and "Sub-Sub" are all available now .
 "Global news that uncovers a new tomorrow, for $99/6 months. Limited time offer.\"", "Claim This Offer", "Sub" and "ExpandCtaCopy" are all available now .
 Get uninterrupted access to global news for $99/6 months . Use this article to help us understand today's featured news stories .