 Mr Scali's journalistic career included many years with The Associated Press and ABC News . He also served as ambassador to the United Nations replacing George Bush .
 Richard Nixon's trips as vice president to Russia and Poland were covered in the U.S. He covered Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev's visit to the United States . Richard Nixon traveled to Poland and Russia as a vice president .
 He stood between Khrushchev and Nixon during the famous ""kitchen debate" in which the two leaders traded barbs on the relative merits of democracy and communism .
 In 1962, President Kennedy disclosed the existence of offensive missile sites in Cuba . President Kennedy warned that if any were fired at the United States, the U.S. would retaliate .
 Two days later, Mr Scali was contacted by Alexandr S Fomin, a personal friend of Khrushchev's . Fomin was a KGB official in Washington and a personal friends of the former Soviet leader .
 Fomin outlined a proposal under which the Soviets would dismantle the Cuban missile bases if the U.S. government would pledge not to invade Cuba . Fomin: The Soviets would remove the bases in exchange for a U.N. pledge to not invade Cuba.
 The emigre community can now talk about ""before"" and ""after"" the Year of the Indefinite Detention of 32,000 Cuban rafters in Guantanamo and Panama . The emigrant community now can talk about the year of the year .
 Cuban exiles set foot on U.S. soil . The fable was an improbable tale of red-carpet treatment the moment they arrived .
 After the 1966 Cuban Adjustment Act, Cubans had automatic legal status, giving them a head start in the race toward the American dream . The federal government provided arriving Cubans with food, clothing and opportunities to study or open a business .
 They had only the privileges that U.S. law gives any political refugee . The refugees were allowed to stay in the United States under a temporary order .
 The ""pampered minority myth" dismissed the hard work and sacrifices that Cuban immigrants made . The ""Pampered Minority myth"" dismissed the work and sacrifice made by Cuban immigrants .
 The myth conveniently ignored the Cubans' prolonged disenfranchisement, and the general contempt with which the nation's news media originally treated them and their cause . The myth also ignored the fact that Cubans were denied access to the U.S. government .
 Until this year of mass detention, many Cubans also wanted to buy the ""privileged minority myth" The myth seemed to distinguish them from other beleaguered minorities . Cubans are now being held in mass detention .
 Cubans repressed their grievances against a society that had given them refuge and that was infinitely more livable than their homeland . Cubans were forced to live in a society where they had been forced to leave their home .
 Their belief in the myth partly explains their reluctance to get involved in the problems of other minorities . The myth is said to explain why they are reluctant to help minorities .
 Haitians and Nicaraguans have received more help from Washington in their struggle for freedom and democracy . They are not perceived to be as economically and politically influential as Cuban Americans .
 Some prominent Cuban Americans initially struck with the Clinton administration to support the rafters' detention doesn't alter these arguments . The Faustian deal that some prominent Cuban American Americans struck with Clinton administration doesn't change these arguments.
 Cuban Americans know that the rafters are their own flesh and blood -in many cases literally . The rafters of the Cuban American home are Cuban American families .
 They view the obstinate, almost universal repudiation of rafters as a rejection of all Cubans . They view it as an almost universal rejection of the rafters . The obstinate repudiation is seen as an attempt to deny Cubans all support .
 Cubans reject political, xenophobic, rejection of rafters has united Cubans . Small wonder then, that other people, sometimes xenophobic people, reject rafters . Cubans are united in their rejection .
 Their unity has been strengthened by the apparent disinterest of the government and public opinion in the rights of the detainees . The unity of the protesters has strengthened .
 The federal lawsuit seeks to reaffirm the humanity of those detained and to ensure their rights under U.S. and international law . The lawsuit seems to have administration officials frothing .
 Even Cubans who normally behave like American jingoists are wondering why their countrymen -no different than they - suddenly ceased to be political refugees . Even Cuban Americans are asking why they suddenly stopped being political refugees.
 Why so many people rail against the lesser evil of comparing Guantanamo to Treblinka but accede to the greater evil of indefinitely detaining human beings . Why do you think it's better to keep Guantanamo detainees indefinitely?
 Some of the answers lie in the nation's current antiimmigrant mood and in America's tortuous history of ethnic relations . The nation has a long history of anti-immigrant relations .
 I hope that in seeking answers Cuban Americans will be inspired by Harold Hongju Koh, a Yale scholar . I hope to ask for answers from a scholar like Koh .
 The rafters' fate hangs on this brilliant Korean American's legal expertise . "The rafters of the rafters" are at risk of losing their rafters .
 He became an advocate, first for Haitians and now for Cubans, he says, because he did not want to wait for government to mistreat his Asian family before acting to protect their rights . He says he is now an advocate for the Cuban people .
 Thomas Moore signed for documents stamped ""top secret" in bold red type . Moore's compact car was being filled with shotguns and explosives . Moore signed documents stamped 'top secret' in bold type .
 It was Oct., 1962, and fate had thrust the young naval officer to the forefront of a global crisis that was escalating by the minute .
 President John F Kennedy still was hours away from telling the world that the Soviet Union was building nuclear missile sites in Cuba . The United States wouldn't stand for it, and the U.S. wouldn't have stood for it .
 He was careful not to use the word ""blockade,"" because under international law, that would have been an act of war . He said he was careful to avoid using the word "blockade" as a reference .
 By the time the president spoke, Moore already had been enveloped for hours in the unfolding drama . Moore was enveloped by the president's attention .
 While I was getting the top-secret orders, they were loading grenades, shotguns and ammunition into my car . While I got the top secret orders, I was loading grenades and shotguns in my car. They were loading guns and ammunition .
 I was carrying explosives in my civilian car down Hampton Boulevard, where our ship was moored . Here I am carrying explosives down the street .
 The Pierce had been selected as one of the ships that would enforce the quarantine . Those and the top-secret orders revealed that the Pierce was selected .
 The Pierce left Norfolk on Oct. 10. and reached its area of operations two days later . The Pierce is the first ship from the Navy to land in the U.S.
 The vintage World War II vessel was so old and tired that its chief engineer had pushed a wooden pencil though its hull . The wooden pencil was pushed through the hull of the vessel .
 The Pierce's radio operator received a message that the Lebanese merchant freighter Marucla was in the area . The freighter was headed to the Pierce area on Oct. 31 .
 The ship, chartered to the Soviets, was suspected of carrying prohibited cargo to Cuba . The ship was believed to have been chartered by the Soviets .
 Pierce initially was ordered to let it proceed, but a short time later, things changed, he says . Pierce says the Pierce was initially ordered to allow it to proceed .
 The USS Joseph P Kennedy will be the official ship to board the USS Joseph Kennedy . The ship is a destroyer, a destroyer from the Philippines .
 It ordered the Marucla to stop and prepare to be boarded . Using internationally recognized flag signals, it ordered the ship to stop . The ship was ordered to prepare for being boarded .
 Navy protocol dictated that the boarding party had to include two officers of a certain rank . Navy protocol required two officers to board the ship . The ship was the last ship to arrive in the U.S. on board .
 Dwight G Osborne, Pierce's executive officer, became senior officer of the boarding party .
 "If we had boarded a ship with missiles on it, we would have had to take it into custody and bring it to a port in the United States," says the U.S. State Department .
 Information declassified a few years ago revealed that the White House had a list of the different Soviet ships headed toward Cuba and their suspected cargo .
 The crisis ended Oct., 1962, when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev announced over Radio Moscow that he'd agreed to move missiles from Cuba . 50 years ago today, 50 years later, the crisis ended in a dramatic end .
 Kennedy agreed not to invade the tiny country off the tip of Florida . By then, Kennedy had agreed to a treaty with the tiny nation .
 The deal came less than two years after the young president approved the ill-fated ""Bay of Pigs"" invasion of southern Cuba .
 Moore said his father worried that Cuban leader Fidel Castro "was a hothead" Moore said he worried that Castro was a "hothead" His father worried about Castro's behavior .
 Early next month, Moore will host a reunion at his home for eight of his shipmates . Moore will be hosting a reunion with eight of the shipmates he left behind . Moore's shipmates will be reunited next month .
 The movie is about the Cuban missile crisis which took the U.S. and Russia to the brink of war 40 years ago . The movie was released on Friday night at 9pm on ABC .
 Costner's film is attracting a lot of interest with the world focusing now on the US-China spy plane stand-off .
 Costner arrived at Havana's Hotel National looking travel weary after the seven-hour flight . Co-producers of the film Armyan Bernstein, Beacon Pictures chairman, and Peter Almond, along with several others from the production team made the trip to Cuba for the premiere .
 The filmmakers will work with the Cuban Institute of Cinematographic Arts and Industry to screen the film to public audiences . The film will be shown to the public in Cuba .
 The film will be shown to Cuban government officials who were involved in the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 . It is known to Cubans as the Crisis of October, known to Cuban people as the crisis .
 Thirteen Days opened in the U.S. in January and got its first high-profile screening at the White House . President George Bush and members of the Kennedy family viewed the film . It was viewed by Bush and the family of Kennedy .
 New Line Cinema then had the movie about the US-Soviet nuclear showdown sent to the international space station for the enjoyment of its crew, two Russians and an American .
 In the movie, Costner stars as Kenny O'Donnell, a White House aide to President John F Kennedy and his brother Robert . The movie stars Costner as Kenny . Costner is in the movie .
 Schiff portrayed Kennedy as he announced in late 1962 that the American naval blockade of Cuba had worked and that the Soviet Union had conceded on the issue of arming the island nation . Schiff portrayed a triumphant Kennedy in the film .
 Students of Journalism 4004 fill in as the White House press corps . Students toss real questions to the fake president about the missile crisis .
 Could Americans have handled the truth about the country's perilous proximity to nuclear war, had they known, student asks .
 Schiff kindled the Kennedy presence throughout the mock news conference . Employing an even Boston accent and pausing after every third or fourth word, Schiff paused every third of the words .
 Schiff spent months studying books on the period and videotapes of Kennedy speeches . Schiff: "I had to become so familiar with Kennedy and the issue that I could think as if I were the president"
 The documents date from the summer of 1962 through early 1963 . The documents add details about what is known about the failure of senior Kennedy administration officials .
 Kennedy advisers began warning in August 1962 that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was capable of putting missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's advisers who began warning that the Soviet Premier was ready to put missiles in the country .
 McCone forced Kennedy and top national security advisers to consider options, such as blockades and quarantines, for reacting to what was then only a hunch .
 McCone left on a honeymoon in late August, and there was no immediate follow-up to these early discussions . McCone is now on his honeymoon with his wife .
 McCone's hunch turned into reality when U-2 photos revealed construction of Soviet missile sites near San Cristobol, Cuba . Two months later, on Oct. 31, photos revealed Soviet medium-range ballistic missile sites in Cuba .
 The discovery raised the threat that Soviet nuclear warheads would be in position to reach the U.S. mainland with little warning time . The discovery raises the possibility of a nuclear strike in the United States .
 Kennedy declared a naval quarantine of all Soviet and communist bloc shipping into Cuba and called on Khrushchev to remove the missiles . Kennedy on Oct. 11, 1962, announced the discovery of the missiles and called for a quarantine . Kennedy: The discovery was a major mistake .
 In succeeding days, the Soviets pushed work on the missiles to make them operational . The Soviets pushed for work to make the missiles operational .
 Khrushchev had hoped to have the weapons installed before they were discovered . He was certain he would have the upper hand once they were ready to fire . The weapons were discovered by the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 CIA materials appear especially instructive today, when President Bush is making trust and experience in crisis management a factor in electing a president, the CIA materials .
 The 45-year-old chief executive was met by a relatively inexperienced, inexperienced, 45 . They expand previous accounts of how one of the nation's major nuclear-age crises was met .
 Documents, along with transcripts of tape-recorded White House meetings held on Oct., 1962, and released by the Kennedy Presidential Library, present vivid details of a critical stage of the missile crisis .
 Kennedy vacillates as the day progresses before choosing a final course of action . Kennedy's final decision was made in a bid to avoid a repeat of the tragedy .
 Among the materials being disclosed are CIA data provided to Kennedy the morning of Oct. 31 . The data was that the agency considered 24 Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles operational .
 If launched from Cuba, missiles could reach as far as New Orleans, Nashville and Richmond . The 1,000-miles-milerange missiles could be launched from the island .
 Photos confirmed that missiles had been moved to launch site in night exercises . Cables, fueling trucks and guidance equipment had been put in place . The missiles were kept separate from their launchers .
 Kennedy's recorded words reflect the varied pressures he faced . Kennedy recorded words on Oct. 31, 1963 . Kennedy's words reflect varied circumstances in his life .
 At times he talked of his belief that although he wanted to avoid war, the only way he could get the missiles out would be to attack Cuba or undertake a secret trade with Khrushchev that would be politically and diplomatically damaging if disclosed .
 For dramatization purposes, it inflates the role of appointments secretary Kenny O'Donnell, played by Kevin Costner . It shortchanges the contributions made by Adlai Stevenson, McGeorge Bundy and Gen. Gen. George Bundy . The role of the appointments secretary is inflated by
 There is no substitute for presidential leadership, no matter how experienced and brilliant the president's top advisers may be . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his handling of the White House .
 It is the president's own judgment, his own knowledge of his adversary and allies, and his ability to guide his advisers and weigh conflicting advice that matter most in the end .
 A negotiated solution, when possible and reasonable, always serves the interests of both parties better than a military solution . The U.S. should negotiate a negotiated solution when it comes to a solution, especially in the age of proliferating weapons of mass destruction .
 Presidential firmness, flexibility and a willingness to maintain a confidential dialogue with the other side - even during the worst times of tension and confrontation - are indispensable . President Barack Obama has been in office since 2009 .
 In world affairs, a U.S. president's every word to another nation's leader, whether written or spoken, is weighted with meaning and consequence . In world politics, every word, including that of the president's to another leader, is weighed with meaning .
 Drafting a letter that could mean the difference between life and death for one's countrymen, or even the planet, inspires clear and careful phrasing that leaves no loopholes but burns no bridges . Drafting such a letter could save the lives of one's people and the planet . Draft
 When dealing with an aggressive adversary, a measured and limited first step is preferable to an unlimited surprise attack that invites both a belligerent response and the condemnation of history . A measured first step that leaves both the president and the other side with an option other than humiliation or escalation is preferable .
 A president's military advisers are likely to trust only military solutions . His diplomatic advisers will likely see merit only in diplomatic solutions, etc. His legal, economic and spiritual advisers will focus primarily on the tools of their respective trades .
 A presidential solution, possibly drawing upon the best elements of all the others, is most often the right answer . A combination of fair-minded diplomacy with a threat of superior military force is most likely to be the answer .
 President Barack Obama is an ambidextrous president with exquisite timing . Thrusting forward the olive branch and the arrows grasped by the eagle represented on the presidential seal requires a president to be a president with a good timing .
 Nuclear missiles are the most likely and most practical weapons for a president to use in a military crisis . For all the terrible power and deterrent value of nuclear missiles, conventional forces are most likely to be used in a crisis .
 No one better positioned to serve as an independent and invaluable channel of confidential communications and cool reflection than the secretary-general of the U.N. Security Council .
 All these lessons and more come through in the movie as well as the published tape transcripts of that harrowing 13-day ordeal .
 'My role, as portrayed in the film and as transpired in 1962, was comparatively light. My role as an actor in 1962 is comparatively light,' she says .
 Robert Kennedy drafted the penultimate letter to Soviet Chairman Nikita S Khrushchev . Attorney General Robert Kennedy was at his side at drafting the letter . The heavy sense of weight he felt was seared on his memory long before that moment was depicted on the screen .
 "That was a moment that neither I nor any American would ever want to experience again. That was that moment," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says .
 The dramatic action sheds a whole new light on those dread-filled days that October, when the world looked like it would be covered in mushroom clouds . Director Matthew Vaughn and his team should be thanked for their work .
 The crisis was a triumph of U.S. brinkmanship, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The crisis is a triumph for the United States, he says .
 Historians say the resolution of the standoff was really a triumph of back-door diplomacy . Historians: The resolution was really an attempt to get around the world .
 The pledge was a secret pledge known to only a handful of presidential advisers . It was not known until years later that the pledge was made public .
 The U.S. came out a winner, but so did the Soviet Union . The United States came out of a winner . The Soviet Union did not win, but did the United States .
 Khrushchev announced the imminent dismantling of offensive weapons in Cuba the next day . Their withdrawal, along with Kennedy's assurance that he would not invade Cuba, was enough to feel he had saved face . The next day he announced the imminent dismissal of weapons in
 It was ""the darkest, most dangerous day of the crisis,"" analyst Peter Kornbluh said . Analysts call it the "darkest day" of history .
 Khrushchev recalled ships carrying nuclear equipment the next day . Kennedy announced a U.S. naval quarantine around the island to prevent more military equipment from arriving .
 Rusk's famous "eyeball" statement was already hundreds of miles away, steaming home . That means that on Oct. 31, when Rusk made his famous ""eyebal" statement, the vessels were already on their way home from the airport .
 The CIA missed several key developments that would have helped Kennedy and his advisers navigate the crisis . The CIA was a day late on the turnaround by Soviet ships, and missed key developments .
 This myth has been perpetuated in part by the title of Robert F Kennedy's posthumous memoir, ""Thirteen Days" as well as the 2000 movie of the same name starring Kevin Costner .
 Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan spent 20 days in tense talks with Cuba's Cuban leader . Cuban leader was angry that the Soviets had reached a deal without consulting him .
 Historians say it was compromise rather than a game of chicken that resolved face-off', St. Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch at ion .
 Jose Morin encounters the ghosts of the Cold War as he drives into the heart of what was once a highly guarded Nike missile base . Morin visits the former base in a bid to find out what happened .
 He stops at the deserted control center where missile crews watched over the base's 18 nuclear-tipped Nike missiles . The control center is now a deserted base .
 In 1993, Morin's trip around the base, on the county line, is just another inspection . Morin: "In 1993, in 1993, the base was on the base's highest level of inspection. The base is now on a mission to find out why .
 Cold War was once part of South Florida life . But it also conjures up images of a time when it was part of the Cold War .
 It was one of a dozen missile sites built to guard the Miami-Homestead area from enemy air attack . The site was built in the 1950s and '60s .
 The Nike program ended in the continental United States in 1979 when the last sites were deactivated . Cornell is the registrar of the United States Army Air Defense Artillery Museum at Fort Bliss near El Paso, Texas .
 The Miramar base, built east of Flamingo Road, was designated as HM-03 . It was operated by the Battery C, 2nd Battalion of the Army's 52nd Artillery Brigade .
 An assembly building was used to install nuclear or conventional warheads on the 41-foot-long air defense missiles .
 Guard dogs patrolled between the fences in what Morin says was then a ""kill zone,"" where intruders could be shot . Morin: "Kill zone" was a "kill zone" where dogs could be used to shoot intruders . Guard dogs patrol between fences .
 Howard Forman, D-Hollywood, wants to convert the abandoned missile base into a historic site . Forman wants to remind residents of South Florida's Cold War heritage . He wants to turn the site into a museum .
 Forman said he plans to meet with federal, state and county officials later this year to see if an agreement can be reached to preserve the site . Forman: I'll meet with state, federal, county officials to discuss preservation .
 In the late 1980s, county officials wanted to make it a permanent home for the Broward County Fair . County officials wanted it to be permanent home to the fair . The Broward Fair is now home to many of the world's largest events, including the county fair .
 Since then, a permanent fairgrounds has been proposed further west on 172nd Avenue at a new regional park in western Miramar .
 Another plan was to create a large National Guard camp to be used as a training grounds for guard units throughout the state . The camp would be used to train National Guard units in other states .
 Miramar City Manager Eric Soroka said the base has become overgrown and is used as a dumping ground . The city manager said the city wants something done as the base is overgrown . Soroka: The city wants to see the base cleaned up .
 If anything, contemporary complacency about the distinctive destructiveness of nuclear weapons makes reviewing this moment in history more important, not less . The U.S. should review its nuclear weapons policy in light of the threat posed by nuclear weapons .
 From Oct. to 28, 1962, the crisis dominated international public and media attention as Washington and Moscow sparred right on the edge of thermonuclear war . The crisis lasted from October to October 1962 .
 Lessons of the events include the exceptional difficulty of securing accurate intelligence, the unpredictability of developments, and the importance of tone and temperament as well as decisions at the top during a major crisis .
 U.S. U-2 aircraft reconnaissance photos revealed the Soviet Union was placing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite contrary assurances . U.2 reconnaissance photos were taken in October 1962, 1962 .
 President Kennedy Kennedy and his advisers spent a week debating options . National security adviser McGeorge Bundy informed President John F Kennedy Kennedy Kennedy .
 Senior officials assumed Moscow would never put long-range missiles into Cuba . Kennedy administration assumed Moscow wouldn't put missiles in Cuba . CIA Director John McCone was independent .
 Khrushchev and associates agreed the move would be just too risky, they said . They erroneously calculated the move was too risky . Khrushchevitch and associates thought it would be too risky to move . The move would have led to a collapse in the Soviet Union .
 Earlier, reconnaissance flights over Cuba were curtailed severely to avoid antagonizing Moscow . The flights were resumed only because McCone aggressively, adamantly pressed the matter .
 Analysis developed photographic evidence of the Soviet deception just before the missiles would have become operational . Analysis developed evidence just before they would have been operational .
 At the start of the crisis, there was strong sentiment, especially among the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for a conventional air attack followed by an invasion of Cuba . There was also strong sentiment for an attack on Cuba .
 JFK imaginatively decided instead of a naval quarantine as the U.S. first step . JFK's first step was to quarantine the United States first .
 JFK accepted while publicly rejecting a Soviet proposal for a Cuba-Turkey missile trade . Bundy's history of the nuclear age, ""Danger and Survival,"" published a quarter century after the crisis, revealed JFK accepted the proposal . Bundy: JFK accepted and rejected the Soviet proposal .
 Throughout the crisis, Kennedy demonstrated calm, open-minded engagement . Kennedy was calm and engaged throughout the crisis .
 In 1961, JFK approved a flawed Cuba invasion plan strongly endorsed by the CIA and military, then mishandled developments . JFK was inexperienced when he approved the plan to invade Cuba .
 Lessons of crisis include importance of thorough, objective intelligence analysis, and communicating effectively with opponents . Lessons of the crisis include important intelligence analysis .
 During Oct.-28 1962, the crisis dominated international public and media attention . Washington and Moscow sparred right on the edge of thermonuclear war .
 National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy informed President John F Kennedy of his findings . President Kennedy was informed after a thorough review .
 A secretive advisory group held a meeting Oct., 1962, to discuss the ongoing work of Operation Mongoose . The plan to cause disruptions in Cuba included blowing up power stations and planting U.S. intelligence infiltrators .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy, tapped by his brother to oversee Mongoose, attended the event . Attorney General John Kennedy was tapped to oversee the project .
 Documents now available at the National Archives in College Park, Md., provide a glimpse inside the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board .
 After failed U.S.-backed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in April 1961, Kennedy formed his version of the advisory group . Kennedy sought improved intelligence gathering and formed his own group .
 Kennedy and his team considered several possible U.S. responses - including a direct airstrike against Cuba . Kennedy was alerted to the rapid buildup of Soviet missile sites .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro could attack U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba . Cuban President Castro is expected to attack the base in response to any attack .
 "It is not conduct that one would expect from the United States,"" says George Ball, an undersecretary of state at the time . Ball: "It's not conduct ... it is ... not conduct"
 On the same day, the United States massed hundreds of fighter jets in Florida . The U.S. was closely monitoring all military activity on Cuba via satellite tracking stations .