 Use a chart like the one below to list the different proxy wars fought by the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Use the chart to help you understand the history of proxy wars .
 The competition between the perpowers also affected ‘hot wars, or those that actually involved fighting,’ says historian .
 The United States and the Soviet Union were now the world’s two superpowers . U.S. and Soviet Union now have the world's two super powers .
 European nations were forced to depend upon one or the other of these two major powers . As the ld War conflict between them grew stronger, European countries were divided into two armed camps .
 The rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union brought the world the brink of nuclear war . The U.S. and Soviet Union fought to avoid a nuclear war.
 These two nations seemed to hold the survival of the orld in their hands . The two nations were seen to be holding onto the survival .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union fought in a series of proxy wars . The United States and the Soviets fought in the Cold War .
 proxy war occurs when two powers use substitutes instead of fighting each other directly . A proxy war is a war that involves using substitutes to avoid direct combat . proxy wars are often used by the same powers in conflict .
 Both the United States d the Soviet Union were armed with powerful nuclear arsenals . Both the U.S. d the . Soviet Union was armed with . powerful nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union had a powerful nuclear arsenal .
 The two nations considered this support as part of the ongoing struggle between their two orldviews . The two countries considered it to be part of an ongoing struggle .
 Each superpower used military and economic aid to win the support of other nations . The U.S. has been involved in the Middle East for more than 20 years .
 The United ates began with NATO in Europe and continued to build liances in other parts of the world . The United States is the largest military alliance in the world with NATO .
 The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization was formed to op Communist aggression in the East . It was formed in response to the threat posed posed posed by the West .
 Central Treaty Organization included Turkey, Iraq, Iran, Pakistan, Great Britain, and the U.S. The organization was formed in 1950s .
 The Korean War and Vietnam War were two major conflicts of the Cold War . Korea and Vietnam were the two major Cold War conflicts . Vietnam was one of the two Cold War Cold War wars .
 The Soviet Union and the United States sent military ports to prevent the other side from expanding its influence . The Soviets and the U.S. sent ports in order to stop the Soviet Union expanding its power .
 The Cold War proxy conflict on e small island of Cuba almost turned into a major nuclear war . Also, the Cold War . proxy conflict . almost turned to a major . nuclear war on the Cuban island of Havana .
 In August 1945, the Soviet Union and the United States agreed to divide Korea . North Korea was divided by Soviet Union, U.S. and United States .
 The plan was to hold elections after World War II to reunify, or join together again, Korea . Korea was ruled out of reunification after the war, but the plan was never realized .
 Two separate governments emerged in Korea: Communist one in the north and an anti-Communist one in south . North Korea was ruled by a Communist government in the 1950s .
 Communist North Korea invaded South Korea on June 25, 1950 . With Joseph Stalin’s promise of Soviet support, Communist North Korean troops invaded the Korean peninsula . South Korea was invaded by North Korea in 1950 .
 Truman saw this as yet another example of Communist aggression and expansion . Truman saw the move as an example of the Communist aggression .
 U.S. troops were sent to repel or force back North Korean invaders . U.N. approval of the U.K. troops was granted by the United Nations .
 In October, UN forces --mostly American --marched across the 38th parallel . UN forces, mostly American, were deployed across the border .
 The Communist government of China was greatly alarmed by the presence of the UN forces . The Chinese government was also alarmed by their presence .
 The Chinese sent hundreds of thousands of troops into North Korea . As a result of the crisis, North Korea has seen a rise in tensions with the West .
 North Korean and South Korean troops fought for three more years . North Korea and South Korea troops, along with those of supporting countries, fought for more than three years .
 An armistice, or an agreement to stop fighting, was finally signed in 1953 . Armistice was an agreement, or agreement, to end fighting between the two sides .
 The 38th parallel remained, and remains today, the boundary line between North Korea and South Korea . It remained the border line between the two Koreas .
 Many Americans viewed events in Korea as a success for the policy of containing, or limiting, communism in Asia . Many Americans now see events as a failure for the policies of containing and limiting communism in the region .
 The United States was now more determined than ever to contain Soviet power . The U.S. was determined to contain the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 Eisenhower adopted a policy of massive retaliation, or fighting back, in the mid-1950s . As a result, the administration of President Dwight D Eisenhower adopted the policy of fighting back .
 The policy stated that any Soviet advance would be met with the full use of American nuclear bombs . The policy was implemented in the early 1950s .
 After the Korean War, U.S. military alliances extended around the world . It was after that Korean War that American military alliances began .
 In 1959 a left-wing revolutionary named Fidel Castro erthrew the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista . Fidel Castro overthrew the dictator in 1959 . The Cuban dictator was overthrown by Fidel Castro .
 U.S. viewed this Soviet-backed regime so close to the mainland as a security threat . United States viewed it as a threat to the U.K.
 Permission is granted to reproduce for classroom use. tween the two superpowers .
 Cuban fighters would invade Cuba at the Bay of Pigs . The plan was approved by the President of the United States .
 One hundred fourteen people died, and the rest were killed by Castro’s troops . Castro's troops killed the rest of the dead, including many of his troops .
 In 1962, Soviet leader Nikita hrushchev began to place nuclear missiles in Cuba . Then, in 1962, he placed nuclear missiles on Cuba . The missiles were placed in Cuba by the Soviet leader .
 The missiles were a clear response to the acement of U.S. nuclear weapons in Turkey . They were launched in response to a threat posed by the United States .
 Khrushchev commented that the U.S. was worried about Soviet missiles that ere 90 miles across the sea from the United States when United States missiles were basically on the Soviet border . The United States was worried that Soviet missiles were 90 miles away from the US when the United.
 The United States was not willing to allow nuclear weapons within such a close distance . The U.S. did not want nuclear weapons in such close proximity .
 In ctober 1962, Kennedy found out that Soviet ships carrying missiles were heading to Cuba . Kennedy was worried about Soviet ships with missiles heading to the island .
 ennedy agreed to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba if Kennedy pledged not to invade Cuba . He agreed to rn back the fleet and remove Soviet missiles from Cuba .
 The Cuban missile crisis brought the world frighteningly close to nuclear war . The crisis was the height of the threat of nuclear weapons .
 30 years later 1992 a high-ranking Soviet officer revealed just how close it had come to war . In fact, 30 years after the war, the Soviet Union and the U.S. were at war again .
 Short-range rockets med with nuclear devices would have been used against U.S. troops if the United States had invaded uba .
 At the time, people realized that e world could have been destroyed in a few days by a nuclear war . People realized that the world was at risk of being destroyed in days by nuclear war.
 This realization had a great 4 Lesson 3 Cold War Conflicts, continued influence on both sides . This is a great example of both sides' influence on each other .
 The French refused to accept the new government, and they seized the southern part of the country . The French government was overthrown by the French in 1953 .
 For years, France fought Ho Chi Minh’s Vietminh for control of Vietnam . France fought for years to take over Vietnam .
 After a huge defeat at Dien Bien Phu, France agreed to sign the Geneva Peace Accords in 1954 . The Geneva peace accord was signed in 1954 after a huge victory over the Vietnam War .
 China and the Soviet Union wanted to avoid another conflict with the United States . Because of the Korean War, China and Soviet Union avoided a conflict with U.S. because of Korean War .
 As a result, they pressured Vietnam to agree to a temporary partition of the country . The partition of Vietnam was a result of the war .
 South Vietnam had to deal both with North Vietnamese troops and with the Viet Cong . South Vietnam fought both North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces in Vietnam .
 The Viet Cong were South Vietnamese Communist guerrillas, who were fighting against the government . They were known as the Viet Cong, which fought against the South Vietnamese government .
 By early 1965, the Viet Cong had almost seized control of South Vietnam . The Viet Cong almost had almost taken control of the country .
 His goal was to keep the Communist regime of North Vietnam from gaining control of South Vietnam . He wanted to keep it out of the hands of the South Vietnamese .
 U.S. policy makers saw the Vietnam conflict in terms of a theory called the domino theory . Vietnam conflict was seen as a domino-like war .
 This theory about communism’s spread compared Asian countries to dominoes . This theory was based on a theory about the spread of communism in Asia .
 If the Communists succeeded in South Vietnam, all the 5esson 3 Cold War Conflicts, continued her countries in Asia that were freeing themselves from colonial domination, would fall like dominoes communism . The Communist Party would have succeeded in Vietnam .
 American forces had the advantage of massive superiority in equipment and epower . The U.S. forces were the most powerful forces in the world .
 Americans, especially college students of draft age, soon sponded with an antiwar movement . Americans, including college students, soon became involved in the movement .
 President Johnson was condemned for how he handled the costly and indecisive war . Johnson was criticized for his indecisive actions in Vietnam .
 Nixon ran on the pledge, or omise, to stop the war and bring the American people together . Former vice president Richard M Nixon ran for the presidency in 1968 .
 President Nixon reached an agreement with North Vietnam in 1973 . Nixon reached a deal with the North Vietnam regime in 1973, ending the war .
 The Peace Accords allowed the United States to withdraw its forces . The United States withdrew its forces following the peace agreement .
 Within two years after American ithdrawal, Communist armies from the North forcibly reunited Vietnam . The North and the South reunited Vietnam within two years .
 The North Vietnamese Communists gained control of Vietnam, but the domino theory proved rong . North Vietnamese Communist Party gained control in Vietnam .
 This clear disagreement put an end to e Western idea of a single form of communism directed by Moscow . Moscow's refusal to accept the West's view of Soviet communism was to blame for the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 By the end of the Vietnam War, a new era American-Soviet relations began to emerge . U.S. and the Soviet Union became friendly relations in the 1960s .