 In October 1962, an American U-2 reconnaissance plane recorded photographs of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.2 plane recorded photos of the Soviet missiles in October 1962 .
 President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Khrushchev were at odds with each other over Berlin and the placement of Soviet weapons in Cuba . Kennedy's assassination was the result of ongoing tension between the two countries .
 Virginia H Jones is President of Communication Management Associates in Chicago . Jones: "Communication Management Associates" is a non-profit organization .
 ExComm, with the participation and leadership of President Kennedy, created the strategies and tactics of diplomacy that averted potential nuclear catastrophe . ExComm was created by President Kennedy in the wake of the Cold War .
 John F Kennedy: Volumes 1–3, The Great Crises, edited by Philip D Zelikow, Timothy Naftali, and Ernest R May, noted scholars and professors of public affairs and history . Includes declassified presidential transcripts from July 30 through October 28, 1962 .
 Transcripts capture decision makers navigating their way through the quicksands of international diplomacy, escalating tension, and the management of public information . The transcripts capture decisions made by decision makers in the wake of international tensions .
 Examples of problem definition, reframing, and consensus building provide rich resources for rhetoricians, public policy analysts, and graduate students . Examples are examples of problem definitions and reframings .
 This three-volume collection provides a captivating and comprehensive sense of the presidency as an institution . Three volumes of the president's memoirs will be released this year .
 The chief executive faces a range of tasks daily . Civil rights, South American regime changes, currency fluctuations, and lesser ceremonial responsibilities . The role of the chief executive is a key role .
 Stern captures personality and contextual nuances, adding rich dimensions to the collective wisdom on this topic . Stern, as an historian, chief librarian of the Kennedy Library for over two decades, is a compelling storyteller . Stern is an expert historian and former librarian at Kennedy Library .
 Children's lives experience attempts of government, schools, and the media to manage and communicate the threat of nuclear war .
 Retired navy captain Peter A Huchthausen’s October Fury recounts moment-by-moment decision making and lifestyles of both the Russian and American naval crews during the crisis .
 The author builds the case that a combination of exceptional political and naval leadership, plus superior American naval power, determined the outcome of events . The author effectively builds the . case that the . outcome of the events in Vietnam was determined by a combination . of exceptional leadership and superior naval power .
 Blight and Brenner contribute the enlightened concept of “realistic empathy,” as applied to relations between political entities, particularly those of unequal power . Blight: “Realistic empathy” applies to relations with political entities .
 These five works provide a kaleidoscopic view of a perilous, historical moment . The works include a series of works by the artist who died in the Holocaust .
 The sum of these authors’ insights, resourcefulness, and thoroughness provides rich resources for rhetorical scholars, political scientists, and historians focusing on this pivotal period .
 Graduate and upper-division students can gain broad perspective on this benchmark event by reading the combined publications . Graduate students can also gain perspective on the benchmark event .
 Tape transcripts provide primary sources of “government in motion” as decisions evolve, leadership negotiates, and public policies form . Tape transcripts are primary sources for ‘government inmotion’ as decisions and leadership negotiate .
 This landmark work documents the dynamics of decision making during the crucial 13-day time bomb that changed international power relations . The work documents decision-making in the aftermath of that time bomb .
 These three volumes include tape transcripts from July 30 through October 28, 1962 . The transcripts are released in three volumes, each covering July 30 to October 28 of 1962 .
 Kennedy predicts Khrushchev will aggressively send troops to West Berlin if he does not remove the missiles from Cuba . Kennedy predicts that Khruschev will aggressive send troops into West Berlin . If he doesn't insist that the Soviets remove missiles, Kennedy predicts they will send more troops .
 The three volumes provide the bases for assessing idea development, argumentation, and the formation of public policy . They provide an easy way to assess ideas and argue with public policy makers .
 Through careful editing of the Kennedy tapes, he literally transcribes materials declassified in late 1996–early 1997 into essential moments of analysis and decision making during the crisis .
 The reader feels involvement through the amplification of personality imbedded in President Kennedy’s remarks and in the words of ExComm members . The reader also feels involvement in the president's remarks .
 This lively recounting of the details illuminates the mood and spirit of the often contentious, often insightful give-and-take . Watch the full transcript below .
 Averting ‘The Final Failure’ will appeal to a broad range of readers, including students of politics and history, and concerned citizens .
 The president selected the individuals because of their formal foreign relations and national security responsibilities . The president selects the individuals based on their formal national security and foreign relations .
 He opposes surprise air attacks, supports the blockade, and counsels not to capture Soviet ships . He also counsels against surprise air strikes and against capture .
 Stern demonstrates his talent for narration through engaging descriptions of day, date, time, and place . Stern demonstrates a talent for narrating by describing the events in his book .
 He portrays day one of the crucial meetings, October 16, 1962 . He portrays the events of that fateful day .
 His representative schedule included astronaut Walter Shirra and a meeting with the White House Panel on Mental Retardation .
 Stern raises reservations about the two previously published transcriptions of the Kennedy tapes . Stern, as in previous writings, raises reservations over the two transcriptions . Stern: "I think the transcriptions should not be published"
 The most recent transcripts of the tapes improve accuracy compared with the 1997 version . He is still troubled by errors, but he says he is troubled by mistakes .
 Stern's narrative approach provides the reader with an engaging, well-documented excursion through our nation’s crucial decision making during the crisis . Stern's narratives provide a narrative approach to the decision-making process .
 Historian Alice George traces origins of governmental steps and public perceptions of activities taken to address the increasing concern of nuclear war during the preceding decade . George traces the origins of government efforts to address nuclear war concerns .
 She provides in-depth details of governmental attempts, educational decision making, and popular perceptions of civil defense programs . For example, she provides details of government attempts and educational decisions .
 The public questions the credibility of such projects as public and private civil defense shelters . The programs are fundamentally ineffective, and the public questions their credibility .
 In this black-and-white photograph, one child is forced to squat, head close to knees because of confined space . Another peers expectantly, watching a third descend the stairs into the dreary setting to face fear .
 Chapter 6, “Children of the Cold War,” is a landmark in communicating the climate in which youngsters went about their daily lives . Chapter 6 is a key chapter in the book .
 The author noted the escalating skepticism of the young concerning the decision making of the adults . Picking up on the then-current humor, the author noted that the young were skeptical of the adult decision making .
 This lack of confidence in adult judgment is one omen of what would become the protest movements of the late sixties . The protest movement of the sixties would be a precursor to what would later become protest movements .
 George traces elements of popular culture such as comic books and television, noting their strategies and tactics in building a negative stereotype of communism and sustaining fears of nuclear war . In addition to the strategies, he also traces elements such as comics and television .
 Communication specialists will find George’s work a rich resource for research and teaching . Communication specialists focusing on the family, popular culture, and propaganda .
 As a career naval officer, Huchthausen held positions as Soviet naval analyst and naval attaché in Yugoslavia, Moscow, and Romania . As a naval analyst he held positions in Yugoslavia and Moscow .
 The book recounts his years of service in the U.S. navy . He meets individuals who have served on Russian submarines assigned to Operation Kamai . The naval portion of the Soviet plan to place nuclear warheads on Cuba was part of the plan .
 October Fury recreates both the U.S. and Russian naval viewpoints during these tense days . The book, October Fury, was published in October 2013 .
 We now know from participants on both sides that a naval shoot-out very nearly occurred . The incident occurred in the early days of the Second World War II .
 His primary sources provide rich evidence of his conscientious and successful effort to convey the communication climate, group dynamics, and leadership capabilities of those involved in this sea of troubles .
 Captain Huchthausen interviews Premier Khrushchev’s son-in-law and admiral who served as a submarine officer during the missile crisis . He interviews Soviet Fleet admiral, Soviet navy captain and naval attaché in Washington, D.C.
 He records the viewpoints of enlisted personnel with such job designations as sonarman first class, electronics technician, and radarman . In addition to high-level governmental decision makers and naval officers, he records the views of enlisted people .
 Wives of several personnel also provide insight into the tenor of sea life under high-tension conditions . Wives also share their experiences with the Navy .
 Huchthausen confirms and corrects all data collected during these interviews such as “dates, events, and locations” through antisubmarine war records .
 The author’s firsthand experience, access to primary sources, compelling storytelling skills, and zest for his subject plunge readers into the contrastive world of U.S. and Soviet naval life .
 Ample supplies and a livable quality of life on U.S. vessels contrast sharply with the limited resources of the Soviet personnel .
 scarce material resources and a paucity of information influenced the climate in which Soviet naval crews worked in the Soviet Union .
 Huchthausen emphasizes the exceptional capabilities of the Soviet naval leadership under conditions of deception and ongoing limited information . The Soviet naval leaders were able to achieve their success under conditions under limited circumstances .
 Scholars concerned with the impact of deception, secrecy, and/or a lack of constant, accurate information for crisis decision making will find this work an excellent base for analysis and discussion . Scholars concerned about the impact on deception and secrecy in crisis decision-making will benefit from this work .
 Those interested in organizational communication, group dynamics, and adaptive practices in the workplace will find Huchthausen’s description of the shipboard management of daily tasks insightful .
 Samples of ship organizational life range from a watch quarter and station bill to an abandon-ship bill . Samples range from an abandon ship bill to a cheer-ship .
 His professional judgment as a career naval officer resonates as sound to those concentrating on group dynamics and the creation of productive organizations .
 October Fury provides a unique opportunity for rhetorical critics to further capture the physical and psychological setting for the crisis . October Fury is October Fury, October Fury .
 Scholars can gain access to new primary material that provides the living and decision-making experiences of American and Soviet naval personnel who were on the firing line .
 Crisis management approaches continue to influence the conduct of international relations . Yet crisis management approaches are still influential in international relations, says David Frum .
 While attention focuses on the interaction intricacies of the Soviet Union and the U.S. The Cuban experience was not examined .
 Those interested in semantics and other meaning theorists will find these differences worth pursuing . Certainly those interested in semantic theory will find it worth pursuing.
 Castro rails against Soviet neglect of Cuba’s views during the missile crisis . Castro chastises the “microfaction,” the 37 individuals, but also rails against the Soviet neglect .
 Blight and Brenner note that only speech segments relevant to the crisis have been declassified . Blight, Brenner: "Speech segments relevant" have been released .
 "For some time we had been raising the issue of the need to take measures that would guarantee the country’s safety," says the government . For some time, the government has been trying to protect the country's safety .
 A close look through his convoluted remarks reveals a painful and cynical reassessment of Cuban-Soviet relations . The Cuban president's remarks reveal a painful reevaluation of Soviet-Cuban relations .
 What appear as frequent digressions and at other times repetitious looping to earlier content may represent a specific cultural communication pattern . What appear to be frequent digressesions and repeated looping may be a cultural pattern .
 Rhetorical critics may want to apply ideological criticism to analyze this cultural product . "Rhetorical criticism may be applied to analyze the cultural product," says author .
 Castro scorns the Soviet leadership for leaking security information and providing minimal facts about the missiles . Next Castro will scorn the Soviet leaders for leaking information . Castro: "Next Castro will be the president of the world"
 Fidel Castro rants about the lack of Soviet consultation . Fidel Castro takes over the presentation . Castro: "I'm going to blame the Soviet government for not consulting me"
 Much of the later part of the speech indicates concern about CubanAmerican affairs .
 The listeners, if there were any left after so many hours, must recognize the on-again, off-again attitude toward Soviet trustworthiness . The listeners must recognize that, as well as the Soviet attitude toward trustworthiness, they say .
 The final remarks seem confusing in the aftermath of sustained criticism of the unreliable and retreating ally . The remarks come after sustained criticism from the unreliable ally .
 The two chapters following Castro’s “Secret Speech’ probe the interpretations and political outcomes of the missile crisis for both Cuba and the Soviet Union . The chapters follow Castro's "Secret Speech" explore the interpretations of the fallout of the crisis .
 This includes the Soviet response to Che Guevara’s activities in Bolivia and intentions of using these activities as a base to foster revolutionary actions throughout South America . This includes plans to use the Bolivian government to foster anti-communist activities .
 The authors examine Castro’s reaction to the 1967 Middle East Six-Day War, and to the 1968 Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia . Then they examine Castro's reaction to Kosygin's “virtual ultimatum,” and the 1968 Czech-oslovakia invasion
 The book's resources include a thorough consideration of the impact of these events on Cuban-Soviet relations . The book’s resources include an extensive consideration .
 Authors Blight and Brenner make four recommendations to promote U.S. relations with Cuba . Authors also make recommendations for improving relations between Cuba and the United States .
 Cuba's Struggle with the Superpowers After the Missile Crisis offers newly released information and interpretations . Cuba’s struggle with the superpowers after the missile crisis offers new information . The Cuban government was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Serious scholars of the perilous event should scrutinize the subject through this magnifying glass on the Cuban perspective . Serious scholars should examine the history of the Cuban invasion of Cuba .