 The then United States President Kennedy ordered his State Department to prepare for Crash Programs . The then U.S. President Kennedy had ordered the State Department prepare for crash programs . Crash Programs are now being used in the United States .
 The next day, on 27th October, becomes one of the most dangerous days in human history . The following day, October 27th, is the deadliest day of human history.
 World War III foreshadowed that the third world war would be a nuclear war . Not only was there a pressing danger of World War II, but also foreshadowing that it would be nuclear war. "The Third World War would be the nuclear war."
 A missile is launched at the place and it is shot down by a local Cuban commander . On the order of a local commander, a missile is fired at the site and it was shot down .
 During this time, the United States Navy warships deployed on the sea found out that there were Soviet Union submarines near Cuba . The U.S. Navy found out there were submarines near the island .
 Many people didn't know this for years, that these submarines carried nuclear bombs too . Many of the world's most powerful submarines were also carrying nuclear bombs .
 On the 27th of October, the United States Navy located the B-59 Soviet Union submarine . On the same day, the U.S. Navy warship located the Soviet submarine .
 Signalling Depth Charges, a type of explosive were dropped on the submarine . Depth Charges were dropped by the submarine during the attack .
 Soviet Union officers in B-59 thought that the war had begun once they were under attack . The Soviet Union thought that it had begun .
 In a submarine, the situation is dire even on the calmest day, it is very hot due to the high temperatures . In a sub, even on a calm day, the conditions are dire even if it is calm .
 The B-59 submarine lost contact with Moscow when it was attacked, says CNN's John Sutter . The submarine was attacked by the Soviet Union in the 1980s, he says .
 Their radio stops functioning too, effectively cutting them off from the news of the world . Their radio also stops functioning, effectively stopping them from accessing the news .
 Captain Valentin Savitsky exclaims that they would blast off their opponents . Because they thought that the war had begun, they thought it was the start of the war .
 The most shocking thing is that, friends, these officers present in the submarine had the authority to launch the nuclear weapons at their discretion . The officers present had the power to launch nuclear weapons in their discretion, the author says .
 "If they judged that the situation had become out of control, they could use discretion to launch the nuclear bombs and the nuclear missiles," says President Obama .
 The nuclear missile in the submarine, was as intense as the nuclear bomb dropped on Hiroshima . The missile was launched by a submarine in a submarine . The submarine was the first to carry out a nuclear missile .
 Had officers in the submarine, launched the nuclear missiles it would have been the beginning of a nuclear war . Had the officers . launched the . missiles it . would have . been the . beginning of the nuclear . war .
 According to the new Cuban Constitution, America had the right to impose restrictions on Cuban foreign policies . The new Cuban constitution says the U.S. has a right to restrict Cuba's foreign policy .
 In 1934, a treaty was signed, Cuba had to hand over its naval bases to America . No other country could build naval bases in Cuba, and no other nation could .
 The situation worsened in 1952, when Fulgencio Batista became the Dictator of Cuba with help from America . The situation deteriorated in 1952 when Batista was the dictator .
 In Cuba, the U.S. government started promoting the interests of private American companies . Private American companies are allowed to operate in Cuba .
 In 1959, 40% of the sugar lands in Cuba were owned by American companies . The situation was so dire that in 1959, in Cuba, was owned by U.S. companies .
 Nearly all the cattle ranches in the country, were under the control of American companies . 90% of the mines, were owned by American companies. 80% of utilities were owned in the US .
 Nearly the entire oil industry in Cuba, was in the hands of the American companies too . And practically, nearly the entire . entire oil . industry in . Cuba, in the . hands of American companies .
 Cuba had become an economic slave in the hands of the U.S. Basically speaking, Cuba had . basically . basically speaking . Basically speaking . Cuba had. become an . economic slave .
 It was a wonderful time for the rich, but for a common Cuban, healthcare was nearly non-existent . It was the time when the rich were able to afford healthcare, but the poor couldn't afford it . Cuban President Obama has been criticized for his policies .
 Typhoid, Tuberculosis, intestinal parasites, such diseases had become quite common among the masses . Typhoid was common in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Prostitution, gambling, and drugs had become a major problem in Cuba . In addition to it, prostitution, gambling and drugs were a problem .
 Corruption was rampant, and Batista himself was linked to the underworld . Batista was known for his role in Brazil's political turmoil . He was the first president of the country to be elected .
 The exact details of the Cuban Revolution, can be discussed in detail in some other video, but the situation that followed, was that the United States influence in Cuba was eliminated . The revolution was the result of the U.S. being eliminated from Cuba .
 Fidel Castro seized all U.S. property, and started nationalising it . Castro seized the property in order to nationalise it . The Castro government seized all of the country's property .
 2/3rds of the American imports into Cuba were stopped . So that all trades and businesses with Cuba could be cut off . The U.S. trade embargo was imposed on Cuba .
 On 20th January 1961, A new United States President was elected, John F Kennedy . A new U.S. President was inaugurated on 20 January 1961 .
 Governments around the world should incorporate this into foreign relations, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 If you don't like someone, stop talking to them, stop hanging out with them . You don't need to treat each other badly, but you need to be friends and family .
 The United States had cut off all their business and diplomatic ties with Cuba, but the United States did not stop there . The U.S. had also cut off their business ties with the island nation .
 America secretly financed and trained more than 1,500 Cuban exiles in 1961 . In April 1961, America secretly funded and trained thousands of exiles from Cuba .
 America's plan was that these 1,500 people would go to Cuba, invade Cuba with the weapons provided by America, so that they could overthrow Fidel Castro's government . this was a secret plan. this was the plan .
 The rebels landed in Cuba, but were spotted by some local fishermen . The rebels have been fighting for Cuban independence from Cuba since 2009 .
 These local fishermen were armed with rifles and they started firing at the rebels . The rebels were attacked by local fishermen . The incident happened in the town of Chibibar, in the city of Chitepiya .
 The firing alerted the Cuban military, and soon the Cuban airforce reached the spot . The Cuban air force was called to the scene after the incident .
 The rebels had some air support from the US, but when it became clear that they would lose, the United States backed away from the invasion . The U.S. backed out of the invasion after it was clear the rebels would lose .
 John F Kennedy didn't want the world to know that the U.S. was behind the invasion . He wanted to keep quiet .
 The United States backed down at a critical moment, and Fidel Castro took charge over this operation . The battle was over within 3 days, and the U.S. backed down . Fidel Castro was in charge .
 This failed Bay of Pigs invasion became an infamous episode of America's foreign policy .
 Cuba started looking up to the Soviet Union even more after the failed invasion . The Soviet Union invaded Cuba in 1940s, but failed to invade Cuba .
 Ukrainian government wants to establish friendly relations with U.S. so that they could protect themselves . The Ukrainian government has been criticized for wanting to protect itself . The country wants to become friendly with America so that it could protect itself from terrorism .
 In this case too, the outcome was the exact opposite of what the invader expected . The invader was attacked by a group of young men in the early hours of the morning .
 "If any country is pressured like this, most of the time, it would have the opposite impact," he says . "Most of the times it would not have an impact on the country," he adds .
 Operation Northwoods was also a plan to combat the rise of the Taliban in Afghanistan . Operation Northwood was also known as Operation Operation North Woods . The Taliban was also involved in Operation Operation Cold War .
 Some friendly Cubans would be selected to wear the uniform of the Cuban Army . They would be told to attack the US's Guantanamo base in Cuba . The plan would be carried out by a friendly Cuban army .
 They planned on staging the attack on an empty American ship, and then this attack would then be used as an excuse, to show that Cuba had attacked America, and so America would justify declaring war on Cuba .
 He wanted to attack American cities in cities such as Miami, Florida, they'd stage ""terrorist attacks"" the United States would stage it and then blame them on the Cuban government . The U.S. would stage the attacks and blame the government for the attacks .
 The Americans would naturally believe that it was done by Cuba, and then they would use that as an excuse for conducting large-scale military operations on Cuba . The U.S. would then use that excuse as a pretext for conducting military operations, he says .
 There were so many assassination attempts that he is said to be the person with the highest number of assassination attempts . He was said to have had so many attempts to kill him .
 2 gangsters from FBIs Top 10 most wanted list were hired to assassinate him . Like when there was an attempt to poison his cigar . The two gangsters were hired by FBI to kill him .
 Chemical, fungus, and poisoned needles were also included in some plans . Chemical and fungus, including poisoned needles, were also considered .
 America's U-2 aircraft, a spy plane, was carrying out its routine surveillance on 15 October 1962 . The U.2 aircraft was a U.S. aircraft carrying out routine surveillance .
 The photo showed that the Soviet Union's nuclear missiles were found on this Cuban island . The photo was taken at the time of the discovery .
 Some time ago, in August, the USA was suspicious that the Soviet Union and Cuba were joining forces . The U.S. was suspicious about the possibility of joining forces with Cuba .
 The Kennedy government did not want the world to know that the U.S. had found out about the Soviet Union's nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 About what they could do about the nuclear missiles discovered in Cuba . About how they could . do about what they can do about nuclear missiles .
 US's Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, said that the United States owned more than 5,000 nuclear warheads . McNamara: "The U.S. owns more than five,000 warheads"
 Excomm members of Excomm claim the political balance of power is changing . He said the United States had many times the number of nuclear bombs than the Soviet Union .
 CNN.com: "They had to take some action or else the United States citizens may be disappointed in them" CNN's John Sutter says the U.S. citizens may have been disappointed in the way they have been treated .
 They were concerned about how NATO allies would look at them if they didn't do anything in the situation . They were also concerned that NATO allies wouldn't look at the situation if they did nothing .
 That either Fidel Castro remove the nuclear missiles from Cuba, or America would invade Cuba . That either either Fidel . Castro remove . the nuclear missile from Cuba or America . would invade . America would . invade Cuba.
 He wanted to use the Army, Marines, Airforce, Navy, Navy; all military forces, for a full-on invasion of Cuba . "He wanted to . use the . Army, . Marines, . Air Force, and all military ... forces," he said .
 Berlin was divided into two parts, one of which was under U.S. influence, and the other under Soviet Union's influence . Berlin was under United States influence, one part under Soviet influence, the other part .
 I discussed this in detail in the video on the Berlin Wall's ground report . I discussed it in detail .
 Carrying out airstrikes at the sites of the nuclear missile sites, to destroy the nuclear missiles, without a full-scale invasion of Cuba . The U.S. carried out airstrikes on the sites . The Cuban government has been criticized for the lack of transparency .
 There were 4 nuclear submarines, of the Soviet Union deployed around Cuba . And there were also 4 nuclear subs, deployed around the island .
 Had the USA carried out an airstrike, Cuba and the Soviet Union could have used the rest of the nuclear missiles and a nuclear war would have broken out . Had the U.S. carried out a strike, the Soviet-Cuba nuclear missiles would have been used against each other .
 The U.S. would cut off the Soviet Union from sending more weapons to Cuba . The Cuban government would then cut off Soviet Union's supply of weapons to the island .
 They could make a demand on the Soviet Union to take back all its nuclear weapons . And then they could demand that all nuclear weapons be taken back from the USSR .
 Putting up a naval blockade is also seen as an act of war . But there was a small problem with this option, putting up a blockade is seen as a war .
 President Kennedy announced a naval blockade, the Soviet Union and Cuba would have considered it an act of war . The U.S. President Kennedy made the announcement in 1962 .
 With the declaration of this quarantine, the U.S. military had started preparing for war . The United States military had already declared a quarantine .
 When there is no war in the country, and there is overall peace, it is Defcon 5 . "Defcon 5" is when the country is at a low level of overall peace . The country is now at Defcon 4 .
 Defcon 1 means the military needs to be prepared to the maximum to launch an attack at a moment's notice . Defcon is a state-run military that is prepared to be ready for attack at moment of notice .
 The Strategic Air Command in America, and the Air Defence Command, have the right to change the Defcon levels at their discretion .
 The next morning, on 23rd October, they changed it to Defcon 2, without Pres. Barack Obama . The next day, the White House changed the name of Defcon 1 .
 The world would perceive it to mean that the USA is prepared to attack. Because it would be perceived as a threat to the U.S. as a state of war. Because the world would see it as 'prepared to attack'
 Defcon 2 meant that the USA was preparing its missiles to attack the Soviet Union . Defcon 1 meant the U.S. was preparing for an attack on Soviet Union. Defcon 3 meant the USA had to prepare its missiles for the attack .
 The next day, 24th October, the leader of the Soviet Union, Nikita Khrushchev responded to this by saying that the blockade declared by America, was an act of aggression . The leader said that the U.S. had declared the blockade an 'act of aggression'
 The Soviet Union ships that were headed towards Cuba, wouldn't be withdrawn by the Soviet Union, says CNN's John Defterios . The ships were headed to Cuba, would not be withdrawn .
 From their perspective, placing nuclear missiles in Cuba, was a strategic defence tactic . The U.S. placed them in Cuba as a strategic defense tactic .
 Because America was doing the same in the countries around the Soviet Union, the U.S. did it in the 1980s, it did it .
 With Soviet ships getting closer to U.S. warships, the world held its breath . The world held their breath as the Soviet ships got closer .
 When Soviet ships reached the quarantine line, some ships turned around, and others that had no offensive weapons, were allowed to pass by the United States ships .
 CIA's director says that the nuclear missiles in Cuba had become operational . But then on 25th October, CIA says that it had not been operational . CIA director says the missiles had now become operational in Cuba .
 With this, nuclear weapons in the U.S. and NATO countries were loaded, and they were ready to strike, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 US President Kennedy ordered the State Department to prepare for the Crash Program . Next morning, the US president ordered the crash program to begin .
 This is the part of the story I talk about at the beginning of the video . This is not the first time I've seen this video .
 Fidel Castro wrote a letter to Nikita Khrushchev, saying that America could attack them within 24 to 72 hours . Fidel Castro got news of Kennedy's secret preparations .
 If it turned out to be a full-scale invasion, they need to launch a nuclear attack on America to prevent it from happening . The U.S. needs to be able to prevent an invasion of North Korea from happening, he says .
 Fidel Castro regretted his position when he was interviewed in 2010 . Fidel Castro said in 2010 that he regretted his role in the Cuban government .
 He said that what he said in the highly tense situation, was not worth it, and he shouldn't have said so . He said, "What he said was not ... worth it"
 If they saw any American aircraft in the Cuban airspace, the military should immediately open fire at it . The military should also open fire on any American plane in Cuban airspace .
 U.S. President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Khrushchev were trying to maintain some diplomacy . President Kennedy was trying to keep some diplomacy with the Soviet Union .
 The world wasn't aware of the two secret communication channels between the two . But the world was not aware of these channels .
 Back Channel allows politicians to secretly communicate with each other . Back Channel is a secret channel for politicians to communicate .
 'Today, it is considered unethical, and the countries don't do it any longer. Today, it's considered unethical," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 John F Kennedy and his brother, the Attorney General of the USA, Robert F Kennedy, were holding secret meetings with Georgi Bolshakov . The meetings were held in secret at the time of the assassination .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev could both pretend for their citizens that they were ready to fight each other and defeat the enemy . Kennedy and his government would both pretend to be ready for each other to fight .
 The public speeches and warmongering placed in front of the public, stayed out of the Back Channel .
 A brilliant audio-learning platform with many audiobooks and biographies for you to listen to . Use the free, downloadable version of this article to help students understand each other's work .
 Normally, it costs ₹399 per year, but because they have sponsored this video, there is a special discount for you . You can buy the video at a special price of just $399 .
 Alexander Feklisov told ABC news correspondent John Scali that the war may break out at any moment . Alexander told Scali on 26th October that the conflict could break out any time .
 If Scali could talk to his 'high-level' friends in the U.S. government, there could be a diplomatic solution . Scali says he hopes to reach out to the United States government .
 The Soviet Union was ready to dismantle the bases in Cuba, under the supervision of the United Nations . The U.N. supervised the removal of the bases under the U.S.
 Fidel Castro would promise to not allow offensive weapons in his country, and in exchange, the U.S. would have to promise, that they will not invade Cuba ever . The United States would also have to say that they won't invade Cuba .
 The same night, the United States State Department received a long, emotional letter . The same evening, the U.S. State Department got an emotional letter from the woman .
 Feklisov's letter contained the same offer to the United States that he talked about during lunch . This letter contains the same letter as the letter he sent to the U.S. The letter also contained an offer to Russia .
 The next day turned out to be one of the most dangerous days in human history . But the next day, it was also a deadly day for humans .
 12 minutes into the day, at 12:12 AM, the USA informed its NATO allies countries, that the situation was worsening . I mentioned this at the beginning of the video too .
 President Obama should be prepared for any military action he might have to take, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 At 6 AM, CIA reported that 5 of the 6 missile sites in Cuba, were operational . CIA: At 6:30 a.m. ET, 5 of Cuba's six missile sites are operational .
 The Cuban military was preparing for war, however, they were ordered not to initiate attacks until the other side attacked first . And that they were told not to attack first, they said .
 Khrushchev said that they agreed with the offer, but they had an additional condition . Khrushchev said they agreed to the offer but had an extra condition .
 The fourth condition was that the nuclear missiles placed by the United States in Turkey, needs to be removed as it was near the Soviet Union . The U.S. needs to remove the missiles as they were near the USSR .
 Khrushchev said that the U.S. was worried about the missiles in Cuba even though it was 90 miles from the US . While Turkey shared a border with the Soviet Union, the US and Turkey did not .
 The U.S. had placed nuclear missiles on Soviet Union's border . The United States had placed nukes on the border with Soviet Union .
 At noon, an American U-2 aircraft entered Cuban airspace . 1 hour later, at noon, the U.S. aircraft entered Cuba's airspace . The U.2 aircraft was the first to enter Cuban airspace.
 As the Cuban military was ordered, they shot down the aircraft, and the pilot died in it . Rudolf Anderson died in the aircraft .
 Around the same time, a United States navy warship spotted a B-59 submarine, and starts attacking it . The U.S. Navy warship saw the submarine and attacked it .
 The USA had continued the naval blockade, and the Russian ships were allowed to move freely, especially if they were carrying weapons . The USA continued the blockade, but Russia was allowed to leave the country .
 When this submarine was attacked, Captain Valentin exclaimed, The submarine was carrying nuclear weapons . The submarine had nuclear weapons, Valentin said in a statement .
 The submarine had lost contact with the outside and their radio wasn't working either . The submarine's radio was also out of work and the submarine had no radio or radio .
 Two officers give their approval for the launch of the nuclear missiles, because from their perspective, the war had already begun . Two of the officers say they approve of the launch because of the war already begun.
 He showed immense courage and said that they wouldn't launch any nuclear missiles . He showed 'immense courage' and said he would not launch any missile launches .
 There was a chance that the war hadn't broken out and if they started launching nuclear weapons, there would be a nuclear war in the world because of them . And tried to convince them that there was no need to jump into launching nuclear .
 Around 4 PM, President Kennedy says that they would continue negotiations . Despite tremendous pressure, the negotiations continue . President Kennedy: "We will continue to negotiate"
 This caused Turkey to put pressure on the US, because Turkey didn't want the missiles to be withdrawn . The missiles were used to carry out missile attacks on the Syrian regime .
 Italy agrees to remove the U.S. nuclear missiles from the country . The move is part of a deal to remove all American nuclear weapons from Italy . Italy has agreed to remove missiles from Italy in exchange for a nuclear deal .
 Robert Kennedy says that they would remove the missiles from Turkey and Italy, but they would do so secretly . Robert Kennedy: They would remove them from Turkey, Italy and Turkey, but do it secretly .
 The U.S. government did not want to be pressured by the people. Because the United States . The United States government . did not . want to pressure the people, the government said .
 Asked Soviet Union to refrain from publicly declaring publicly that they removed missiles from Turkey and Italy . And asked the Soviet Union not to publicly declare publicly that it removed the missiles .
 Khrushchev would have to publicly withdraw his fourth demand even though it would be fulfilled secretly . The fourth demand would be made public even though the deal would be done secretly .
 He broadcasted a message on Radio Moscow that the Soviet Union had accepted America's demands . The Soviet Union accepted the U.S. demands, he said .
 America takes back nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy . 25 years later, this secret is revealed to the world. 25 years after this secret, the secret of the nuclear missiles is revealed .
 Many people in these countries believed that the other country was an enemy that needed to be wiped out . Many people believed that other countries were an enemy needed to wipe out .
 Khrushchev's image, as I told you, he had to sacrifice his image completely . And his image, of course, was that of the Soviet Union, he sacrificed his image .
 2 years later, Nikita Khrushchev was overthrown by his political opponents in the Soviet Union . On the other hand, 2 years after, 2. years after the Soviet leader was ousted by his opponents in Russia, the country's most powerful leader .
 Vasili Arkhipov, the Commander of the submarines who refrained from using the launch button, was the biggest hero . Along with the Robert Kennedy and Robert McNamara in the US and in the Soviet Union, along with Nikita Khrushchev, Alexander Feklisov,
 Despite huge pressure from the U.S. military, Kennedy did not go ahead with the invasion . Despite pressure, Kennedy decided not to invade the Philippines .
 Claiming that Russia's actions in Ukraine are right because the same thing happened in Cuba is right . Claiming to be right is right because it happened in the same way as Cuba did in Cuba .
 The US's actions in Cuba were also justified because the Soviet Union had placed nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. acted in Cuba because of the nuclear threat posed by the USSR .
 Had the U.S. invaded Cuba, they would have made a major mistake, he says . Had the United States invaded Cuba would have been a big mistake, the president says .
 Russia's actions in Ukraine are wrong because Ukraine wants to be a part of NATO, he says . However, there are no American missiles in Ukraine. With the same logic, Russia in Ukraine is wrong, he adds .
 If you liked this video, you should watch the one on the Berlin Wall, because in it, you can understand the Cold War in detail .