 The revolution began in July 1953, and continued sporadically until the rebels ousted Batista on 31 December 1958, replacing his government . Batista was ousted by the rebels in 1958 .
 Cuban Revolution had powerful domestic and international repercussions . The Cuban Revolution was a major event in Cuba's history .
 Cuba–U.S. relations transformed Cuba–United States relations . Efforts to improve diplomatic relations gained momentum during the 2010s .
 In the immediate aftermath of the revolution, Castro's government began a program of nationalization, centralization of the press and political consolidation . Cuba's economy and civil society transformed during Castro's rule .
 The revolution also heralded an era of Cuban medical internationalism . Cuban intervention in foreign conflicts in Africa, Latin America, Southeast Asia, and the Middle East .
 Several rebellions occurred in the six years following 1959, mainly in the Escambray Mountains, which were defeated by the revolutionary government . Several rebels were defeated in the following years .
 The Republic of Cuba at the turn of the 20th Century was largely characterized by a deeply ingrained tradition of corruption . Political participation resulted in opportunities for elites to engage in wealth accumulation in Cuba .
 Cuba's first presidential period under Don Tomás Estrada Palma from 1902 to 1906 was considered to uphold the best standards of administrative integrity in the history of Cuba .
 United States intervention in 1906 resulted in Charles Edward Magoon, an American diplomat, taking over the government until 1909 . The U.S. intervened in 1906 and took control of the government .
 It has been debated whether Magoon's government condoned or in fact engaged in corrupt practices . Magoon government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Hugh Thomas suggests that while Magoon disapproved of corrupt practices, corruption still persisted under his administration . He undermined the autonomy of the judiciary and their court decisions, he says .
 Cuba's subsequent president, José Miguel Gómez, was the first to become involved in pervasive corruption and government corruption scandals . He was the president of Cuba's first government .
 These scandals involved bribes that were allegedly paid to Cuban officials and legislators under a contract to search the Havana harbour, as well as the payment of fees to government associates and officials .
 Corruption actually intensified under his government from 1913–1921 . Despite his intentions, corruption actually intensified in his government .
 Instances of fraud became more common while private actors and contractors colluded with public officials and legislators . Private actors became more involved in fraud, according to the report .
 Charles Edward Chapman attributes the increase of corruption to the sugar boom that occurred in Cuba under the Menocal administration . Chapman: The sugar boom in Cuba led to corruption in Cuba .
 Zayas relied on friends and relatives to illegally gain greater access to wealth . Both petty and grand corruption spread to nearly all aspects of public life .
 Gerardo Machado aimed to diminish corruption and improve the public sector's performance under his successive administration from 1925–1933 . Zaya's previous policies were aimed at reducing corruption under Machado .
 While he was successfully able to reduce the amounts of low level and petty corruption, grand corruption still largely persisted . He was successful in reducing the amount of low-level corruption .
 Machado embarked on development projects that enabled the persistence of grand corruption through inflated costs and the creation of ""large margins"" that enabled public officials to appropriate money illegally . Machado was accused of corruption in the 1970s and '80s .
 Under his government, opportunities for corruption became concentrated into fewer hands with ""centralized government purchasing procedures"" and the collection of bribes among a smaller number of bureaucrats and administrators .
 Machado's administration was able to use insider information to profit from private sector business deals . Through the development of real estate infrastructures and the growth of Cuba's tourism industry, Machado used real estate and tourism to profit .
 Argote-Freyre points out that Cuba's population under the Republic had a high tolerance for corruption . Argote Freyre: Cuba's people had a tolerance for corrupt practices .
 Corrupt officials went beyond members of congress to also include military officials . Military officials granted favours to residents and accepted bribes, officials said .
 The establishment of an illegal gambling network within the military enabled army personnel to engage in extensive illegal gambling activities . Lieutenant Colonel Pedraza and Major Mariné were among those involved in the network .
 Mauricio Augusto Font and Alfonso Quiroz, authors of The Cuban Republic and José Martí, say corruption pervaded in public life under the administrations of Presidents Ramón Grau and Carlos Prío Socarrás . The authors say corruption was rampant under the presidents of
 Prío was reported to have stolen over $90 million in public funds . The amount is equivalent to one fourth of the annual national budget .
 Prior to the Communist revolution, Cuba was ruled under the elected government of Fulgencio Batista from 1940-1944 . The government of Cuba was overthrown by the Communist Party in 1945 .
 Throughout this time period, Batista's support base consisted mainly of corrupt politicians and military officials . Throughout this period period, the support base was mainly corrupt politicians .
 Batista was able to heavily profit from the regime before coming into power through inflated government contracts and gambling proceeds . Batista himself himself himself profited from the government contracts .
 British diplomats believed that corruption was rooted within Cuba's most powerful institutions . The highest individuals in government and military are heavily involved in gambling and the drug trade .
 In terms of civil society, Eduardo Saenz Rovner writes that corruption within the Police and government enabled the expansion of criminal organizations in Cuba .
 Batista refused United States President Franklin Roosevelt's offer to send experts to help reform the Cuban Civil Service . Batista's refusal to accept the offer to reform Cuba's civil service was rejected by Roosevelt .
 Later in 1952, Batista led a U-S backed military coup against Prío Socarras and ruled until 1959 . Batista ruled the country until 1959, when he was assassinated .
 Batista led a corrupt dictatorship that involved close links with organized crime organizations . Under his rule, he led the reduction of civil freedoms of Cubans .
 This period resulted in Batista engaging in more ""sophisticated practices of corruption"" at both the administrative and civil society levels . Batista engaged in more 'sophististicated' practices at the time of his presidency .
 Batista and his administration profited from the lottery as well as illegal gambling . Batista's administration engaged in profiteering from illegal gambling, according to reports . The lottery was illegal in Cuba .
 Corruption flourished in civil society through increasing amounts of police corruption, censorship of the press as well as media, and creating anti-communist campaigns that suppressed opposition with violence .
 Former culture of toleration and acceptance towards corruption also dissolved with the dictatorship of Batista . The former culture of tolerance towards corruption was also dissolved in the dictatorship .
 One citizen wrote that "we elected them and therefore allowed them to steal from us" Grau and Prío were elected and therefore let them steal, he wrote .
 Corruption under Batista expanded into the economic sector with alliances with foreign investors and the prevalence of illegal casinos and criminal organizations in the country's capital of Havana . Corruption under the Batista continued to expand into the .
 In the decades following the U.S. invasion of Cuba in 1898 and formal independence from the United States on 20 May 1902, Cuba experienced a period of significant instability . Cuba endured a number of revolts, coups, and periods of military occupation .
 Fulgencio Batista, a former soldier who had served as the elected president of Cuba from 1940 to 1944, became president for the second time in 1952 . Batista seized power in a military coup after seizing power in 1952, and canceling the 1952 elections .
 Batista proved far more dictatorial and indifferent to popular concerns in the 1950s . Batista had been relatively progressive during his first term, but in 1950s he proved far less .
 Batista antagonized the population by forming lucrative links to organized crime and allowing American companies to dominate the Cuban economy . Cuba remained plagued by unemployment and limited water infrastructure .
 Later U.S. presidents recognized its corruption and the justifiability of removing it . Although the United States armed and politically supported the Batista dictatorship, it was never removed .
 Batista developed a rather weak security bridge as an attempt to silence political opponents . Batista used the bridge as a way to silence opponents .
 Fidel Castro petitioned for the overthrow of Batista, whom he accused of corruption and tyranny . Fidel Castro was a young lawyer and activist when he was in charge of Cuba .
 Castro's constitutional arguments were rejected by the Cuban courts . However, Castro's constitution was upheld by the courts in Cuba .
 Castro decided that the Cuban regime could not be replaced through legal means . Castro resolved to launch an armed revolution in Cuba . Castro decided not to use legal means to replace the regime .
 He and his brother Raúl founded a paramilitary organization known as ""The Movement" They stockpiled weapons and recruited around 1,200 followers from Havana's disgruntled working class by the end of 1952 .
 Fidel Castro in the Cuban Revolution Attack on Moncada Barracks . Castro in attack on the barracks in 1953 . Castro on his arrest after the July 1953 attack .
 Fidel and Raúl Castro gathered 70 fighters and planned a multi-pronged attack on several military installations . The attack was the Castro brothers' first strike against the Batista government .
 On 26 July 1953, the rebels attacked the Moncada Barracks in Santiago and the barracks in Bayamo, only to be defeated by the far more numerous government soldiers . The rebels were defeated in the battle .
 The staged attack was hoped to spark a nationwide revolt against Batista's government . It was hoped that the staged attack would spark a national revolt against the government .
 After an hour of fighting most of the rebels and their leader fled to the mountains . Most of the rebel group fled to mountains after the fighting .
 The exact number of rebels killed in the battle is debatable . In his autobiography, Fidel Castro claimed that nine were killed . An additional 56 were executed after being captured by the government .
 Hunt revised the number to be around 60 members taking the opportunity to flee to the mountains along with Castro . Due to the government's large number of men, Hunt revised it down to 60 members .
 Among the dead was Abel Santamaría, Castro's second-in-command, who was imprisoned, tortured, and executed on the same day as the attack . The attack took place in the same place as the assassination of Fidel Castro .
 Castro brothers captured shortly afterwards . Castro brothers were captured shortly after . Movement revolutionaries, including Castro brothers, were captured .
 In a highly political trial, Fidel spoke for nearly four hours in his defense, ending with the words ""Condemn me, it does not matter. Condemns me" Fidel .
 Castro's defense was based on nationalism, the representation and beneficial programs for the non-elite Cubans, and his patriotism and justice for the Cuban community . Castro was a leader of Cuba in the 1950s and '60s .
 Fidel was sentenced to 15 years in the Presidio Modelo prison, located on Isla de Pinos . Raúl was also sentenced to 13 years in prison . Fidel is serving a 15-year sentence .
 In 1955, the Batista government freed all political prisoners in Cuba, including the Moncada attackers . However, in 1955, under political pressure, the government freed political prisoners .
 Fidel's Jesuit childhood teachers succeeded in persuading Batista to include Fidel and Raúl in the release . Soon, the Castro brothers joined with other exiles in Mexico to prepare for the overthrow of Batista .
 Fidel met Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, who joined his cause . In June 1955, Fidel met the Argentine revolutionary Ernesto "Che" in June 1955 .
 Raul and Castro's chief advisor Ernesto aided the initiation of Batista's amnesty . Castro and Raul were both involved in the Cuban revolution .
 The revolutionaries named themselves the ""26th of July Movement" in reference to the date of their attack on the Moncada Barracks in 1953 . The revolutionists are now known as the 26th July Movement .
 By late 1955, student riots and demonstrations became more common, and unemployment became problematic as new graduates could not find jobs .
 The Castro brothers and the other 26 July Movement guerrillas were training in Mexico and preparing for their amphibious deployment to Cuba . Another revolutionary group followed the example of the Moncada Barracks assault assault .
 The attack was repelled with ten rebels and three soldiers killed in the fighting . One rebel was summarily executed by the garrison commander .
 The yacht Granma departed from Tuxpan, Veracruz, Mexico, on 25 November 1956, carrying 80 others including Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara and Camilo Cienfuegos . The yacht was only designed to accommodate 12 people with a maximum
 On 2 December, it landed in Playa Las Coloradas, in the municipality of Niquero, arriving two days later than planned . The boat was heavily loaded, unlike during the practice sailing runs .
 This dashed any hopes for a coordinated attack with the llano wing of the Movement . This dashed . any hopes of a coordinated . coordinated attack .
 After arriving and exiting the ship, the rebels began to make their way into the Sierra Maestra mountains, a range in southeastern Cuba . The band of rebels is believed to be making their way to the mountains in the mountains .
 Three days after the trek began, Batista's army attacked and killed most of the participants . No more than twenty of the original eighty-two men survived the initial encounters with the Cuban army and escaped into the Sierra Maestra mountains .
 The dispersed survivors wandered through the mountains, alone or in small groups, looking for each other . The survivors were separated from each other in search of each other for help .
 The men would link up again – with the help of peasant sympathizers – and form the core leadership of the guerrilla army . Eventually, the men would join up with peasants and become the core leaders of the guerillas .
 A number of female revolutionaries, including Celia Sanchez and Haydée Santamaría, assisted Fidel Castro's operations in the mountains .
 On 13 March 1957, a separate group of revolutionaries – the anticommunist Student Revolutionary Directorate – stormed the Presidential Palace in Havana, attempting to assassinate Batista and overthrow the government .
 The RD's leader, student José Antonio Echeverría, died in a shootout with Batista's forces at the Havana radio station he had seized to spread the news . The student had seized the radio station to broadcast the news of Batistas' death .
 The plan was to attack the Presidential Palace by a commando of fifty men and simultaneously support the operation by one hundred men occupying the radio station Radio Reloj at the Radiocentro CMQ Building to announce Batista's death .
 The attack on the palace would result in the elimination of Fulgencio Batista . The purpose of taking of Radio Reloj was to announce the death of Batista and to call for a general strike, to incite the people of Havana to join the armed struggle .
 Secondary support operation was not carried out as the men who were to participate never arrived at the scene of the events because of last-minute hesitation . However, this secondary support operation did not carry out due to last minute hesitation .
 Although the attackers reached the third floor of the Palace, they did not locate or execute Batista . Batista was killed by the attackers in the attack .
 Havana police at the entrance door of apartment 201, 20 April 1957, Havana police . Havana police were at the scene of the Humboldt 7 massacre . Cuba was at the center of the massacre in the city of Havana .
 Colonel Esteban Ventura Novo assassinated four participants who had survived the Assault on the Presidential Palace and in the seizure of the Radio Reloj station at the Radiocentro CMQ Building .
 Marcos Rodríguez Alfonso began arguing with Fructuoso, Carbó and Machadito; Joe Westbrook had not yet arrived . Joe Westbrook arrived at the scene .
 Marquitos, who gave the airs to be a revolutionary, was strongly against the revolution and was thus resented by the others . Marquitsos was a strong opponent of the revolution, and was resented .
 Colonel Esteban Ventura revealed the location of the young revolutionaries were, Humboldt 7. He revealed that the revolutionaries were in the region of Humbumbt 7 . Colonel Ventura revealed that he had been sent to the region .
 A large contingent of police officers assaulted apartment 201, where the four men were staying . After 5:00 PM on 20 April, police officers arrived and assaulted the men .
 The police rounded up and executed the rebels, who were unarmed . The incident was covered up until a post-revolution investigation in 1959 . The rebels were unarmed and had been unarmed .
 Marquitos was arrested and, after a double trial, was sentenced by the Supreme Court to the penalty of death by firing squad in March 1964 . He was sentenced to the death by a firing squad after being found guilty of a double murder charge .
 Frank Pais was a revolutionary organizer who had built an extensive urban network in Cuba . He was acquitted for his role in organizing an unsuccessful uprising in Santiago de Cuba in support of Castro's landing .
 On 30 June 1957, Frank's younger brother, Josué Pais, was killed by the Santiago police .
 Frank País was forced into hiding in Santiago de Cuba during a wave of systematic police searches in July 1957 .
 On 30 July he was in a safe house with Raúl Pujol, despite warnings from other members of the Movement that it was not secure . He was in the house at the time of the July 30 incident, but it was deemed secure .
 Santiago police under Colonel José Salas Cañizares surrounded the building . The Santiago police were called to the Santiago police station .
 An informant betrayed them as they tried to walk to a waiting getaway car . However, an informant was able to get them to the car .
 Police officers drive the two men to the Callejón del Muro and shoot them in the back of the head . The two men were shot in the head by police officers . The men were killed by police in a car crash .
 In defiance of Batista's regime, he was buried in the Santa Ifigenia Cemetery in the olive green uniform and red and black armband of 26 July Movement .
 In response to the death of País, the workers of Santiago declared a spontaneous general strike . País was killed in a car crash in Santiago, Chile .
 This strike was the largest popular demonstration in the city up to that point . The strike was largest popular protest in city's history . This strike is the largest strike in the country's history.
 The mobilization of 30 July 1957 is considered one of the most decisive dates in both the Cuban Revolution and the fall of Batista's dictatorship . The mobilization was considered a major turning point in Cuba's revolution .
 This day has been instituted in Cuba as the Day of the Martyrs of the Revolution . This day is also known as the day of the day to commemorate the Cuban Revolution .
 Frank País Second Front, the guerrilla unit led by Raúl Castro in the Sierra Maestra was named for the fallen revolutionary . The Frank Pais Second Front was named after the revolutionary who died in 1953 .
 On 6 September 1957 elements of the Cuban navy in the Cienfuegos Naval Base staged a rising against the Batista regime . The mutiny was a revolt against the Cuban government .
 Led by junior officers in sympathy with the 26th of July Movement, this was originally intended to coincide with the seizure of warships in Havana harbour . The 26th July Movement was inspired by the events in Cuba .
 By 5:30am the base was in the hands of the mutineers . Reportedly individual officials within the United States Embassy were aware of the plot .
 About two hundred 26th of July Movement members and other rebel supporters entered the base from the town and were given weapons . The rebels are armed with weapons .
 By the afternoon Government motorised infantry had arrived from Santa Clara, supported by B-26 bombers . Motorised infantry were joined by motorised bombers and B-25s .
 Last of the rebels, holding out in the police headquarters, were overwhelmed . After street fighting throughout the afternoon and night, the last of the rebel fighters were overwhelmed by police .
 The United States supplied Cuba with planes, ships, tanks and other tech such as napalm . The U.S. supplied the rebels with napalm, which was used against them .
 This would eventually come to an end due to a later arms embargo in 1958 . This would be due to an arms embargo that would end in 1958 due to the later arm embargo .
 According to Tad Szulc the U.S. began funding the 26th of July Movement around October or November 1957 and ending around middle 1958 . The 26th July Movement was formed in the United States .
 The purpose being to instill sympathies to the United States amongst the rebels in case the movement succeeded . The purpose of the mission was to encourage the rebels to support the U.S.
 Batista increased troop deployments to Sierra Maestra region to crush guerrillas . Second National Front of the Escambray kept battalions of the Constitutional Army tied up in the mountains .
 The Second National Front was led by former Revolutionary Directorate member Eloy Gutiérrez Menoyo and the ""Yanqui Comandante"" William Alexander Morgan . Morgan was the leader of the second National Front .
 Gutiérrez Menoyo formed and headed the guerrilla band after news had broken out about Castro's landing in the Sierra Maestra, and José Antonio Echeverría had stormed the Havana Radio station .
 Morgan was dishonorably discharged from the U.S. Army . His recreating features from Army basic training made a critical difference in the Second National Front troops battle readiness .
 Batista's support among Cubans began to fade, with former supporters either joining the revolutionaries or distancing themselves from Batista . Former supporters either joined the revolution or distanced themselves from the Batista.
 Batista started making drastic decisions concerning Cuba's economy . He began to nationalize U.S. oil refineries and other properties in Cuba . Batista began making drastic economic decisions concerning the economy .
 Batista's government often resorted to brutal methods to keep Cuba's cities under control . The Mafia and U.S. businessmen maintained their support for the regime .
 Castro aided by Frank País, Ramos Latour, Huber Matos, and many others, staged successful attacks on small garrisons of Batista's troops . However, in the Sierra Maestra mountains, Castro was able to stage successful attacks .
 Castro was joined by CIA connected Frank Sturgis who offered to train Castro's troops in guerrilla warfare . Castro's forces were trained by the CIA . Castro was in control of the Cuban government in Cuba .
 Castro accepted the offer, but he also had an immediate need for guns and ammunition, so Sturgis became a gunrunner . Castro accepted Castro's offer but also had a need for weapons and ammunition .
 CIA weapons expert Samuel Cummings' International Armament Corporation in Alexandria, Virginia . Sturgis purchased boatloads of weapons and ammunition from the company .
 Sturgis opened a training camp in the Sierra Maestra mountains, where he taught Che Guevara and other 26 July Movement rebel soldiers guerrilla warfare .
 In addition, poorly armed irregulars known as escopeteros harassed Batista forces in the foothills and plains of Oriente Province .
 Escopeteros also provided direct military support to Castro's main forces by protecting supply lines and by sharing intelligence . Escopetos also protected supply lines, shared intelligence and protected intelligence .
 In addition to armed resistance, the rebels sought to use propaganda to their advantage . Ultimately, the mountains came under Castro's control .
 Nearly every time the Cuban military fought against the revolutionaries, the army was forced to retreat . Even though the Cuban army was fighting against the revolution, it was often forced to back down .
 An arms embargo – imposed on the Cuban government by the United States on 14 March 1958 – contributed significantly to the weakness of Batista's forces .
 Batista responded to Castro's efforts with Operation Verano, known as la Ofensiva . Batista's attack on the mountains was known to the rebels as la ofensiva. Batista finally responded .
 The army sent some 12,000 soldiers, half of them untrained recruits, into the mountains, along with his own brother Raul . Half of them were untrained soldiers, including Raul's brother .
 Castro's determined guerrillas defeated the Cuban army . In a series of small skirmishes, Castro's forces defeated the army . The Cuban army was defeated by the rebels .
 Castro asked for, and received, a temporary cease-fire on 1 August . Castro's forces were pinned down by superior numbers, and he asked for it .
 Castro's forces gradually escaped from the trap . Over the next seven days, while fruitless negotiations took place, Castro forces eventually escaped .
 By 8 August, Castro's entire army had escaped back into the mountains, and Operation Verano had effectively ended in failure for the Batista government . The Batista army had effectively left the country .
 Battle of Las Mercedes was the last battle during Operation Verano, the summer offensive of 1958 launched by the Batista Government during the Cuban Revolution . The battle was a trap designed by Cuban General Eulogio Cantillo to lure Fidel Castro's guerrillas into a place where they
 The battle ended with a cease-fire which Castro proposed and which Cantillo accepted . Castro proposed a truce with Cantillo .
 The battle, though technically a victory for the Cuban army, left the army dispirited and demoralized . The battle was fought in Cuba's capital, Havana . The Cuban army was disheartened by the defeat .
 Castro views the result as a victory and soon launched his own offensive . Castro viewed the result of the election as a success . Castro's own offensive was launched in 2009 .
 Castro sent a column of men under René Ramos Latour to ambush the retreating soldiers . Castro sent the men under . René was killed in the ambush by the soldiers .
 They attacked the advance guard and killed some 30 soldiers . But then came under attack from previously undetected Cuban forces . The advance guard was attacked by unknown forces .
 Latour called for help and Castro came to the battle scene with his own column of men . Latour was killed in the battle . Castro was killed by Latour's forces in the Battle of the Second World War .
 Castro's column also came under fire from another group of Cuban soldiers that had secretly advanced up the road from the Estrada Palma Sugar Mill . Another group of soldiers also advanced on the road .
 General Cantillo called up more forces from nearby towns and some 1,500 troops started heading towards the fighting . The battle heated up as more troops were called up .
 Che Guevara's force was halted by a column under Che Gueser's command . The force was stopped by a group of rebels under the leadership of the Communist Party . The death toll from the conflict rose to 9,000 in 1968 .
 Some critics accuse Che for not coming to the aid of Latour . Major Bockman argues that Che's move here was the correct thing to do . Che died at the hands of Soviet Union forces in 1953 .
 By the end of July, Castro's troops were fully engaged and in danger of being wiped out by the vastly superior numbers of the Cuban army . The Cuban army was fully engaged in the battle against the Soviet Union .
 He had lost 70 men, including René Latour, and both he and the remains of Latour's column were surrounded . The French president was surrounded by his troops .
 Castro requested a cease-fire with General Cantillo, even offering to negotiate an end to the war . The next day, Castro requested the next day . Castro also offered to negotiate the end of the war with Cantillo .
 General Cantillo accepted the offer for reasons that remain unclear . This offer was accepted by the general general for reasons unknown .
 Batista sent a personal representative to negotiate with Castro on 2 August . Batista's personal representative was sent to Castro's camp to negotiate . Castro died in prison in August 1961 .
 Castro's troops managed to slip away unnoticed during the next six nights . The negotiations yielded no result . Castro's forces slipped away unnoticed .
 On 8 August when the Cuban army resumed its attack, they found no one to fight . The Cuban army had been attacked by the Soviet Union in 1991, but was defeated .
 Operation Verano had effectively ended in failure for the Batista government . Castro's remaining forces had escaped back into the mountains, and operation Verano was effectively a failure . Batista's government was overthrown by the end of the operation .
 Battle of Yaguajay Central part of the battle's monument and plaza with the statue of Camilo Cienfuegos . In 1958 Fidel Castro ordered his revolutionary army to go on the offensive against the army of Fulgencio Batista .
 Castro led one force against Guisa, Masó and other towns . Another major offensive was directed at the capture of the city of Santa Clara, Santa Clara .
 Three columns were sent against Santa Clara under the command of Che Guevara, Jaime Vega, and Camilo Cienfuegos . The battle was fought in Santa Clara, Mexico .
 Cienfuegos's column directly attacked a local army garrison at Yaguajayay . The attack was the first of its kind in the region .
 Lee put up a determined defense of his post in Santa Clara, California . Lee was convinced reinforcements would be sent from Santa Clara . Lee: "I'm not going to be afraid. I'm not scared"
 The guerrillas repeatedly attempted to overpower Lee and his men, but failed each time . Lee's men failed to overpower the rebels, but they were eventually defeated .
 By 26 December Camilo Cienfuegos had become quite frustrated . Lee could not be overpowered, nor could he be convinced to surrender . Lee was unable to be overpowered .
 Cienfuegos tried to use a homemade tank against Lee's position . Lee's forces were defeated in the latest round of fighting .
 The ""tank" was actually a large tractor encased in iron plates with attached makeshift flamethrowers on top . It was a large tractor encased in iron plates with attached makeshift flamethrowsers .
 The surrender of the garrison was a major blow to the defenders of the provincial capital of Santa Clara . Lee ran out of ammunition and was forced to surrender his force to the guerrillas .
 The next day, the combined forces of Cienfuegos, Guevara, and local revolutionaries under William Alexander Morgan captured the city in a fight of confusion .
 Batista fled Cuba the next day . Panicked by news of the defeat at Santa Clara and other losses . Batista was forced to flee Cuba .
 Battle of Guisa took place on November 20 November 1958 . Batista soldiers were returning from their usual journey from Guisa . The battle took place in Guisa in the early hours of November 20 .
 Shortly after leaving that town, the rebels attacked the caravan . The rebels attacked that town in the northern foothills of the Sierra Maestra .
 Guisa was 12 kilometers from the Command Post of the Zone of Operations, located on the outskirts of the city of Bayamo . Guisa is 12 kilometers away from the command post .
 Nine days earlier, Fidel Castro had left the La Plata Command, beginning an unstoppable march east with his escort and a small group of combatants . The rebels arrived in Santa Barbara on 19 November .
 Fidel ordered the placement of a mine on the Monjarás bridge, over the Cupeinicú river . Fidel gathered his officers to organize the siege of Guisa .
 In the early morning, they took the path that runs between the Heliografo hill and the Mateo Roblejo hill, where they occupied strategic positions . In the morning, the group took a path between the two hills, one of which they occupied .
 At around 10:30 am, the military Command Post located in the Zone of Operations in Bayamo sent a reinforcement made up of Co., plus a platoon from Co. Co. The reinforcement was sent to Bayamo at around 10,30 am .
 Fidel ordered mining of another bridge over a tributary of the Cupeinicú River . Fidel ordered the mining of a bridge over another bridge .
 Hours later the army sent a platoon from Co. and another platoon from . Co. supported by a T-17 tank . Hours later, the army . sent a . platoon from. Co., supported by . a tank .
 This section needs additional citations for verification . The Rebel offensive was created by the U.S. government .
 Che Guevara: "If the price of maintaining them will cost it, he is better off giving them up" Castro's forces began their own offensive on 21 August 1958 .
 Fidel Castro, Raúl Castro and Juan Almeida Bosque directed attacks on four fronts . In the Oriente province, Fidel Castro and Raún Castro directed attacks against four fronts.
 Castro's forces won a series of initial victories with new weapons smuggled in by plane . The weapons were captured during the Ofensiva and smuggled into by plane by Castro's troops .
 Castro's major victory at Guisa, and the capture of several towns including Maffo, Contramaestre, and Central Oriente, brought the Cauto plains under his control . Castro's victory in Guisa was a major success .
 Three rebel columns, under the command of Che Guevara, Camilo Cienfuegos and Jaime Vega, proceed westward toward Santa Clara, the capital of Villa Clara Province . The rebel columns proceeded westward to Santa Clara .
 Batista's forces ambushed and destroyed Jaime Vega's column, but the surviving two columns reached the central provinces . They joined forces with several other resistance groups not under the command of Castro .
 Che Guevara's column passed through the province of Las Villas, and specifically through the Escambray Mountains . The anticommunist Revolutionary Directorate forces had been fighting Batista's army for months .
 There was also a minor party candidate on the ballot, Alberto Salas Amaro for the Union Cubana party .
 Andrés Rivero Agüero was due to be sworn-in on 24 February 1959 . He was unable to take office due to the Cuban Revolution .
 Smith called Castro a ""sick man"" and said it would be impossible to reach a settlement with him . Smith said Castro was a sick man and called it impossible to find a settlement . Smith also said Castro would not be able to be reconciled with the government .
 The 1940 Constitution of Cuba, the Congress and the Senate of the Cuban Republic, were quickly dismantled shortly thereafter . Rivero Agüero also said that he planned to restore constitutional government and would convene a Constitutional Assembly .
 The rebels had publicly called for an election boycott, issuing its Total War Manifesto on 12 March 1958 . The rebels threatened to kill anyone that voted, threatening to kill them .
 Fidel Castro and Huber Matos fought in Santa Clara . Batista's flight Habana was the first flight of the Batista .
 On 31 December 1958, the Battle of Santa Clara took place in a scene of great confusion . The battle took place on December 31, 1958 .
 The city of Santa Clara fell to the combined forces of Che Guevara, Cienfuegos, and Revolutionary Directorate rebels .
 He fled Cuba by air for the Dominican Republic just hours later on 1 January 1959 . The Cuban president fled Cuba hours later in 1959 by air .
 Castro learned of Batista's flight in the morning and immediately started negotiations to take over Santiago de Cuba . General Eulogio Cantillo entered Havana's Presidential Palace, proclaimed the Supreme Court judge Carlos Piedra as the new president .
 Castro's forces took over the city on 2 January . The military commander in the city, Colonel Rubido, ordered his soldiers not to fight . On 2 January, the city was taken over by the Castro government .
 The forces of Guevara and Cienfuegos entered Havana at about the same time . The forces entered Havana about the time .
 They had met no opposition on their journey from Santa Clara to Cuba's capital . They were met by no opposition during the trip to the capital .
 Castro arrived in Havana on 8 January after a long victory march . Castro himself arrived in Cuba after a victory march to Havana .
 President Manuel Urrutia Lleó took office on 3 January . His initial choice of president, Manuel Uruutia, took office in January .
 Victorious rebels in the Havana Hilton, January 1959 . Victorious rebel in Havana Hilton . Aftermath relations with the United States .
 The Cuban Revolution was a crucial turning point in U.S.-Cuban relations . The Cuban revolution was a key turning point for the American-Cuban relationship .
 The U.S. government was initially willing to recognize Castro's new government . It soon came to fear that Communist insurgencies would spread through the nations of Latin America .
 Castro's government resented the Americans for providing aid to Batista's government during the revolution . Meanwhile, the Americans provided aid to the Batista government in Cuba .
 Eisenhower administration froze all Cuban assets on American soil, severed diplomatic ties and tightened its embargo of Cuba in 1960 . Cuba's revolutionary government nationalized all United States property in Cuba in August 1960 . Eisenhower administration also severed diplomatic relations and tightened the embargo .
 In 1961, the United States government launched the Bay of Pigs Invasion, in which Brigade 2506 landed on a mission to oust Castro . The attempt to overthrow Castro failed, with the invasion being repulsed by the Cuban military .
 The U.S. embargo against Cuba is still in force as of 2020 . It underwent a partial loosening during the Obama Administration, only to be strengthened in 2017 under Trump .
 The United States began efforts to normalize relations with Cuba in the mid-2010s . The U.S. formally reopened its embassy in Havana in August 2015 after over 50 years .
 The Trump administration reversed much of the Cuban Thaw by severely restricting travel by United States citizens to Cuba . The U.S. government has tightened the United States government's embargo against Cuba .
 There is no country in the world, including the African regions, where economic colonization, humiliation and exploitation were worse than in Cuba, in part owing to my country's policies during the Batista regime . I believe that there are no countries in Africa, including any and all the countries under
 "I believe that we created, built and manufactured the Castro movement out of whole cloth and without realizing it," Castro says . Castro: "We created and manufactured, built, manufactured, manufactured and manufactured"
 The accumulation of these mistakes has jeopardized all of Latin America, says President Obama . "I believe that these mistakes have jeopardized ... Latin America. I believe that that is a mistake," he says .
 Alliance for Progress aims to reverse this unfortunate policy . The great aim of the Alliance is to reverse the unfortunate policy.
 This is one of the most important problems in U.S. foreign policy, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Fidel Castro justifiably called for justice and especially yearned to rid Cuba of corruption . I approved the proclamation which Fidel Castro made in the Sierra Maestra, Cuba . I approve of the proclamation .
 Manuel Urrutia Lleó was president of Cuba in 1959 . He was the first Cuban president of the country . He died of a heart attack .
 Manuel Urrutia was president at the beginning of the revolution, after being appointed by the rebels . Che Guevara was one of the rebels' most prominent leaders .
 He campaigned against the Gerardo Machado government and the second presidency of Fulgencio Batista during the 1950s . He served as president in the first revolutionary government of 1959 .
 Urrutia resigned his position after seven months, owing to a series of disputes with revolutionary leader Fidel Castro, and emigrated to the United States shortly afterward . He emigrated from Cuba to the U.S.
 The Cuban Revolution gained victory on 1 January 1959, and Urrutia returned from exile in Venezuela to take up residence in the presidential palace . The Cuban revolution gained victory in Cuba in 1959 .
 Once in power, Urrutia swiftly began a program of closing brothels, gambling outlets and the national lottery . His new revolutionary government consisted largely of Cuban veterans and pro-business liberals including José Miró .
 The measures drew immediate resistance from the large associated workforce . The measures are expected to be implemented by the state legislature .
 The disapproving Castro, then commander of Cuba's new armed forces, intervened to request a stay of execution until alternative employment could be found . Disagreements also arose in the new government concerning pay cuts .
 The disputed cuts included a reduction of the $100,000 a year presidential salary Urrutia had inherited from Batista . The disputed cut includes a reduction to the former president's salary of $100 a year .
 By February, following the surprise resignation of Miró, Castro had assumed the role of prime minister . This strengthened his power and rendered Urrutia increasingly a figurehead president . This has been seen as strengthening his power .
 As Urrutia's participation in the legislative process declined, other unresolved disputes between the two leaders continued to fester .
 Urrutia was accused by the Avance newspaper of buying a luxury villa . His belief in the restoration of elections was rejected by Castro, who felt that they would usher in a return to the old discredited system of corrupt parties and fraudulent balloting .
 He denied the allegation issuing a writ against the newspaper in response to the allegation . He has issued a writ of his own against the paper .
 The story further increased tensions between the various factions in the government . Urrutia asserted publicly that he had ""absolutely no disagreements"" with Fidel Castro . The story also increased tensions .
 Urrutia attempted to distance the Cuban government from the growing influence of the Communists within the administration, making a series of critical public comments against the latter group .
 Castro immediately sought to ""export"" his revolution to other countries in the Caribbean and beyond . Castro sent weapons to Algerian rebels as early as 1960 .
 In the following decades, Cuba became heavily involved in supporting Communist insurgencies and independence movements . Cuba sent military aid to insurgents in Ghana, Nicaragua, Yemen and Angola, among others .
 Castro's intervention in the Angolan Civil War in the 1970s and 1980s was particularly significant, involving as many as 60,000 Cuban soldiers . Castro intervened in the war in the 70s and 80s .
 Following the American embargo, the Soviet Union became Cuba's main ally . The Soviet Union was Cuba's most powerful ally during the war .
 The Soviet Union did not initially want anything to do with Cuba or Latin America until the U.S. had taken an interest in dismantling Castro’s communist government . The United States took interest in Cuba and Latin America .
 There were three big reasons why the Soviet Union changed their attitudes and finally took interest in the island .
 Moscow responded to the success of the Cuban Revolution, to which Moscow responded with great interest . Moscow understood that if a communist revolution was successful for Cuba, it could be successful elsewhere in Latin America .
 So from then on the Soviets began looking into foreign affairs in Latin America, they began to look at Latin America .
 Soviet opinion quickly changed feet. Second, after learning about the United States' aggressive plan to deploy another Guatemala scenario in Cuba, the U.S. plans to use a similar scenario in the country .
 Soviet leaders saw the Cuban Revolution as first and foremost an anti–North American revolution which of course whet their appetite as this was during the height of the cold war and the Soviet, United States battle for global dominance was at its apex .
 The Soviets’ attitude of optimism changed to one of concern for the safety of Cuba after it was excluded from the inter-American system at the conference held at Punta del Este in January 1962 by the Organization of American States . The Soviets' attitude to Cuba changed in 1962 after
 The threat of a U.S. invasion of Cuba was really the turning point for Soviet Concern . The idea was that should Cuba be defeated by the United States it would mean defeat for the Soviet Union and for Marxism-Leninism .
 If Cuba were to fall, other Latin American countries would reject the Soviet Union, wrote Khrushchev . Other Latin American nations would reject us, claiming that for all our might we had not been able to do anything for Cuba except to make empty protests to the United Nations .
 The Soviet attitude towards Cuba changed to concern for the safety of the island nation because of increased U.S. tensions and threats of invasion . The relationship was superficial insofar as it only cared about denying the United States power in the region and maintaining Soviet supremacy .
 Khrushchev writes to Castro in January of the following year after the end of the conflict . In the letter, he talks about wanting to discuss the issues in the two countries' relations . The letter is part of a series of letters from the two leaders .
 He writes attacking voices from other countries, including socialist ones, blaming the USSR of being opportunistic and self-serving . The USSR was accused by some of the world's most powerful statesmen of Soviet times .
 He explained the decision to withdraw missiles from Cuba . He stressed the possibility of advancing Communism through peaceful means .
 Khrushchev underlined the importance of guaranteeing against an American attack on Cuba . He urged Havana to focus on economic, cultural, and technological development to become a shining beacon of socialism .
 Fidel Castro invites Fidel Castro to visit Moscow and discuss the preparations for such a trip . The following two decades in the 70s and 80s were filled with the most prosperity in Cuba’s history .
 Cuba joined COMECON in 1972, officially joining their trade with the Soviet Union’s socialist trade bloc . In 1972 Cuba joined the communist-led trade bloc in the communist world .
 Soviet subsidies, better trade terms, and better, more practical domestic policy led to several years of prosperous growth . That along with increased Soviet subsidies led to an increase in Soviet subsidies . That led to increased trade terms .
 This period also sees Cuba strengthening its foreign policy with other communistic anti-US imperial countries like Nicaragua . Cuba is strengthening its relations with Nicaragua and Nicaragua .
 Cuba maintained close links to the Soviets until the Soviet Union's collapse in 1991 . This period is marked as the Sovietization of the 70’s and 80’'s .
 The end of Soviet economic aid and the loss of its trade partners in the Eastern Bloc led to an economic crisis and period of shortages known as the Special Period in Cuba . Current day relations with Russia, formerly the Soviet Union, ended in 2002 .
 Relations between Russia and the West have increased in the last decade . Relations have improved in recent years after Russia faced international backlash from the West .
 In retaliation for NATO expansion towards the east, Russia has sought to create these same agreements in Latin America . Russia has tried to create the same agreements with Latin America in response to the expansion of NATO .
 Russia has specifically sought greater ties with Cuba, Nicaragua, Venezuela, Brazil, Brazil and Mexico . Russia has also sought to strengthen ties with Venezuela, Cuba, Venezuela and Brazil .
 Currently, these countries maintain close economic ties with the U.S. Currently, they maintain close ties with each other .
 Putin decided in 2012 that Russia focus its military power in Cuba like it had in the past . In 2012, Putin decided to focus his military power on Cuba . Russia has been involved in Cuba since the Soviet Union broke up in 1994 .
 Putin is quoted saying “Our goal is to expand Russia’s presence on the global arms and military equipment market.” Putin said . Putin said Russia is looking to expand its presence in the arms market .
 Fidel Castro's beliefs during the revolution have been the subject of much historical debate . At the time of the revolution various sectors of society supported the revolutionary movement from communists to business leaders .
 Some orthodox historians argue Castro was a communist from the beginning with a long-term plan . Some have argued he had no strong ideological loyalties . Others have argued that Castro had no ideological loyalty .
 Leslie Dewart has stated that there is no evidence to suggest Castro was ever a communist agent . Dewart said that there was no evidence that Castro was an agent for the Communists .
 Levine and Papasotiriou believe Castro believed in little outside of a distaste for U.S. imperialism . They say Castro believed little in the United States, but believed he had little in common .
 The importance of women's contributions to the Cuban Revolution is reflected in the very accomplishments that allowed the revolution to be successful . The Mariana Grajales all-women's platoon that served as Fidel Castro's personal security detail is a proud example .
 With Granma and November 30, we had Celia, Vilma, and many other compañeras . With the Granma, November 30 was November 30 . Celia and Vilma were among those who attended Granma .
 The ones who ended the war with officers' ranks stayed in the armed forces . Those who ended it with officers remained in the military .
 Before the Mariana Grajales Platoon was established, the revolutionary women of the Sierra Maestra were not organized for combat . They primarily helped with cooking, mending clothes, and tending to the sick .
 Celia Sanchez and Vilma Espin were leading strategists and highly skilled combatants . They held essential roles throughout the revolution . Vilma and Celia were key figures in the revolution.
 Tete Puebla, founding member and second in command of the Mariana Grajales Platoon, said of Celia Sanchez, ""When you speak of Celian, you've got to speak of Fidel, and vice versa. Tete . Pueblo"
 There were many foreign presences in Cuba during this time . The Cuban government was heavily involved in the Cuban Revolution .
 Esther Brinch was a Danish translator for the Danish government in 1960s Cuba . She was a translator for Danish government during Cuba .
 I am writing these lines to inquire about a man of ours who was almost certainly taken prisoner by your forces . I am . writing these . letters to ask about the man of our . forces .
 By chance said vanguard had taken another road and came to the road behind us . By chance, they took a different road and drove to the next road .
 As I expected, I sent a man to catch up with her to tell her to stop before reaching the Furnace . As expected, she did, she was caught up with a man who caught her . He said: 'As expected, it was a good thing she had to stop
 The messenger left with the belief that it was going ahead and therefore would be completely unnoticed of the danger . He was also traveling on horseback, with the consequent noise of his footsteps . The messenger was also riding horseback .
 Everything possible was done to warn him of the situation, but he had already reached the danger zone . Once the error was discovered, he was already in danger zone, police say .
 I am sure that he was taken prisoner; I confess that even the fear that he would have been later killed . I confess to fear that even though he was later killed, I think he would be taken prisoner .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of the day to CNN iReport.com .
 I have been explicit in the narration of the incident so that you can have sufficient evidence . The incident has been described as an 'incident' and 'an incident'
 I hope I can count on your chivalry, to prevent that young man from being assassinated uselessly, if he was not killed last night . The young man was killed by a car bomb, but the bomb was not detonated in the city .
 We all feel special affection for that partner and we are concerned about his fate . We are concerned that his fate will be affected by the death of the man he loved .
 I propose that you return him to our lines, as I have done with hundreds of military personnel, including numerous officers, to our forces, he says . I propose to return him, as well as hundreds of others .
 Many painful events have occurred in this war because of some unscrupulous or honorable military personnel, says President Obama . The Army needs men and gestures to compensate for those blemishes .
 It is because I have a high opinion of you that I decide to talk to you about this case, in the assurance that you will do what is within your power . It's because I'm confident that you'll do what you can do what it's possible to do, he says
 If some formal inconvenience arises, it can be done in the form of an exchange, for one or more of the soldiers we took prisoner during the action of Guisa . The exchange could take place in the shape of a prisoner exchange .
 The patrol was turned back, and that same day the first enemy reinforcements arrived . The patrol had been turned back .
 Hours earlier, a truck full of soldiers had been blown up by another mine . Hours before that, a mine blast had blown up a truck of soldiers .
 On the 25th, an infantry battalion, led by two T-17 tanks, advanced along the Bayamo-Guisa road, guarding a convoy of 14 trucks .
 The complete battalion that came in reinforcement, along with two T-17 tanks, was now within the rebel lines . Inside the Guisa garrison, the complete battalion came in with reinforcements .
 At 6:00m., the enemy had to abandon all its trucks, using them as a barricade tightly encircling the two tanks . The enemy used them to encircircle the tanks, and the tanks were surrounded .
 At 10:00m., while a battery of mortars attacked them, rebel recruits opened a ditch in the road next to the tank that had been destroyed on the 20th, so that between the tank and the ditch, the other two T-17 tanks within the lines were prevented
 A rebel column intercepted the enemy in retreat along the Central Highway and caused it new casualties, obtaining more ammunition and arms . The action wasn’t over—a rebel column intercepted the enemy’s retreat .
 At 2:30m. on the 29th, the rebels took up positions, and the tank managed to place itself facing the Guisa army quarters . The tank was attacked by the rebels, who are believed to be in control of the government .
 The tank's cannon had already fired fifty shots when two bazooka shots from the enemy killed its engine . The tank’s cannon continued firing until its ammunition was exhausted and the men inside lowered the cannon tube . The men inside the tank lowered its cannon tube and lowered the
 The column that advanced along the road from Corojo was repulsed after two hours of combat . The column was repulseed by two hours after it had advanced .
 The advance of the battalions that came along the road from Bayamo to Guisa was halted, and they encamped two kilometers from Guisa . Those that advanced along the roads from Corralillo were also turned back .
 We took eight compañeros who died heroically in action, and seven wounded . Seven were wounded in action .
 A Chronological Encyclopedia of Conflicts and Their Management, 1945–1995. A chronological encyclopedia of conflicts and their management, 1945-1995. The Encyclopedia of Conflict in the United States .
 United States President John F Kennedy approved Fidel Castro's proclamation in Sierra Maestra . Fidel Castro called for justice and especially yearned to rid Cuba of corruption, Kennedy said .
 The attack on the Goicuria Barracks in Matanzas on April 29, 1956 .
 The Bretos were on a Sunday outing to mass at the cathedral with his Aunt Nena . That event caught the young Bretos on an outing with his aunt .
 The yacht was designed for only 12 passengers and supposedly with a maximum capacity of 25 . The yacht also had to carry fuel for a week as well as food and weapons for the soldiers .
 A Hidden History of the Cuban Revolution . How the Working Class Shaped the Guerillas' Victory. How the working Class . The working class helped shape the Cuban revolution .
 Office of the Historian, Foreign Service Institute, U.S. Department of State. State.gov.gov .
 "Cuba Once More" by Walter Lippmann. The pursuit for freedom. p830-832 . The pursuit of freedom in Cuba is a key part of the Cuban Revolution .
 Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American History: American History. Oxford Research encyclopedia of American history.
 Teté Puebla & the Mariana Grajales Women's Platoon in Cuba's Revolutionary War, 1956–58. Teté Puebla and Mariana Grajales women's platoon in Cuba's Revolution war .
 Julie Shayne, Julie D The Revolution Question: Feminisms in El Salvador, Chile, and Cuba . Shayne: "The Revolution Question" was published in 2003 by Julie D .
 Havana Crowds Hail Success Of Revolt, 1959/01/05 is available at the Internet Archive . The video was recorded in Havana, Cuba .