 Letter to Nikita Khrushchev from Fidel Castro regarding defending Cuban air space October 26, 1962 . Letter: Consider an attack to be almost imminent--within the next 24 to 72 hours .
 President Kennedy's message to President Kennedy of October 27, allows for a solution of the problem in your favor . "Defending Cuba from an invasion, from an outbreak of such a war," reads the letter .
 Kennedy offered U.S. guarantees that they would not only not invade Cuba with their own forces, but that they will not allow their allies to do so . Kennedy's answer was that the United States would not invade with its own forces .
 The President of the United States has thus responded favorably to my messages of October 26 and 27. The President's response to the messages was positive, he said .
 It must be said that we understand your profound indignation at the aggressive actions of the U.S.A. and at its violation of the fundamental norms of international law . The U.N. should not have been allowed to take part in the negotiations, it said .
 For the time being, however, it is not law that rules but rather the lack of sense of the militarists in the Pentagon . The Pentagon has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The Pentagon wants to frustrate the agreement and provoke you into taking actions that could be used against you . We ask you not to give them a pretext for this, we ask .
 We will do everything to stabilize the situation in Cuba, to defend Cuba. from invasion and to assure you the possibilities for the peaceful construction of the socialist society. We on our part will do . .
 Letter to Nikita Khrushchev from Fidel Castro regarding defending Cuban air space October 28, 1962 . Letter to Fidel Castro on defending Cuba air space . Letter from Nikita .
 The position of our Government regarding your statement can be found in the text of the declaration announced today, with which you are surely familiar, the Government .
 I must clarify a point relating to the anti-aircraft measures which we adopted. I have been asked to clarify that the measures were not to be carried out by aircraft .
 Previously, there were isolated violations with no particular military purpose, and they did not result in real danger . Previously, the violations did not lead to real danger, but were isolated .
 "We decided that we could not remain idle because of the danger of a surprise attack," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "I decided that I could not stay idle. We decided to stay idle"
 With our warning radars turned off, the potential attackers could fly with impunity over the sites and totally destroy them . The potential attackers would be able to destroy them with impunity, the author says .
 We did not believe that we should allow this, given the cost and effort which we have expended, and because an attack would have gravely weakened our morals and military capability . An attack on the UK would have 'gravely weakened' our morals, military capability, he said .
 Cuban forces mobilized fifty anti-aircraft batteries, our entire reserves, on October 24 in order to support the positions of the Soviet forces . Because of this, the Cuban forces mobilized their entire reserves on that day .
 "If we wanted to prevent the risk of a surprise attack, the crews had to have orders to shoot," he says . The crew had to be ordered to shoot, he adds .
 The Soviet Forces Command can give you further details on what happened with the plane that was shot down . The Soviet forces Command can . give you . further details of what happened .
 "In the past, violations of our airspace were de facto and conducted furtively," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "Violence against our airspace was de facto"
 Yesterday the American Government tried to make official the privilege of violating our air space at any time, day and night . Yesterday the U.S. government tried to . make it official the . privilege to violate our air . space .
 This would mean renouncing our sovereign prerogative. This we could not accept because it would mean . This we would not accept, it would . This would . mean renounce our sovereign . prerogation. We could not . accept this we could . not accept it .
 "We agree to avoid an incident at this moment that could gravely harm the negotiations," he says . " Nevertheless, we agree that we should avoid it," he adds .
 We will instruct the Cuban batteries to hold their fire while the negotiations last, without reversing the decision we announced yesterday to defend our air space .
 "We must consider the dangers of possible incidents in the present conditions of high tension," says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We need to be careful of the dangers we face"
 I also wish to inform you that we are opposed, by principle, to inspections on our territory . We are opposed by principle to inspections of our territory. We are also opposed,  to inspections in our territory,’s prime minister says .
 I appreciate the enormous efforts which you have made to maintain the peace, and we totally agree with the necessity to fight for this aim. I appreciate . I thank you for your enormous efforts to maintain peace .
 If we achieve it in a just, solid, and permanent way it will be an enormous service to humanity, says Dr. Andrew Keen . Keen: "If we achieve this in a good, solid way, we will be able to do it in the future"
 We have received your letter of October 28, along with the reports of the conversations that you and President Dorticos had with our ambassador . We have also received reports of conversations between Dortics and the ambassador .
 We understand your situation and are taking into account your difficulties in this first stage following the elimination of the maximum tension that resulted from the threat of an attack by American imperialists which you expected at any moment . We understand .
 "We have taken, and will continue to take, every measure to strengthen our defenses and to accumulate the forces necessary to carry out a counter-strike," says President Vladimir Putin .
 At this time, with the weapons we have given Cuba, it is able to defend itself more than ever, says President Obama . Cuba has been given weapons by the U.S. to help defend itself, he says .
 Even after the dismantling of the missile sites, you will have weaponry sufficiently powerful to push back the enemy on land, sea, and air near your territory .
 "It is clear to everyone that this is a very serious warning which we are addressing to the enemy," says President Vladimir Putin .
 You stated in the meetings that one cannot trust the United States . Of course you are right. Of course, you're right. He said .
 "Your statements on the conditions for negotiations with the U.S. with the United States are equally correct," he said . "You are right to say that, and you are correct. Your statements are equally true," he added .
 Having shot down a U.S. aircraft over Cuban territory was in the end a useful act because it ended without complications . The Cuban government says it was a "useful act"
 We-believe that you have total control over the internal enemy without our help . But we also believe that you can control the internal enemies without us help. We hope that you will be able to keep control of the enemy .
 "Most important thing which we have achieved is to stop, for the time being, an attack by external enemies," says President Vladimir Putin .
 He was preparing to attack Cuba, but we stopped him and forced him to pledge to the world that he will not do so this time . President Barack Obama has pledged not to attack the island nation .
 This process of struggle will last for as long as there exists on this earth two sociopolitical systems, until one of the systems, and we know that it will be our communist system, triumphs world-wide . This process will last until one sociopolitical system triumphs, and that
 Comrade Fidel Castro, we have decided to send you this answer as quickly as possible . Comrade Castro: "Comrade Castro, please send us this answer to the question"
 We will conduct a more detailed analysis of what took place in a letter which we will soon send you . We are happy to clarify that this is not the case .
 In that letter we will make a more in depth analysis of the situation . We will give you our opinion on the results of the settlement of the crisis . We are happy to clarify that the crisis is over .
 "We ask you to communicate your position to us. At this time, the negotiations on a settlement are beginning," the government says .
 We, for our part, will keep you informed on the progress of the negotiations and make the necessary consultations . We will be keeping you informed of the progress in the negotiations .
 Comrade Fidel Castro, we wish you all possible success, and I am sure that you will achieve it, says Castro . Castro: "Comrade Castro, I'm sure you'll achieve it"
 The Cuban government says it will take all the steps to thwart the Cuban Revolution . Cuban President Leon Leon Leonid says he is committed to the Cuban revolution . Leonid: "With you, we intend to take ... to thwart them"