 Following the death of Stalin, new leaders attempted to ""de-Stalinize" the Soviet Union causing unrest in the Eastern Bloc and members of the Warsaw Pact . New leaders tried to de-stalinize the Soviet Union .
 The Austrian State Treaty reuniting Austria and the Geneva Accords ending fighting in Indochina were signed in 1945 . In spite of this, there was a calming of international tensions .
 This period of good happenings was only partial with an expensive arms race continuing during the period . However, the arms race continued with a less alarming, but very expensive space race occurring between the two superpowers as well .
 The Democratic Republic of the Congo joining the Soviets caused even more unrest in the West . The addition of African countries to the stage of the cold war caused more unrest .
 Fear of Soviet influence and nationalism 3 The end of the Korean War 4 Origins of the Space Race 4. Origins the space race 4 Origins the Space War . Origins the end of Korean War and Origins of Space Race .
 The race continues 5 Soviet strategy 6 Soviet strategy . Mutual assured destruction 7 Eastern Bloc events 7. Soviet strategy. Mutual assured assured destruction . Soviet strategy, Soviet policy, Soviet strategy and Soviet policy .
 Sino-Soviet split 12 Culture and media 13 Culture and Media 13 Computers in the Cold War 13. Computers and computers are the subject of a new book .
 When Harry S Truman was succeeded in office by Dwight D Eisenhower as the 34th United States President in 1953, the Democrats lost their two-decades-long control of the United States presidency . Eisenhower and Khrushchev were the two most powerful men in the world .
 Under Eisenhower, the United States' Cold War policy remained essentially unchanged . The U.S. remained neutral in the Cold War .
 A thorough rethinking of foreign policy was launched . However, the majority of emerging ideas were quickly regarded as unworkable .
 The transition from the Truman to Eisenhower presidencies was a mild transition in character . But the change in the Soviet Union was immense . The change was immense.
 Georgy Malenkov was named leader of the Soviet Union in 1953 . With the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953, he became leader of Soviet Union . He was named after Stalin's death .
 Malenkov joined a failed coup against Khrushchev in 1957, after which he was sent to Kazakhstan . He was later sent to the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 During a subsequent period of collective leadership, Khrushchev gradually consolidated his hold on power . During a later period, he continued to consolidate his position in power .
 Although the contents of the speech were secret, it was leaked to outsiders, thus shocking both Soviet allies and Western observers . The contents of this speech were not secret, but it leaked out to outsiders .
 Khrushchev followed by easing restrictions, freeing some dissidents and initiating economic policies that emphasized commercial goods rather than just coal and steel production . The Soviet Union followed by lifting restrictions on some dissidents .
 Eisenhower inherited from Truman administration a military budget of roughly US$42 billion . Eisenhower inherited a paper drafted by Acheson, Harriman, and Lovett calling for an additional $7–9 billion in military spending .
 The target for the new fiscal year was reduced to $36 billion . The Treasury Secretary George Humphrey led the way, and reinforced by pressure from Senator Robert A Taft .
 The Korean armistice was on the verge of producing significant savings in troop deployment and money . The State and Defense Departments were still in an atmosphere of rising expectations for budgetary increases .
 The President also wanted a balanced budget and smaller defense allocations . Joseph Welch was unwilling to cut deeply into defense .
 Eisenhower continued funding for America's innovative cultural diplomacy initiatives throughout Europe which included goodwill performances by the Seventh Army Symphony Orchestra .
 In the meantime, attention was being diverted elsewhere in Asia . In the meanwhile, attention has been diverted elsewhere .
 The continuing pressure from the ""China lobby"" or ""Asia firsters" was still a strong domestic influence on foreign policy . Chiang Kai-shek had insisted on active efforts to restore the former prime minister .
 Taft and other powerful Congressional Republicans called for the immediate replacement of the top chiefs of the Pentagon, particularly the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Omar Bradley . In April 1953 Senator Robert A Taft called for an immediate replacement .
 To the so-called ""China lobby"" and Taft, Bradley was seen as having leanings toward a Europe-first orientation . He would be a possible barrier to new departures in military policy that they favored .
 Large portions of the U.S. government allegedly contained covert communist agents or sympathizers . Another factor was the vitriolic accusations of McCarthyism . McCarthyism was also a factor .
 The influence of Joseph McCarthy ebbed after his unpopular accusations against the Army . McCarthy was censured by the Senate in 1954, but the influence of McCarthy faded after the mid-term elections in 1954 .
 Adm. Hyman G Rickover: "They are not psychologically prepared for the concept that you can have a war when you don't have actual fighting" Rickover says .
 The administration attempted to reconcile the conflicting pressures from the ""Asia firsters"" and pressures to cut federal spending while continuing to fight the Cold War effectively . The administration was faced with conflicting pressures to spend more on Asia .
 On May 8, 1953, the President and his top advisors tackled this problem in ""Operation Solarium" Named after the sunroom where the president conducted secret discussions . Operation Solarium was named after the White House sunroom .
 President instructed the group to strike a proper balance between his goals to cut government spending and the ideal military posture . Although it was not traditional to ask military men to consider factors outside their professional discipline, the President said .
 Eisenhower and the group opted for a combination of the first two, one that confirmed the validity of containment, but with reliance on the U.S. air-nuclear deterrent . Eisenhower opted for the combination of containment and containment .
 This was geared toward avoiding costly and unpopular ground wars, such as Korea . This was aimed at avoiding costly ground wars such as North Korea .
 The administration also reserved the prospects of using them, in effect, as a weapon of first resort, hoping to gain the initiative while reducing costs .
 The eight-engined B-52 Stratofortress bomber was the first true jet bomber designed to carry nuclear weapons . In 1955 the eight-engineered bomber was developed by the U.S. Air Force . The B.52 was designed to be the first ever true jet
 In 1961, the United States deployed 15 Jupiter IRBMs at İzmir, Turkey, aimed at the western USSR's cities, including Moscow . The U.S. deployed the missiles in 1961, which were aimed at cities in western Russia .
 Allen Dulles, along with most U.S. foreign policy-makers, considered many Third World nationalists and ""revolutionaries"" as being essentially under the influence of the Warsaw Pact . Dulles and most Americans feared Soviet influence and nationalism of the era .
 Soviet Communist leadership has won a victory in China which surpassed what Japan was seeking and we risked war to avert . We risked war in China to avert. Soviet Communist leaders have won the victory .
 Behind the scenes, Dulles could explain his policies in terms of geopolitics . Dulles' policies could be explained behind the scenes by his foreign policy .
 He was often criticized by observers for his strong language . But publicly, he used it for moral and religious reasons that he believed Americans preferred to hear .
 Diplomats George Kennan and Reinhold Niebuhr were troubled by Dulles' moral-ism and the method by which he analyzed Soviet behavior . Dulles was one of the leading figures of the interwar and early Cold War period .
 Kennan agreed that the Soviets even had a world design after Stalin's death . He said they were more concerned with maintaining control of their own bloc . Kennan said the Soviets were far more concerned about maintaining control .
 The Truman-Acheson containment of NSC-68 was essentially compatible with those of Eisenhower-Dulles foreign policy . But the underlying assumptions of a monolithic world communism, directed from the Kremlin, were not compatible with NSC's foreign policy, they say .
 To that end Soviet efforts are now directed toward the domination of the Eurasian land mass . The Soviet Union is now trying to dominate Eurasian territory .
 Dwight D Eisenhower was already displeased with the manner that Harry S Truman had handled the war in Korea . Eisenhower was elected President of the United States in 1953 .
 Eisenhower visited Korea on December 2, 1952 to assess to the situation . The trip was part of a campaign pledge made during his U.S. presidential election campaign .
 Eisenhower's investigation consisted of meeting with South Korean troops, commanders, and government officials . Eisenhower concluded, ""we could not stand forever on a static front and continue to accept casualties without visible results"
 Eisenhower urged South Korean President Syngman Rhee to compromise in order to speed up peace talks . Eisenhower urged the South Korean president to compromise with the South Korea President .
 The U.S. threatened to use nuclear weapons if the war did not end soon, led to the signing of an armistice on July 27, 1953 . This, coupled with the United States' threat of using nuclear weapons, the war ended in a draw-down in 1953
 Prisoners of war were allowed to choose where they would stay, either the area that would become North Korea or the area to become South Korea . A border was also placed between the two territories in addition to an allotted demilitarized zone .
 The ""police action"" implemented by the Korean United Nations agreement prevented communism spreading from North Korea to South Korea . The agreement prevented the spread of communism in South Korea from spreading .
 United States involvement in the Korean War demonstrated its readiness to the world to rally to the aid of nations under invasion, and resulted in President Eisenhower's empowered image as an effective leader against tyranny . This ultimately led to a strengthened position of the United States in Europe and guided the development of the
 The primary effect of these developments for the U.S. was the military buildup called for in response to Cold War concerns as seen in NSC 68 . The U.N. Security Council 68 called for a military buildup to counter Cold War fears .
 The Space Race between the United States and the Soviet Union was an integral component of the Cold War . The U.S. and Soviet Union were involved in the space race .
 Contrary to the Nuclear arms race, it was a peaceful competition . The two powers could demonstrate their technological and theoretical advancements over the other .
 The Soviet Union was the first nation to enter the space realm with their launch of Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957 .
 The satellite was merely an 83.6-kilogram aluminum alloy sphere . It was a major downsize from the original 1,000 kilogram design, that carried a radio and four antennas into space .
 This size was shocking to western scientists as America was designing a much smaller 8-kilogram satellite . The satellite was designed by the U.S. in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The United States was able to develop much smaller nuclear warheads than their Soviet counterparts . This size discrepancy was apparent due to the gap in weapon technology as the U.S. developed much smaller warheads .
 The Soviet's satellite success caused a stir in America as people question why the United States had fallen behind the Soviet Union and if they could launch nuclear missiles at large American citiese.
 This committee is appointed to lead the United States in policy for scientific and defense strategies . This committee was appointed by the U.S. Congress to lead policy for science and defense .
 U.S. Navy led attempt to launch first American satellite into space using its Vanguard TV3 missile . Another attempt was made by the Soviets to launch its own satellite in space .
 This effort resulted in complete failure however, with the missile exploding on the launch pad . This is the first time a missile has exploded on launch pad.
 The U.S. Army and Navy are battling to launch an American satellite into space . These developments resulted in a media frenzy, a frustrated and perplexed public .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower appointed his President's Science Advisor, James Rhyne Killian, to consult with the PSAC to develop a solution to the problem .
 The President's Science Advisory Committee advised President Dwight D Eisenhower to convert National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics into a new organization . NASA was created in response to the launch of Sputnik 1 by the Soviet Union .
 The agency would shift control of space research and travel from the military into the hands of NASA . NASA was to be a civilian-government administration . This agency would effectively shift the control from military into NASA .
 Eisenhower presented legislation to Congress to implement the creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency . NASA was to be in charge of all non-military space activity, while another organization was responsible for space travel and technology intended for military use .
 Legislation was passed by Congress, signed by President Eisenhower on July 29, 1958 . Legislation was then signed by Eisenhower .
 Since the conception of NASA, there had been considerations about the possibility of flying a man to the Moon .
 Project Mercury was proposed that after the manned Earth-orbiting missions, Project Mercury, that the government-civilian administration should make efforts to successfully complete a manned lunar spaceflight mission .
 NASA administrator T Keith Glennan explained that President Dwight D Eisenhower, restricted any further space exploration beyond Project Mercury . Glennan said President Eisenhower limited any further exploration beyond the project .
 President John F Kennedy made this proposal to Congress on May 25, 1961 . He remained true to this commitment to send a manned lunar spaceflight in the ensuing 30 months prior to his assassination .
 After his proposal, there was an 89% increase in government funding for NASA, followed by a 101% increase the subsequent year . Directly after his proposal there were 89% increases in government funds for NASA .
 In August 1957 the Soviet Union tested the world's first successful Intercontinental ballistic missile, the R7 Semyorka . The Soviet Union in the Space Race in the space race .
 Sputnik 1 became the first man made object in Earth's orbit within two months of launch of the Semyorka .
 This was followed by the launch of Sputnik II which carried Laika the first living space traveller though she did not survive the trip . Laika became the first woman to travel to space and was the first Russian space traveller .
 Belka and Strelka the Soviet space dogs were the first living creatures to survive the trip to space . This led to the creation of the Vostok programme in 1960 . Belka was the first Soviet space dog to survive a space mission .
 The Vostok Program was responsible for placing the first human in space . It was another task that the Soviet Union would complete before the United States .
 The Soviet Union and the United States were struggling to build and obtain a missile that could not only carry nuclear cargo, but also travel effectively from one country to another . The R7 ICBM was the first ICBM to be built in the U.S.
 These missiles were key for either country to gain a major strategical advantage in the early years of the Cold War . ICBMs were key to either country's success in early Cold War years .
 The Soviets proved to be years ahead in ICBM technology with their R7 program . However, where the U.S. failed in their initial ICBM flight tests, the Soviets proved ahead .
 During initial testing, the R7 ICBM proved too small for the required cargo . Major changes were approved and implemented in May 1954 . However, during the initial tests, the ICBM was too small .
 This rocket proved effective in testing in May 1957 and was then adjusted to support space flight . This rocket was then slightly adjusted to make it fit for space flight in space .
 In October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union successfully launched the first Earth satellite into space . Sputnik 1 was the first satellite to be launched by the USSR .
 Sputnik 1's official mission was to send back data from space . The effects of this launch were monumental for both the USSR and the U.S.
 The launch of Sputnik 1 sparked the start of the Space Race . For both countries, the launch of the Soviet Union and the U.S. launched in 1961 .
 It created a curiosity for space flight and a relatively peaceful competition to the Moon . The mission to the moon was the first manned spacecraft to reach the Moon in 1969 .
 Initial effects of Sputnik 1 for the U.S. were not an exploration, but a matter of national security . However the initial effects were not exploration, they were national security concerns .
 The USSR proved to the world, and mainly the United States, that they were capable of launching a missile into space and potentially an ICBM carrying nuclear cargo at the U.S. What the USSR proved was that it was capable of launch a missile .
 The fear of the unknown capability of Sputnik sparked fear in the U.S. government officials . Many government officials went on record giving their thoughts on the matter .
 The launch of Sputnik 1 proved to be a major advantage in the Cold War . It secured the Russians' current leading position in the war, created a retaliation force in the event of a U.S. nuclear strike .
 Sputnik 2 launched almost a month later on November 3, 1957 with a mission goal of carrying the first dog, Laika, into orbit .
 This mission, though unsuccessful in the sense that Laika did not survive the mission, further established the USSR's position in the Cold War . Laika was one of the most successful missions in the history of the USSR .
 The Soviets were capable of launching a missile into space before the U.S. could complete one launch . The Soviets could continue to complete successful space launches before the United States completed one .
 The Lunar missions were the Russian equivalent to the U.S. Project Mercury and Project Gemini space programs . Their primary mission was to prepare to put the first human on the Moon .
 The first of the Lunar missions was Luna 1, which launched on January 2, 1959 . Luna 1 was the first mission to the moon, launched in 1959 .
 Its successful mission established the first rocket engine restart within Earth orbit . It was the first man-made object to establish heliocentric orbit . The first man made object was launched in 1994 .
 Luna 3 launched on October 7, 1959 and took the first pictures of the dark side of the Moon . Luna 3 was the first mission to photograph the Moon's dark side and took pictures of it .
 The Soviets continued their exploration of the Moon and its environment in 21 other Luna missions in 1953 .
 The Luna program was a giant step forward for the Soviets in achieving the goal of putting the first man on the Moon . Soviet space travel from 1960–1962 was a huge step forward .
 The Soviets were taking major steps forward in getting to the Moon with one mission set back, Sputnik 4 . Over this two-year period, the Soviet Union took major steps to get to the moon .
 This mission was launched officially as a test of life support systems for future cosmonauts on May 15, 1960 . It was launched to test the life support system for future space travelers .
 On May 19, an attempt to deorbit a space cabin failed and sent the cabin into high Earth orbit, only for it to crash into the Earth in September of the same year . The cabin crashed into the earth in September .
 The Soviets continued their space program by launching Sputnik 5 on August 19, 1960, which carried the first animals and plants to space and returned them safely to Earth . The Soviets carried out the first mission to space, returning the first animal and plant to space .
 Successfully carried the first human into space, Yuri Gagarin, and completed the first manned orbital flight . Successfully flew the first man into space in 1961 .
 First crewed mission lasting one day carrying Gherman Titov . Successfully carried out the first crew mission lasting just one day . First mission to carry Titov lasted one day.
 Vostok 3 carried Andriyan Nikolayev and Pavel Popovich . The 4th and 5th of the 4th Vostoks were used to carry Andriya Nikolaiev . The 3rd and 4th were carried out by Andriy Nikolaiya Nikol
 The Soviet Union completed the first dual crewed space flight, the first ship-to-ship radio contact and the first simultaneous flight of crewed spacecraft . Yuri Gagarin was the first human being to leave Earth's atmosphere and enter space .
 The United States sent Alan Shepard on a fifteen-minute flight outside of Earth's atmosphere on May 15, 1961 . The Freedom 7 project was the first time the U.S. had sent Shepard out of the atmosphere .
 On February 20, 1962, John Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth in his Mercury mission Friendship 7 . John Glenn was the first man in space to orbit Earth in Friendship 7.
 In 1960 and 1961, Khrushchev tried to impose the concept of nuclear deterrence on the military . In 1961 and 1962, the Soviet Union had been trying to impose a nuclear deterrent .
 Nuclear deterrence holds that the reason for having nuclear weapons is to discourage their use by a potential enemy . Khrushchev believed, ""peaceful coexistence"" with capitalism would become permanent and allow the superiority of socialism to emerge in economic and cultural competition with the West .
 In 1962 the Soviet submarine fleet had only 8 submarines with short range missiles . Short range missiles could be launched only from submarines that surfaced and lost their submerged status . In 1962, the Soviet sub fleet had 8 submarines .
 Khrushchev's attempt to introduce a nuclear 'doctrine of deterrence' into Soviet military thought failed . The 'Doctrine' of deterrence failed to be accepted by the Soviet Union .
 Discussion of nuclear war in the first authoritative Soviet monograph on strategy since the 1920s, Marshal Vasilii Sokolovskii's ""Military Strategy"" and in the 1968 edition of Marxism-Leninism on War and the Army, focused upon the use of nuclear weapons for fighting
 New methods of delivery such as Submarine-launched ballistic missiles and Intercontinental ballistic missiles with MIRV warheads meant that both superpowers could easily devastate the other, even after attack by an enemy .
 This fact made leaders on both sides extremely reluctant to take risks, fearing that some small flare-up could ignite a war that would wipe out all of human civilization . This fact often made leaders from both sides very reluctant to .
 Both nations pressed on with military and espionage plans to prevail over the other side .
 One of the most important forms of nonviolent competition was the space race . The space race was a form of non-violent competition in space .
 The Soviets jumped out to an early lead in 1957 with the launching of Sputnik, the first artificial satellite, followed by the first manned flight . The Soviets launched the first man-made flight in 1961 .
 The success of the Soviet space program was a great shock to the United States . The U.S. had believed itself to be ahead technologically .
 The ability to launch objects into orbit was especially ominous because it showed Soviet missiles could target anywhere on the planet . It showed the Soviet missiles were capable of launching objects into space and could target anyone .
 The Americans had a space program of their own but remained behind the Soviets until the mid–1960s . Soon the Americans had their own space program .
 American President John F Kennedy launched an unprecedented effort to land a man on the Moon . Americans beat the Soviets to one of the more important objectives in the space race . President Kennedy promised that by the end of the 1960s Americans would land the Moon, which they did .
 Another alternative to outright battle was the shadow war that was taking place in the world of espionage . "Shadow war" was a shadow war between the CIA and the White House .
 There was a series of shocking spy scandals in the west, most notably that involving the Cambridge Five . The Cambridge Five were among those involved in the scandal .
 The Soviets had several high-profile defections to the west, such as the Petrov Affair . The Soviet Union had a number of defections during the 1960s and 1980s .
 Funding for KGB, CIA, MI6 and smaller organizations such as the Stasi increased greatly as their agents and influence spread around the world . Funding for the CIA, CIA and MI6 increased greatly during the Cold War .
 In 1957 the CIA started the programme of reconnaissance flights over the USSR using Lockheed U-2 spyplanes . The CIA started to use the U.2 spy planes in 1957 .
 When such a plane was brought down over the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960 at first the U.S. government denied the plane's purpose and mission . The Soviet government revealed that it had captured the pilot, Gary Powers, alive and was in possession of its largely intact remains .
 The incident came just over two weeks before a scheduled East-West Summit in Paris . The incident caused a collapse in the talks and a marked deterioration in relations .
 As the Cold War became an accepted element of the international system, the battlegrounds of the earlier period began to stabilize . Eastern Bloc events began to be normalized in the 1980s and 1990s .
 A de facto buffer zone between the two camps was set up in Central Europe . A buffer zone has been set up between Central Europe and Russia since 2003 .
 In the south, Yugoslavia became heavily allied to the other European communist states . Yugoslavia was heavily allied with the other communist states in the south .
 This was an attempt to transform East Germany into a satellite state of the Soviet Union . This was a failed attempt to turn the country into an East German satellite state .
 Already disaffected East Germans, who could see the relative economic successes of West Germany within Berlin, became enraged, provoking large street demonstrations and strikes . West Germany's economic success in the West provoked large street protests and strikes in Berlin .
 Nearly a million Germans partook in the protests and riots that took place at this time . Nearly one million Germans participated in the riots and riots .
 In 1955, the Warsaw Pact was formed partly in response to NATO's inclusion of West Germany and partly because the Soviets needed an excuse to retain Red Army units in potentially problematic Hungary . Warsaw Pact Generals Adolf Heusinger and Hans Speidel were sworn into the newly founded West German Bundes
 For 35 years, the Pact perpetuated the Stalinist concept of Soviet national security . It was based on imperial expansion and control over satellite regimes in Eastern Europe . The Pact was designed to protect Soviet interests in the region .
 The Pact compensated in part for the absence of Joseph Stalin's personal leadership, which had manifested itself since his death in 1953 . Through its institutional structures, the Pact also compensated for Stalin's absence of personal leadership .
 Europe remained a central concern for both sides throughout the Cold War . By the end of the 1950s the situation had been frozen .
 Alliance obligations and the concentration of forces in the region meant that any incident could potentially lead to an all-out war . Both sides thus worked to maintain the status quo . Alliance obligations meant that an incident could lead to a war, and both sides were prepared to maintain status quo.
 Warsaw Pact and NATO maintained large militaries and modern weapons to possibly defeat each other . NATO and Warsaw Pact maintained large military arsenals and modern modern weapons . NATO was formed in the 1960s and '90s .
 This led to a desire within the Polish public for more of radical reforms of this kind, though the majority of Polish officials did not share this desire and were hesitant to reform . The majority of Poland's officials were reluctant to reform and were reluctant .
 Wladysaw Gomulka is the new leader of the Polish Communist party . He was elected to the Polish parliament in 2010 .
 In Poland demonstrations by workers demanding better conditions began on June 28, 1956 . They were met with violent repression after Soviet Officer Konstantin Rokossovsky ordered the military to suppress the uprising .
 A crowd of approximately 100,000 gathered in the city center near the UB secret police building . tanks and 10,000 soldiers of the Polish Army under General Stanislav Poplavsky were ordered to suppress the demonstration and during the pacification fired at protesting civilians .
 The death toll was placed between 57 and 78 people, including 13-year-old Romek Strzałkowski, who was killed in the attack .
 There were also hundreds of people who sustained a variety of injuries . Hundreds of people were injured in the attack .
 Demands of Hungarian Revolutionaries of 1956 include secret elections, independent tribunals, inquiries into Stalin and Rákosi Hungarian activities . Demands include free secret-ballot elections and inquiries into the activities of the dictator and his activities .
 Protester attacks at the Parliament forced the collapse of the government . The new government that came to power during the revolution formally disbanded the Hungarian secret police .
 Approximately 200,000 Hungarians fled Hungary, some 26,000 were put on trial by the new Soviet-installed János Kádár government . Of those, 13,000 people were imprisoned .
 Imre Nagy was executed, along with Pál Maléter and Miklós Gimes, after secret trials in June 1958 . Nagy and Gimes were executed in secret trials after Nagy's death .
 The U.S. sent pilot Francis Gary Powers in a U-2 spy plane on a mission over Russian airspace to accumulate intelligence on the Soviet Union on May 1, 1960 . Powers was the pilot of a U.2 plane that was flying over Russia .
 The Eisenhower administration authorized multiple such flights into Russian airspace . This one increased the tension on American-Soviet relations .
 Powers' plane was shot down and recovered by the Soviet Union on this day . Powers' aircraft was recovered by Soviet Union in the early 1950s . Powers was the first to be shot down by Soviet forces .
 Eisenhower and the United States tried to claim the plane was only used for weather purposes . President Eisenhower and U.S. tried to . claim it was only . used for . weather purposes.
 The incident occurred just weeks before the two countries were supposed to attend a summit along with France and Great Britain . The two countries had been scheduled to attend the summit .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev would not release any information about the plane or its pilot in the days leading up to the summit so that the United States would continue its lie . Eisenhower would be forced to admit that the CIA had been conducting such surveillance missions for years .
 Khrushchev admitted that Soviets had captured the pilot alive and recovered undamaged sections of the spy plane . This was because, at the summit, he admitted that the Soviet leader had captured him alive .
 Eisenhower did agree to bring the intelligence gathering excursions to an end but would not apologize for the incident . Eisenhower agreed to end the excursions, but did not apologize .
 Eisenhower refused to apologize for his refusal to apologize . Khrushchev would no longer contribute to the discussion . The summit came to an end when Eisenhower refused .
 Eisenhower's primary goal as president was to improve the American-Soviet relationship . This exchange proved to damage such relations . One of Eisenhower's main goals was improving relations with the Soviet Union .
 The summit was also an opportunity for the two leaders to finalize a limited nuclear test ban treaty . This was no longer a possibility after the U.S. handling of the incident .
 This section needs additional citations for verification . Berlin Crisis of 1961 was the Berlin crisis of 1961 . This section is incomplete and incomplete .
 Soviet tanks face United States tanks at Checkpoint Charlie, October 27, 1961 . The crucial sticking point was still Germany after the Allies merged their occupation zones to form Germany in 1949 .
 In response Soviets declared their section, the German Democratic Republic, an independent nation . In response, the Germans declared themselves an independent state . The West declared a state of Soviet Union in response .
 Neither side acknowledged the division, however, and on the surface both maintained a commitment to a united Germany under their respective governments . Neither side acknowledges the division .
 Germany was an important issue because it was regarded as the power center of the continent . Both sides believed that it could be crucial to the world balance of power .
 The temporary post-war occupation zones became permanent borders . The risks of a united neutral Germany falling into the enemy's camp for either side were too high . The temporary occupation zones are now permanent .
 In November 1958, Khrushchev issued an ultimatum giving the Western powers six months to agree to withdraw from Berlin and make it a free, demilitarized city . The Soviet first secretary gave the West powers a six-month deadline .
 At the end of that period, the Soviet Union would turn over to East Germany complete control of all lines of communication with West Berlin . The western powers would have access to West Berlin only by permission of the East German government .
 The United States, Great Britain, and France replied to this ultimatum by firmly asserting their determination to remain in West Berlin and to maintain their legal right of free access to that city .
 In 1959 the Soviet Union withdrew its deadline and instead met with the Western powers in a Big Four foreign ministers' conference . The conference was held in Moscow, Russia and the USSR in 1959 .
 The three-month-long sessions failed to reach any important agreements, but they did open the door to further negotiations . Khrushchev's visit to the U.S. in September 1959 led to a visit by the Soviet leader to Washington .
 Khrushchev created a new crisis over the status of West Berlin in June 1961 . He threatened to sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany, which he said would end existing four-power agreements guaranteeing American, British, French access rights to West Berlin .
 The three powers replied that no unilateral treaty could abrogate their responsibilities and rights in West Berlin . The three countries replied that the right of unobstructed access to the city was not negotiable .
 As the confrontation over Berlin escalated, President Kennedy requested an increase in the Army's total authorized strength from 875,000 to approximately 1 million men . The increase of 29,000 and 63,000 men in the active duty strength of the Navy and the Air Force also increased .
 President Obama ordered that draft calls be doubled . He also asked Congress for authority to order active duty certain ready reserve units and individual reservists .
 He also requested new funds to identify and mark space in existing structures that could be used for fall-out shelters in case of attack . The funds will stock those shelters with food, water, first-aid kits and other minimum essentials for survival .
 During the early months of 1961, the government actively sought a means of halting the emigration of its population to the West .
 By the early summer of 1961, East German President Walter Ulbricht apparently had persuaded the Soviets that an immediate solution was necessary . The only way to stop the exodus was to use force . The East German president said the only way of stopping the exodus would be to stop it .
 The four-power status of Berlin specified free travel between zones and specifically forbade the presence of German troops in Berlin . This presented a delicate problem for the Soviet Union because of the situation . The Soviet Union was unable to find a solution to the problem .
 During the spring and early summer, the East German regime procured and stockpiled building materials for the erection of the Berlin Wall . The Berlin Wall was built by the East Germans during the summer and spring of 1989 .
 Few outside the small circle of Soviet and East German planners believed that East Germany would be sealed off . Although this extensive activity was widely known, few outside the . small . circle of . Soviet and . East Germans believed that the East Germany . would be closed off .
 It was the first time the colloquial term Mauer had been used in this context . It was first time it was used in a context .
 Leaders of East Germany attended a garden party at a government guesthouse in Döllnsee, in a wooded area to the north of East Berlin . Walter Ulbricht signed the order to close the border and erect a Wall on August 12, 1961 .
 At midnight the army, police, and units of the East German army began to close the border . By morning on Sunday August 13, 1961 the border to West Berlin had been shut . The border was closed by midnight .
 Approximately 32,000 combat and engineer troops were used in building the Wall . Around 32,500 troops were involved in the building of the Wall in the 1930s .
 Border Police assumed the functions of manning and improving the barrier . Once their efforts were completed, the Border Police took over the duties of the border police .
 East German tanks and artillery were present to discourage interference by the West and presumably to assist in the event of large-scale riots . The tanks were deployed to discourage West interference and discourage riots in East Germany .
 President John F Kennedy ordered 148,000 Guardsmen and Reservists to active duty in response to East German moves to cut off allied access to Berlin .
 ANG units mobilized in October included 18 tactical fighter squadrons, 4 tactical reconnaissance squadrons and 6 air transport squadrons . Air force units were mobilized for the first time in October .
 On 1 November, the Air Force mobilized three more ANG fighter interceptor squadrons . The Air Force also mobilized three additional squadrons of fighter interceptors .
 60 Air Guard F-104 interceptors were airlifted to Europe in late November . Because of their short range, the interceptors had a short range . 60 interceptors have been flown to Europe .
 The United States Air Forces in Europe lacked spare parts needed for the ANG's aging F-84s and F-86s . The U.S. Air Force in Europe lacks spare parts for the F-87s and the U.84s .
 Some units had been trained to deliver tactical nuclear weapons, not conventional bombs and bullets . Some units were trained not to deliver conventional nuclear weapons .
 They had to be retrained for conventional missions once they arrived on the continent . They were retrained to carry out conventional missions in Africa .
 The majority of mobilized Air Guardsmen remained in the U.S. The four powers governing Berlin had agreed at the 1945 Potsdam Conference that Allied personnel would not be stopped by East German police .
 U.S. Chief of Mission in West Berlin, E Allan Lightner, was stopped in his car while going to a theatre in East Berlin . Two months after the construction of the Wall, Lightner was stopped at a theatre .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy's Special Advisor in West Berlin, decided to demonstrate American resolve . Army General Lucius D Clay decided to show American resolve in the West Berlin . General Clay was the President of the United States in Berlin .
 The attempts of a U.S. diplomat to enter the East Berlin were backed by United States troops . The attempts were made by the United States of East Berlin in the 1950s .
 The stand-off was resolved only after direct talks between Ulbricht and Kennedy . Kennedy was the first person involved in the dispute to reach a settlement .
 The Berlin Crisis saw United States Army troops facing East German Army troops in a stand-off . The East German government backed down until the U.S. backed down . The Berlin crisis was the Berlin standoff between the United States and East Germany .
 Korean War marked a shift in the focal point of the Cold War, from postwar Europe to East Asia . Third World arena of conflict .
 After the disintegration of Europe's colonial empires, proxy battles in the Third World became an important arena of superpower competition in the establishment of alliances and jockeying .
 Third World nations did not want to align themselves with either of the superpowers . Many Third World countries did not align themselves .
 Eisenhower administration attempted to formalize its alliance system through a series of pacts . Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, Organization of American States, ANZUS, Central Treaty Organization and Non-Aligned Movement were among those involved .
 He intensified efforts to ""integrate"" the entire non-communist Third World into a system of mutual defense pacts, travelling almost 500,000 miles in order to cement new alliances .
 Dulles initiated the Manila Conference in 1954, which resulted in the SEATO pact that united eight nations in a neutral defense pact . The Manila Conference was held in 1954 .
 The combined effects of two great European wars had weakened the political and economic domination of Latin America, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East by European powers . European powers were weakened by the effects of the two great wars .
 Eisenhower administration adjusted U.S. policy to the effects of decolonization . Eisenhower administration adjusting policy to effect of decolonialization .
 Marshall Plan had already rebuilt a functioning Western economic system, thwarting the electoral appeal of the radical left . The Marshall Plan was designed to thwart the appeal of radical left.
 Eisenhower administration began to focus on other regions . When aid had ended the dollar shortage, the U.S. began to look at other countries .
 Eisenhower thwarted Soviet intervention, using the CIA to overthrow unfriendly governments . In an exercise of the new ""rollback"" policies, acting on the doctrines of Dulles, . Eisenhower thwarted . the Soviet intervention .
 The U.S. viewed the decolonization movement in Africa as an opportunity to gain access to raw materials that had previously been monopolized by the imperialist powers in Europe . The United States viewed the movement as a chance to access raw materials .
 U.S. policy makers recognized poverty and instability that had persisted in Africa because of the colonial empires would provide a breeding ground for communist ideologies . The United States would respond by providing economic assistance to the newly developing nations .
 The United States championed itself as a beacon of freedom and democracy in Africa . It often supported repressive regimes within Africa, such as the apartheid system in South Africa .
 Communist governments also had, sometimes conflicting, policy objectives within Africa . British decolonization in Africa was one of the most successful periods of British rule in Africa .
 Soviet Union sought to respond to U.S. intervention within Africa by establishing alliances with newly born nations against Western imperialism . The Soviet Union wanted to counter the United States intervention in Africa .
 The Soviet Union saw the elimination of colonial capitalism from Africa, and the rest of the Third World, as necessary for the advancement of those nation and the triumph of socialism over capitalism .
 Third World nationalist viewed the command style economy of the Soviet Union as promising since it allowed that country to advance from an agrarian to an industrial economy . Third World nationalists viewed the Soviet economy as promising .
 Soviet doctrine was challenged by the United States and other communist powers . However, the doctrine was not only challenged but also challenged by other communist countries .
 China also moved to support nationalist movements in Africa in order to challenge imperialism . China also supported nationalist movements against imperialism .
 Maoist ideology became more alluring than Soviet ideology due to its emphasis on the rural population as opposed to Soviet doctrine which focused more on the urban proletariat . The Soviet Union provided more substantial assistance than the Soviet Union did .
 Often the Soviet Union and China found themselves supporting opposing liberation movements in Africa . Often the Soviets and China supported opposing liberation groups .
 Cuba would also play a major role in nationalist movements within Africa . Such as with Zimbabwe, with the Soviet Union supporting the Zimbabwe African Peoples Union . China supported the ZANU's breakaway movements .
 Fidel Castro and his associates saw Cuba as an example to be followed by the African nations on how to escape the clutches of imperialism . Fidel Castro was seen as a model for African nations .
 Cuba had thrown off an oppressive dictatorship and with stood a U.S. backed invasion of the island . After all, Cuba was thrown off a dictatorship and stood a United States backed invasion .
 Cuba's focuses on Africa stemmed from the belief that decolonization provided an arena for the struggle between socialism and capitalism . Cuba's focus on Africa was to be an arena between capitalism and socialism, Cuba believed .
 Another reason for Cuba's support of African socialist movements was for the shared link between Cuba and Africa . Another reason is for the support of Cuba's socialist movements . Cuba's relationship with Africa was a common link between Cuban and African socialism .
 Many Cubans were motivated to help liberate Africans from colonialism and imperialism and help spread the Cuban revolution to them . As such, many Cubans helped liberate Africans .
 The Democratic Republic of the Congo, previously known as Belgian Congo, achieved independence from Belgium in 1960 . Western leaders were determined to keep the country, and its enormous quantities of mineral wealth, within their sphere of influence .
 In May 1960, the elected government led by Patrice Lumumba envisioned an economic model that would benefit the citizens of the Congo as opposed to supporting western economic interests . However, in May 1960 the government was overthrown by the West .
 On July 5, five days after independence, Congolese soldiers mutinied after being told by their Belgian officers that there would be no wage increases, promotions, or African officers in the post-colonial army .
 Lumumba dismissed the Belgians, and elevated Joseph Mobutu to army chief of staff . After that, Lumumbi dismissed Belgians and appointed Mobutus as army chief-of-staff . The war ended in defeat, and the country became independent .
 Lumumba appealed for intervention at the United Nations at the time of Belgium's invasion of the Congo . He was convinced that Belgium was attempting to recolonize the Congo, and appealed to the UN .
 Lumumba turned to the Soviet Union for aid . The United Nations and United States refused to provide support . However the United States and the United Nations refused to help .
 With CIA and Belgian army support Mobutu staged a coup against Lumumba . The U.S. government saw this as a threat and thus formulated plans to assassinate him . The coup took place in 1961 .
 Lumumba was captured and transferred to Katanga where he was executed by the secessionist forces there . He was executed in Katanga by the secessionist forces .
 Despite Tshombe's rule, the Congo would continue to be in crisis throughout the 20th and early 21st centuries .
 Though Communist nations would support rebel groups in the Congo, those groups would not succeed in taking power . The Congo would have been ruled out of the Congo .
 The Middle East in the Cold War was an area of extreme importance and also great instability . Suez Crisis was the focus of the Suez crisis in the 1960s .
 The region lay directly south of the Soviet Union, who traditionally had great influence in Turkey and Iran . The region was located in the heart of Iran and Turkey . The Soviet Union was known for its influence in the region .
 The area also had vast reserves of oil, not crucial for either superpower in the 1950s . The area was essential for the rapidly rebuilding American allies in Europe and Japan .
 Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria made arms deals to Egypt, worth up to $225– 50 million in exchange for surplus cotton . Warsaw Pact members gave Egypt a strong presence in the region .
 Egypt, a former British protectorate, was one of the region's most important prizes with a large population and political power throughout the region . Egypt's dealings with the Soviet Union and its allies antagonized the administrations of the West, including the Eisenhower administration .
 Eisenhower persuaded the United Kingdom and France to retreat from a badly planned invasion with Israel that was launched to regain control of the canal from Egypt . Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal and ejected British troops from Egypt in response .
 Nasser was later lauded around the globe, but especially in the Arab world . Nasser's death was the first of his assassination in Egypt .
 Italy, France, Spain, West Germany, Norway, Canada, Canada and Britain developed a Common Market to be less dependent on the United States . The Common Market was created in order to make the U.S. less dependent .
 The United States found its competitive edge dulled in international markets while at the same time it faced foreign competition at home . The 20th-century successor to the UK as the ""workshop of the world"
 Throughout much of Latin America, reactionary oligarchies ruled through alliances with the military elite and the U.S. Reformed oligarchs ruled through their alliances with military elite .
 By the mid-20th century, much of the region passed through a higher state of economic development, which bolstered the power and ranks of the lower classes . The region's lower classes were bolstered by economic development .
 This left calls for social change and political inclusion more pronounced, thus posing a challenge to the strong U.S. influence over the region's economies . The United States has a strong influence in the Middle East .
 When democratically elected Guatemalan President Jacobo Árbenz attempted a modest redistribution of land, he was overthrown in the 1954 CIA coup d'état . Throughout the Cold War years, the United States acted as a barrier to socialist revolutions .
 The CIA Operation PBSuccess eventually led to the 1954 coup that removed Arbnez from power . The CIA operation led to a coup in 1954 that ousted the dictator . The coup was the result of the CIA operation that led to an overthrow .
 The operation drew on an initial plan first considered in 1951 to oust Arbenz named Operation PBFortune . The operation was first considered by the U.S. in 1951 .
 The Castro Regime overthrew the dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista, who came to power in 1933 through a military revolution, and then again through another military coup . The Castro regime was overthrown by a military coup in 1953 .
 After the revolt Batista ran the government through a number of puppet rulers . The government was ruled by Batista's government after the revolt .
 After a series of failed puppet presidents Batista himself became president from 1940–1944 . Batista was president of Cuba from 1940-44 .
 Batista's first term as president went peacefully and saw large amounts of economic growth due to public works programs he implemented . Batista was the first president of the country to hold office .
 After his term as president Batista moved to Florida where he lived until he decided to come back to Cuba run for president in 1952 . Batista lived in Florida until he returned to Cuba in 1952 and ran for president .
 Just three months before election day, a military coup put Batista back in power . Batista's government was overthrown by a coup just three months earlier .
 He justified this coup by claiming the sitting president was planning his own coup in order to remain in power . He justified it by claiming he was planning to stay in power. He justified the coup by saying the president was trying to stay alive .
 The Batista dictatorship lasted seven years until 1959 when it was overthrown by Fidel Castro . Batista was ousted by Castro's government in 1959 .
 Fidel Castro was the first political leader to establish a communist state into the western hemisphere . Fidel Castro has held control of Cuba for over five decades . He is the first person to establish the state of Cuba in the west .
 In 1952 he ran for a seat in Cuba's House of Representatives, but the election failed to happen due to the rise of the dictator . In 1952, he tried to become a Cuban congressman, but was unable to do so .
 In 1953 Castro launched a coup in an attempt to overthrow Batista, but failed and was jailed soon after . Castro was jailed in 1953 after failing to overthrow the Batista government .
 While in jail he renamed his revolutionary group ""26th of July Movement"" and helped coordinate the group from prison . While in prison he renamed the group "26th July Movement" He was jailed for 18 years .
 In 1955 was released from Cuban prison under an amnesty deal, after which fled to Mexico in order to rally support for his second attempt at overthrowing Batista and dictatorship . In 1955 he was released under amnesty deal and fled Cuba .
 In December 1956, Castro, along with about 80 of his comrades, landed on Cuba . Castro landed in Cuba in December 1956 . Castro was one of the first Cubans to land in Cuba .
 Most of Castro's forces were killed or captured for their attempt to overthrow the government during this time . Castro and what was left of his forces escaped into the mountains and began their guerrilla warfare campaign .
 Over the next two years Castro continued his guerrilla warfare while slowly growing his militant forces . Castro continued to grow his forces in the guerrilla warfare . Castro's forces were slowly growing in Cuba .
 In 1959 Castro's forces had key victories at important Cuban strong holds that, combined with Barista's loss of popularity and military power, led to Barista fleeing Cuba and Castro taking power . Castro took power in 1959 after a series of victories in Cuba .
 Castro was sworn in as Prime Minister of Cuba on February 16, 1959 at this point in time he had control of the Cuban government's 30,000 man army . Castro was in control of Cuba's 30 thousand man army at the time .
 One of Castro's first acts as leader of Cuba was to nationalize American assets on the island without compensation . Castro's Cuba nationalization of American assets was one of his first acts of Cuban leadership .
 Before the fall of the Batista regime, U.S. interests owned four-fifths of the stakes in the island's utilities, nearly half of its sugar, and nearly all of its mining industries .
 The United States could manipulate the Cuban economy at a whim by tinkering with the island's financial services or by tampering with government quotas and tariffs on sugar–the country's staple export commodity . The U.S. could tamper with the Cuban government quotas, tariffs and quotas .
 The U.S. government refused to recognize Castro as the leader of Cuba . The Bay of Pigs Invasion was the first of several attempts to overthrow Castro . Castro was overthrown by the United States .
 Castro signed a trade agreement in February 1960 with communist states, which would emerge as a market for the island's agricultural commodities that could replace the country's traditional patron–the United States . Castro then signed a deal with communist countries, which could emerge as the market for agricultural commodities .
 The East garnered a huge victory when they formed an alliance with Cuba after Fidel Castro's successful revolution in 1959 . The East won a huge win when they joined Cuba in the 1950s .
 This was a major victory for the Soviet Union, which had garnered an ally in close proximity to the U.S. coast . The Soviet Union had gained a close relationship with the United States .
 After Fidel Castro's takeover of Cuba, the U.S. was unsure about the nation's new leader's political ideologies . The United States was unsure when Castro took over Cuba . Castro's government was overthrown in 1953 .
 Potential economic cooperation between Khrushchev and Castro in 1959 resulted in the immediate perturbation of the United States . The two leaders of the Soviet Union and Cuba, respectively, led the U.S. in economic cooperation .
 The largest concern was the Soviet satellite just 90 miles from the U.S. mainland . The Soviet satellite was the largest concern at this time .
 The administration then began planning to intervene with this situation . The administration plans to intervene in the situation .
 The Central Intelligence Agency initially proposed sabotaging the sugar refineries in Cuba . President Eisenhower felt the threat was Castro and that he was the issue the U.S. needed to resolve .
 CIA began planning for an overthrow or possible assassination of Castro in December 1959 . CIA then began planning to overthrow or possibly assassinate Castro . Castro was assassinated in 1959 .
 In February 1960, President Eisenhower requested the CIA develop a formal program to remove Castro from power . President Eisenhower asked the CIA to develop a program to take Castro out of power .
 The request resulted in a plan for a task force led by a Deputy Director for Plans Richard Bissell .
 The initial stage of this task force was to develop and train a group of Cuban exiles to form a paramilitary group . The initial step of the task force is to develop, train and develop the exiles into paramilitary groups .
 This group would then deploy into Cuba to organize, train, and lead resistance forces to overthrow the government . This group was then deployed to Cuba to train, organize and train resistance forces .
 Eisenhower approved the Bissell task force which is also known as Brigade 2506 . With no other plausible alternative, the task force was created .
 The force was later transitioned from its original guerrilla infiltration model to a more paramilitary invasion concept due to the difficulty in coordinating with anti-Castro opposition . The force is now a paramilitary invasion force .
 Eisenhower pushed the CIA to accelerate its plans for Brigade 2506 . In Eisenhower's remaining months in office, he pushed the project to be completed .
 Eisenhower did not want the transition of presidency to halt any development . Eisenhower wanted the transition to a new president to halt development .
 The plans began to finalize in the time between Kennedy's election in November and his inauguration in January . Kennedy's inauguration will be held in Washington, DC .
 Bissell hoped to train men in Guatemala to be Brigade 2506 . The 5412 Committee endorsed this along with the use of an airstrip in Nicaragua, and supply missions from the United States .
 President Kennedy was faced with the decision of whether of not to follow through with this plan when he ordered a meeting with many department heads in the United States government .
 Kennedy ultimately decided to fully fund and accelerate the program making the operation and its results his own responsibility . Kennedy made the program his own personal responsibility for funding .
 Castro publicly declared himself a Marxist-Leninst and set up Cuba as the first Communist state in the Americas . He continued to nationalize virtually all major industries in the country .
 The Soviet government seized on the abortive invasion as a rationale for the placing of Soviet troops on Cuba . The Cuban invasion was used as a pretext for the Soviet government to place troops in Cuba .
 It was also decided to position on Cuba medium-range nuclear missiles which could strike many points in the United States at once . The U.S. decided to place the missiles on Cuba .
 President Kennedy quarantined the island of Cuba after several intense days . The Soviets retreated in return for promises from the United States not to invade Cuba and to pull missiles out of Turkey .
 After this brush with nuclear war, the two leaders banned nuclear tests in the air and underwater after 1962 . After 1962, North Korea banned all nuclear tests .
 The retreat undermined Khrushchev, who was ousted soon afterwards and replaced by Leonid Brezhnev . The retreat was a major embarrassment for the Soviet Union, which was overthrown .
 The Cuban Revolution led to Kennedy's initiation of the ""Alliance for Progress" program . Kennedy's program was initiated by the Cuban Revolution .
 The program was to provide billions of dollars of loans and aid over the course of the 1960s for economic development in order to stave off socialist revolution . It was intended to provide $1 billion in loans and $1.5 billion in aid to help the country .
 The Alliance also contained counterinsurgency measures, such as the establishment of the Jungle Warfare School in Panama Canal Zone and the training of police forces .
 Through the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, the British had a monopoly on the transporting, pumping, and refining of oil in most of Iran . The British had the monopoly on transporting and pumping of oil .
 The company paid production royalties to the government of the Shah— placed on the throne by the British in 1941 . The company was founded in 1941 by the Shah of Iran .
 The company's earnings were ten times greater than its expenses . But royalties and salaries to Iranian employees were smaller, considering that the company had less than its earnings .
 Iran suffered from poverty, and nationalists insisted that controlling the company could alleviate this . Nationalists insisted it could help alleviate this.
 Many Iranians demanded that a higher share of the company's earnings be paid . Many Iranians have demanded that the company be paid more . Iran's economy has been hit hard by the economic downturn .
 AIOC replied that it had a binding agreement with the Shah until 1993 . AIOC said it had collaborated with some Iranian political forces to draft a report opposing nationalization .
 Iran's prime minister, suspected of being involved with the report, was assassinated in 1951 . In February 1951, the Iranian prime minister was assassinated . He was suspected of involvement in the report .
 Truman administration attempted to mediate with Iran . Later that year the new prime minister nationalized his nation's British-owned oil wells .
 Eisenhower administration convinced that Iran was developing communist ties . Later, the CIA joined forces with Iran's military leaders to overthrow Iran's government . The Eisenhower administration used the CIA to help overthrow Iran .
 By 1953, the party had begun to criticize him as a United States puppet state . However, by 1953 the party was criticizing him for being a puppet state.
 The premier perceived that as Iran's economy suffered and fears of communist takeover gripped the United States government, the U.S. would abandon Britain and rescue him from his predicament . Mohammad Reza Pahlavi was favored by the young Pahlavian leader .
 Pahlavi promised to allow U.S. companies to share in the development of his nation's reserves . In return, he promised to give the United States companies access to his country's oil reserves . The deal was made in return for a return to Iran .
 CIA documents made public in 2000 say the U.S. provided guns, trucks, armored cars, radio communications in 1953 coup . CIA documents show the CIA-assisted coup elevated Pahlavi from constitutional monarch to absolute ruler .
 Oil profits were then divided between the Shah's regime and a new international consortium . Mossadeq's regime split profits between oil profits and a consortium of international firms .
 The British were awarded 40% of the country's oil revenues, five U.S. firms won another 40% . Royal Dutch Shell and Compagnie Française des Pétroles won the rest of the money .
 U.S. had been trying to get into Iranian oil fields since the turn of the 20th century . The profits were divided evenly between the consortium and Iran .
 The breakthrough for the United States was made possible by the Cold War-era ties to the Shah . State Department official Herbert Hoover, Jr., Jr. had gained a great deal of experience in the complexities of the international oil problem as a private businessman .
 The Battle of Dien Bien Phu was the climactic battle of the First Indochina War . French Union forces of the French Far East Expeditionary Corps were defeated by Vietnamese Viet Minh revolutionary forces .
 The battle occurred between March and May 1954, and culminated in a massive French defeat that effectively ended the war . The battle took place in the spring of 1954, ending the war in France .
 As a result of blunders in the French decision making process, the French undertook to create an air-supplied base at Dien Bien Phu, deep in the hills of Vietnam .
 Its purpose was to cut off Viet Minh supply lines into the neighboring French protectorate of Laos, at the same time drawing them into a battle that would cripple them . It was intended to cut supply lines to neighboring Laos and draw them into the battle .
 The French were unaware of the Viet Minh's possession of heavy artillery and their ability to move such weapons to the mountain crests overlooking the French encampment . Instead, the Vietnamese, under General Vo Nguyen Giap, surrounded and besieged the French, who were unaware the French had heavy
 The Viet Minh occupied the highlands around Dien Bien Phu, and were able to fire down accurately onto French positions . The Vietnamese government was able to use accurate fire on the French troops .
 Tenacious fighting on the ground ensued, reminiscent of the trench warfare of World War I . The French repeatedly repulsed Viet Minh assaults on their positions .
 Supplies and reinforcements were delivered by air, although as the French positions were overrun, fewer and fewer of those supplies reached them . Fewer and fewer French troops were able to reach them .
 After a two-month siege, the garrison was overrun and most French surrendered . After two months of siege, most French surrender .
 Despite the loss of most of their best soldiers, the Viet Minh marshaled their remaining forces and pursued those French who did flee into the wilderness, routing them and ending the battle . The battle ended in a victory for the French, who were defeated .
 Shortly after the battle, the war ended with the 1954 Geneva accords, under which France agreed to withdraw from its former Indochinese colonies . The war ended shortly after the war with the Parisian government agreeing to withdraw .
 The U.S. intervention with the greatest ramifications was in Indochina . The United States intervention was in Vietnam .
 The NLF drew its ranks from the southern peasantry and was backed by North Vietnam . North Vietnam, China and the Soviet Union backed the NLF in the 1960s .
 The RVN was later absorbed by its communist counterpart to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam . RVN later absorbed into the communist state of Vietnam, which was formed from the Soviet Union of Soviet-Russian Union .
 The Indian subcontinent was never a primary focus of superpower attention during the Cold War . South Asia was the focus of most of the world's most powerful powers .
 Europe, East Asia, Latin American, and the Middle East were consistently viewed as being more important to the superpowers' interests . Europe and East Asia were viewed as more important than East Asia and Latin American .
 The countries of South Asia, despite containing a fifth of the world's population, were not powerful economies like Japan or Western Europe . South Asia is not a powerful economy like Japan, Western Europe or Japan .
 Unlike the Middle East with its oil, South Asia was lacking vital natural resources . Unlike the Mideast, it was lacking in vital natural resource resources . South Asia is lacking in many of the world's most important natural resources, experts say .
 The United States' most important interest in the region was the establishment of airfields that could be used as bases for U-2 flights over Soviet territory . In case of wartime, the bases could be home to nuclear bombers .
 Originally, both the Americans and Soviets felt the region would remain in the British sphere of influence, but this was not the case . The region was originally thought to be under British influence .
 The Americans hoped that the Pakistani armed forces could block any Soviet thrust into the crucial Middle East . The U.S. hoped that Pakistan could be used to block any . Soviet thrust .
 It was also felt that as a large and high-profile nation, India would be a notable prize if it fell into either camp . India is a notable winner if it falls into either either camp.
 India, a fledgling democracy, was never particularly in any grave danger of falling to insurgents or external pressure from a great power . India's fledgling democracy was never in any serious danger from insurgents .
 The Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement between Pakistan and the U.S. was signed in 1954 . A key event in the South Asian arena of Cold War competition was the signing of the MDA Agreement .
 This pact would limit the later options of all the major powers in the region . It would also limit the future options of the region's major powers .
 For Pakistan, the U.S. alliance became a central tenet of its foreign policy . Despite numerous disappointments with it, it was always seen as far too valuable a connection to abandon .
 After the Sino-Soviet Split, Pakistan also pursued close relations with China . Pakistan has had close ties with China since the 1950s .
 Soviet policy towards South Asia had closely paralleled that of the United States . Soviet policy on South Asia was closely followed by U.S. policy towards the region .
 At first the Soviets, like the Americans, had been largely uninterested in the region . They maintained a neutral position in the Indo-Pakistani disputes .
 With the signing of the accords between Pakistan and the U.S. in 1954, the situation changed . With the countries enlisting in CENTO and SEATO, it changed the situation in Pakistan .
 In 1955, Bulganin and Khrushchev toured India and promised large quantities of financial aid and assistance in building industrial infrastructure . The Soviet Union toured India in 1955 .
 In Srinagar, the Soviet leaders announced that the Soviet Union would abandon its neutralist position and back India in Kashmir dispute . The Soviet Union backed India in the ongoing Kashmir dispute.
 Jawaharlal Nehru wished to avoid entanglements with the United States . He also wished to keep India from being too closely attached to the Soviet Union . Nehru wanted to avoid being too close to the USSR .
 Nehru became the first non-communist leader to address the people of the Soviet Union . Although the USSR sent India some aid, the two nations remained relatively distant .
 After Khrushchev's ousting, the Soviets reverted to a neutralist position and moderated the aftermath of the 1965 war . After the war, the Soviet Union moderated its stance on the West .
 A large current accounts deficit had developed and a severe drought hit the agricultural sector hard . A severe drought has also hit the agriculture sector hard.
 As with the downturn of a decade earlier, India again looked to outside assistance . India again sought outside assistance from outside sources .
 Relations were at a low ebb with the United States, which was largely preoccupied with Vietnam . However, relations with the U.S. was at a high ebb when the war began .
 On top of that, several smaller issues had turned American indifference into antipathy . "Several smaller issues" had turned Americans into antipathetic, he said .
 The World Bank was also unwilling to commit money to India's development projects without Indian trade concessions . Western international organizations such as the World Bank were also unwilling .
 The Soviets began to provide extensive support for India's efforts to create an industrial base . Along with other Warsaw Pact nations, the Soviets provided extensive support to India .
 In 1969, the two powers negotiated a treaty of friendship that would make non-alignment little more than a pretext . The treaty would be used as a pretext for the two countries to avoid warring nations .
 Two years later, when faced with a growing crisis in East Pakistan, India signed the agreement . India signed it two years later . The agreement was signed in response to the growing crisis .
 Before the Sino-Soviet split, tensions between China and India complicated the Soviet Union's efforts to maintain close relations with Asia's leading emerging nations .
 China suppressed a revolt in Tibet in 1959, leading to open conflict between China and India . In March 1959, China suppressed an uprising in Tibet, which led to an open conflict with India .
 On March 31, the Dalai Lama, Tibet's spiritual and temporal ruler, fled to India, where he was granted asylum over China's protest . The Dalai Lama is granted asylum in India, which China says is against him .
 India backed a move in the United Nations general assembly to enter into a full debate on charges of Chinese suppression of human rights in Tibet . The move was rejected by the Soviet Union, Poland, Yugoslavia, Albania, Romania, Bulgaria, East Germany, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, North Korea
 Mao grew increasingly frustrated with the Soviet Union's reluctant backing of Chinese actions in Tibet . The Warsaw Pact's, Mongolia's, and North Korea's objections to the Indian-backed debate in the UN were ignored .
 Director of Central Intelligence at the time Allen W Dulles believed that the India and Pakistan could best combat communist China politically and economically . Dulles noted that the ruthless suppression of the Tibetan Revolt was likely to cause each country to focus resources onto protecting their Himalayan borders .
 China's active presence in Tibet preceded a much more dangerous confrontation between India and China . This would likely escalate the contest, and not in favor of India .
 Successive Chinese governments had rejected the Sino-Indian border dictated by the British Empire in the early 20th century . The McMahon Line was called the McMahon Line .
 China built outposts along what China thought to be its borders . India built more outposts in the disputed area to drive out the Chinese, in what would be known as the Forward Policy .
 Charges and countercharges of border violation and aggression were exchanged along the frontier . Charges were exchanged between the two sides of the border in Kashmir .
 Janos Kadar of Hungary attempted to mediate the disputes between China and India . Kadar was hoping to appeal to his friendly relations in both parties . He was scheduled to leave for the U.S. in September .
 Khruschev and Dubček of Czechoslovakia appealed to China and India . Khrusches and Dubczek appealed to India and China .
 China's reaction to the Soviet, Hungarian, and Czechoslovakian appeal for ""peaceful coexistence"" with the West and India was not seen as encouraging . The fallout of the tensions along the Himalayas caused worldwide speculation over the Warsaw Pact-Chinese alliance .
 By the time the Sino-Indian border dispute developed into full-fledged fighting in the 1962, the alliance between the world's two leading communist powers was irreparably shattered .
 Albania's and Romania's offer to deliver MiG fighter planes to India sent Sino-Albanian relations into crisis . The Warsaw Pact nations backed China's October 1962 peace offer, urging Nehru to accept it . Albania's offer sent India's relations with the Warsaw Pact into crisis
 This also turned China against Eastern European communist states . China also turned against other Eastern European countries .
 By the end of 1963, the Eastern Bloc and China were engaging in open polemics against each other . The period of open hostility between the former allies lasted for the remainder of the Cold War era .
 In the ensuing years from World War II in the United States, media and culture portrayed a general sense of anxiety and fear of the spread of the Soviet Union's communism in American entertainment, political, social, and scientific sectors .
 As tensions between the two nations increased over the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, public hysteria over communism subverting American daily life was coined the ""Red Scare" The Second red scare with respect to the 1950s was coined as the 'Red Scare' The Second Red Scare
 Media coverage of the Cold War served as a catalyst for acknowledging ideological differences between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Cold War was a catalyst to acknowledge ideological differences in the two nations .
 Written and illustrative forms of communication were the predominate source of information before the 1960s in the United States . Political expressions in American newspaper cartoons, fliers, and movie posters largely served as a casting mold for solidifying American ideals against its Soviet counterpart .
 U.S. and USSR medias succeeded in producing rhetoric and imagery that bolstered the motives of their respective states while establishing a sense of jingoism in their people .
 The polarization of the Cold War era and the dread resulting from a Nuclear arms race between the United States and USSR, in addition to a politicized system of media distribution, led to the escalated height of sentiments which included statements like ""Better Dead Than Red"" in American media and culture .
 As early as 1947 in the United States entertainment sector, the House Un-American Activities Committee began holding hearings regarding the political orientation of American entertainment professionals . The peak of the committee's actions occurred between 1953 and 1956 . The Hollywood Ten trial resulted in the conviction of 10 Hollywood directors and writers
 HUAC's entertainment industry blacklist included directors, actors, screenwriters, musicians, and other prominent entertainment professionals . They were ultimately blacklisted from their careers for having been alleged communist members or having communistic sympathies .
 Soviet communistic ideals being propagated into American life was used as justification for the tactics employed by the HUAC and McCarthy trials . McCarthy trials were used to justify the tactics used by the U.S. government .
 TV stations and motion picture corporations were considerably influential on the minds of the public during the Cold War . The associations between federal and private corporations became more intimately associated . This was a deliberate measure to promote positive consensus for military and intelligence efforts against the Soviet Union .
 The House Un-American Activities Committee was officially dismantled in 1975 . After the downfall of senator Joseph McCarthy and the McCarthy trials, the committee began its descent into ruin .
 Prior to these events, there had never been such a socially and politically significant issue publicized to the American populace regarding domestic threats to U.S. democracy during the 20th century . Prior to this event, there was never such an issue such as this in American culture and media .
 During this great period, Cold War themes first entered mainstream culture as a public preoccupation . During this period, the Cold War theme first appeared in mainstream culture .
 1959 film On the Beach depicted a gradually dying, post-apocalyptic world that remained after a nuclear Third World War . The 1959 film depicted the dying, dying world of a post-nuclear post-war world .
 James Bond first appeared in 1954; the films were loosely connected to the Cold War . Fans loved the beautiful women, exotic locations, tricky gadgets, and death-defying stunts .
 Bond movies followed the political climate in depicting Soviets and ""Red"" Chinese . Bond movies often depicted the Soviets and Red Chinese .
 Frederick Forsyth's formula spy novels sold in the hundreds of thousands of thousands . Forsyth wrote the formula spy novel for the first time .
 His 1984 novel The Fourth Protocol refers to a series of conventions that, if broken, will lead to nuclear war . The novel was made into a major 1987 film starring Michael Caine .
 Computer technology began to be influential in the mid–1940s during World War II and continued to increase in use during the 1950s and 1960s . Computers in the Cold War included computers that were used in Cold War use .
 The first computers were designed and built in Great Britain and the U.S. to store digital programs . They were built in the UK and the United States .
 The first electronic digital computers were used for large-scale military calculations . They were used in the first era of electronic computers . The first computers were developed in the 1960s .
 The computers would go on to help scientists in the fields of ballistic missiles, nuclear missiles, and anti-missile defense systems . These computers would help scientists with missile technology .
 The Soviet Union faced a dilemma in that Western science was what Soviet scientific progress had been measured against . Western science had been the basis for the Soviet Union's scientific progress . Soviet computers were the answer to the problem .
 The dilemma for the Soviets was that while they wanted to surpass and overtake Western science, they had to borrow it in order to further their scientific progress . The Soviets wanted to overtake and overtake the Western science .
 The results were that many Soviets were denouncing Western science but would turn around and describe a national need for the same theory they just denounced . Many Soviets denounced Western science, but said they needed the same idea .
 The Soviet Union first began getting reports about electronically stored digital programs designed and built in Britain and the U.S. in the 1940s . The programs got great attention from Soviet mathematicians and physicists working on defense projects .
 Soviet scientists got information about these computers from publications and survey articles . Soviet scientists used these computers to develop Soviet computers .
 They may have also got some of this information through their intelligence channels . But they may also got it through intelligence channels.
 Ballistic missile programs were major clients of Soviet digital computing . The large high speed computer M-2, was the calculation of thermodynamic and hydrodynamic parameters .
 One of the first problems solved by a computer was the calculation of the dependency of the target destruction probability on the detonation efficiency of fragmentation warheads . The Soviet Union got in the game of computers early and further developed them to make them into useful pieces of equipment .
 This was fueled in part by wanting to compete with Western sciences . This was during the Cold War which meant the United States was also investing into computers . The Soviet Union also invested into computers which gave them extra motive .
 The United States and Britain were some of the first countries to start developing computers . The U.S. did not stop developing computers in the United States .
 The United States saw that using computers for military purposes would be beneficial . This came during the beginning of the Cold War . The U.S. saw the use of computers as a military tool .
 The Soviet Union also began to integrate computers into military programs . The competition between the Soviet Union and the U.S. with computers began .
 The United States quickly started to adapt computers to defense and military purposes . The U.S. quickly adapted computers to military purposes.
 The air force was one of the first military branches to adapt and use computers for their uses . Air force was among the first to adapt to computer technology .
 The air force established a Reeves analogue computer at the Wright Air Development Center at Daytona for developing weapons systems .
 It was already used in the Korean War to track enemy shells back to their source which was then destroyed . It had already been used in that war .
 The Navy then deployed its Naval Ordnance Research Calculator to accurately fire a naval gun at a target . It takes into account multiple variables of ship speed, wind velocity, direction and roll and pitch of the vessel .
 As the U.S. knew how computers would impact military programs, they began collecting what information they could on how the Soviet Union was coming on with their own computer program .
 The information the United States got was that the Soviet Union was not really able to keep up with the U.S. because they had insufficient and poor standards of equipment needed for making computers . The Soviet Union had insufficient equipment to make computers .
 The United States had a pretty sizable lead in the computer competition with the Soviet Union . This would show that unlike the nuclear programs of each country which was pretty even race, the U.S. had a big lead .
 The United States had a good lead in computer development against the Soviet Union . The U.S. had a better lead in developing computer technology .
 30% of computers in the United States was used for military purposes . 30% were used for civilian uses . The civilian population was also able to use computers .
 Computers became a big role in the military after World War II . The United States led this change into the technical world through the 1950s and 1960s . Computers were available to civilians and the U.S. led the change .
 "Eisenhower Presidential Library" is located at the Eisenhower Presidential Library .
 Bibcode: 2009AcAau..65.1530L. Bibcode :2009AcAua .
 LexisNexis Academic & Library Solutions is an academic and library software company . The company is based in London, England, based in New York .
 This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations . References are included in this article but not necessarily all of them .
 Fursenko, Aleksandr and Timothy Naftali. They were in Berlin, Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam . They were also in Vietnam, Vietnam and Laos .
 "The Devil and John Foster Dulles" was Dulles' secretary of state of state . Dulles was a CIA operative in the late 1960s and early '60s .
 Russian and American Dystopian Satires of the Cold War" Critical Survey, Vol. 2005 . Melanson, Richard A and David Mayers, eds., Reevaluating Eisenhower.