 Crisis of the Cold War 1955-1970: The Cold War of the 1950s and 1960s . Crisis of Cold War 55-1970. Crisis of Peace in the 20th Century, Topic 5. Conflict and Peace in The 20th century .
 This is a describe type question and to answer it well you need to either describe This invasion was a complete four separate points or develop two disaster and the invaders did not get points further than the beach . To answer the question well, you must either describe the invasion as a complete 4 separate
 From Castro’s view point this identify a third one you should get invasion was evidence that the USA. was working actively to overthrow his Government. Quick tip – if you develop two points and From Castro. From Castro's view of this identify third one .
 Crisis in missile crisis was the most frightening of their the Cold War 1955-70 lives . Crisis in missiles crisis was one of the most terrifying moments of their lives .
 In April 1962, America had placed nuclear missiles in Turkey . Shortly after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro declared Cuba as a socialist republic, supported judgement for entering into close ties with the Soviet Union .
 Explain your range ballistic missiles in Turkey, these directly threatened cities in the western parts of the Soviet Union . answer. answer. explain your range of ballistic missiles .
 The deployment of missiles in Cuba can be seen as Khrushchev’s direct response to the United States missiles in need to explain an Turkey issue . Having medium range ballistic missiles on Cuban land meant that the Soviet Union had the capacity to threaten two separate points .
 Khrushchev planned the deployment in May 1962, by late July over sixty Soviet ships were on their way to Cuba . By late July the Soviet Union was sending over sixty ships to Cuba.
 Qb Explain President Kennedy’s options once the missiles had been discovered on Cuba . Qb explain President Kennedy's options after the discovery of the missiles .
 President Kennedy organised a secret meeting of senior advisors at the White House . The meeting was held after photographic evidence showed Soviet missiles deployed in Cuba .
 In these he claimed the nature of the missiles in Cuba and the Soviet Union had peaceful intentions .
 Khrushchev and the Soviet Union had not made public the withdrawal of the missiles in Turkey . The compromise reached satisfied no one, but it was a particular embarrassment for the Soviets .
 General LeMay told the president that it was “the greatest defeat in our history” and that the U.S. should invade immediately . The president said that the defeat was the “greatest defeat” in American history .
 The purpose was to enable both leaders to communicate directly to ensure future crisis’ did not evolve . The purpose of the meeting was to ensure both leaders’s 'future crisis' didn't evolve .
 Top marks her you must provide a developed explanation for all three countries . Explain your answer referring only to , and explain only to . Explain only to refer only to the countries mentioned in your question .
 This means describing an evidence point and explaining its significance in relation to other points . This means explaining significance of the evidence point in relation with other points.
 Top tip – to gain full marks here you must provide a developed explanation for both leaders and countries . Top tip: To gain a full mark, provide an explanation for leaders and their countries .
 You must not just describe and explain, but also reach a clear judgement, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not just describing and explaining, but I'm trying to make a sense of the world"