 Noam Chomsky: "I'm not going to let it slide down" Chomsky: Obama should be allowed to speak out on the issue of climate change .
 Kennedy’s own judgment was that the probability of war might have been as high as 50 percent . Kennedy: “I’m not sure if war would have been possible,” he said. ‘I think it was possible that war might be possible’
 U.S. destroyers enforcing a quarantine around Cuba were dropping depth charges on Soviet submarines . One is Oct. 31, when United States destroyers enforce a quarantine . Another was Oct. 28, when the U.N. dropped depth charges .
 President Kennedy was “leaning towards military action to eliminate the missiles” in Cuba, Stern says . Stern concludes that, on Oct. 31, Kennedy was . President Kennedy wanted to eliminate missiles in Cuba .
 The American attacks are often dismissed in United States commentary as silly pranks, C.I.A. shenanigans gone wrong . U.S. attacks on American targets often dismissed as silly . The attacks have been seen as a joke by the U.N. and the C.A
 One of the main functions of the international institutional order is to legitimate the use of deadly military force by western powers . The U.S. is “amazingly naïve,” indeed quite “silly” to suggest that it should obey international law or other conditions
 United States policy towards Cuba is harshly condemned throughout Latin America and indeed most of the world . “A decent respect for the opinions of mankind” is understood to be meaningless rhetoric intoned mindlessly on July 4 .
 On Nov.th, the Pentagon announced that all known Soviet missile bases had been dismantled .
 In 1962, Khrushchev's willingness to accept Kennedy’s hegemonic demands was key to avoiding war . In 1962 the war was avoided by the willingness of Kennedy to accept his demands . In 1963, the U.S. went to war with the Soviet Union, but
 Noam Chomsky is Institute Professor Emeritus in the MIT Department of Linguistics and Philosophy . Chomsky: "Noam Chomsky was a pioneer in the field of linguistics and philosophy .
 Guernica has spent the last 15 years producing uncompromising journalism . Follow us on Twitter @Guernica .
 The magazine is a platform for ideas fostering justice, equality, and civic action . And we're constantly working to produce a magazine that deserves you .
 Guernica is committed to journalism journalism in the digital age of digital age . We are happy to feature some of the world's most interesting stories . Please donate to us at the end of this article .
 We are a home for singular voices, incisive ideas, and critical questions . With contributors from every continent and at every stage of their careers, we're here . We are happy to feature some of the world's top thinkers and thinkers .