 The U.S.A, Soviet Union, and Cuban countries were so close they could feel it breathing down their necks . They were close to each other in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The people of the United States were so close to being incinerated, they didn’t even know it . The U.S. didn't even know they were going to be incinerated .
 The Soviets had such a build up of missiles in Cuba they could have wiped-out most of the continental U.S. mainland . The Soviets built up such a stockpile of missiles they could wipe-out the continental United States .
 The United States had John F Kennedy, the Soviet Union had Nikita Khruschev, and Cuba had Fidel Castro, a dictator over Fulgenico Bftista . The U.S. had JFK, the USSR, the U.K. and the USSR also had a dictator
 These three countries are linked together in one of the most climatic movements in the cold war . The three countries were linked together during the Cold War .
 The United States took an estimate and figured that the Soviets and Cubans could only have about forty-four sub-launched polaris missiles and about one-hundred bombers on Cuba . The U.S. had one hundred fifty-six ICBM missiles ready to go along with
 The invasion started on April seventeenth 1961 and ended on April nineteenth . The invasion began on April 17, 1961 .
 The invasion was unsuccessful because the transport ships of the invaders got caught on seaweed in the bay . The transport ships got caught in seaweed .
 Three hundred of the exiles were killed and the remaining one-thousand two-hundred survivors were captured . The remaining 1,thousand 2,000 survivors of the former Soviet Union were captured by the Soviets .
 The blockade was established so the missiles could be taken out of Cuba by the Soviets, and so the U.S. could learn about the situation . It was established to help the United States learn of the situation in Cuba .
 Khruschev ordered the missiles out of Cuba, and the crisis ended without a nuclear war . On the twenty-eighth of the Cuban missile crisis, he ordered the missile missiles out .
 In January of 1991 six of Kennedy’s top aids with Fidel Castro, Rail Castro, and some Russians . Six of Kennedy's top aids were with Castro and his wife .
 Castro’s efforts to overthrow Central American Governments, the Bay of Pigs invasion, and Operation Mongoose. The Bay of the Pigs invasion was the result of a CIA operation that overthrew Central American governments .
 The United States was so close to a nuclear war, but had the wits and brains to prevent it . The U.S. had the ability to prevent nuclear war from happening .