 Dickson Musslewhite Acquisitions Editor: Charlyce Owen-Jones . Senior Managing Editor: Ann Marie McCarthy Project Manager: Carol O’Rourke Project Management and Composition: Aptara® Inc.
 Cover Designer: Suzanne Behnke Cover Photos: Clockwise from top left: Syrian rebel with son, 2012 .
 Refugees from Kyrgyzstan receive help from UNICEF, 2010, Hrc/ Wenn Photos/Newscom, 2010 .
 For permission to use copyrighted material, grateful acknowledgment is made to the copyright holders on 517 . This copyright page is hereby made part of this copyright page .
 Each chapter includes a summary, key terms, and critical thinking questions . Each chapter ends with a summary of key terms and key questions .
 Many students begin college misinformed about basic facts of international relations such as poverty and levels of foreign assistance given to the developing world . The trend toward fewer wars over the past two decades has led to fewer wars .
 An introductory textbook plays a key role in students’ education about international affairs . We have worked hard to make this one timely, accurate, visually appealing, and intellectually engaging .
 We hope this textbook can help a generation develop knowledge and critical thinking in order to find its voice and place in the changing world order .
 The rich complexity of international relationships -- political, economic, and cultural --provides a puzzle to try to understand, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The puzzle is not only an intellectual challenge but also emotionally powerful . The puzzle was not only a puzzle but also an emotional challenge . It's the first time a puzzle has been solved in the U.S. history .
 It contains human-scale stories in which the subject’s grand themes—war and peace, intergroup conflict and community, integration and division, humans and their environment, poverty and development—play out .
 The tenth edition 2012-2013 update includes important revisions throughout to keep the book current in a time of historic changes . New to the Tenth Edition 2013-2014 Update .
 New developments such as the Syrian civil war and the new European recession are featured in text and photos throughout the book .
 In international security affairs, this edition gives particular attention to the rapidly changing face of war across the world . In this edition, we focus on the changing nature of war in the world.
 The Syrian civil war grinds on, with more than 70,000 lives lost as of early 2013 . The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has heated up, while violence in the Democratic Congo has re ignited . Island disputes threaten to trigger violence in both the East China Sea and the South China Sea
 NATO campaign in Afghanistan is winding down; France has routed Islamists from northern Mali, as has African Union in Somalia . The United States defense budget has begun a sharp decline .
 The spread of democracy continues, with elections in Egypt and civilian rule in Burma . Democracy continues in Egypt, Burma .
 Cyberwarfare, such as the Flame virus and expanding drone attacks, also contributes to the changing international security picture covered in this edition of this edition .
 The European Union fell into a second recession after debt crises in Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Portugal, led to massive street protests, bailouts, and austerity budgets .
 The euro currency, a successful experiment in its first decade, began to look shaky, and further expansion of the EU was put aside . The euro is now the world's most important single currency .
 There are 6 billion cell phone subscribers worldwide, according to the world's most recent statistics . The world's telecommunications industry continues to revolutionize the global economy .
 Chinese citizens bypass their government and have their say on microblogs . Chinese citizens used Twitterdike microblogs to bypass government and bypass the government .
 Deep divisions of governance of the Internet emerged at an international conference in Dubai tasked with developing a new Internet treaty . But deep divisions emerged at the international conference .
 On the world health front, tremendous progress has been registered in such areas as fighting measles, cutting maternal deaths, and providing access to safe drinking water . The World Health Organization says the world has made a huge difference .
 Global warming is marked by stark warning signs such as freakish weather, floods, and droughts . But the international community proves incapable of coming to grips with the problem .
 This update edition discusses all these major development of the past eventful year . The latest update edition of the 2014 edition of this year's edition of our weekly Newsquiz.com .
 Chapter 2 discusses realist theories, while Chapter 3 discusses alternatives to realism, including liberal and social theories . Chapter 4 discusses alternative theories, including liberalism and social theory .
 Chapter 4 covers foreign policy, including how domestic politics influences international relations . Chapter 4: How domestic politics affects international relations in both positive and negative ways .
 We have updated the tables and figures with the most recent available data . The tables have been updated to reflect current data .
 New data on GDP, military forces, migration and refugees, debt, remittances, foreign aid, HIV/AIDS epidemic, and UN peacekeeping operations . New data also includes new data on debt, debt and foreign aid .
 Dozens of new photos, mostly from 2012 and 2013, draw visual attention to current events while reinforcing key concepts in the text . The photos were mostly taken in the wake of Hurricane Katrina .
 Each chapter contains an example of a collective good that states are attempting to achieve . Each chapter includes examples of what states are trying to achieve in order to achieve.
 We hope these new examples can provide a meaningful anchor for students to consider the concept of collective goods problems and the three potential approaches to solving them .
 This map is organized around the subfields of international security and international political economy . This map includes subfields such as international security, political economy and international security .
 These subfields, although separated physically, are integrated conceptually and overlap in many ways . The subfields are separated physically in this book, but they are integrated conceptsually .
 Common core principles—dominance, reciprocity, and identity—unify the book by showing how theoretical models apply across the range of topics in international security .
 The overall structure of this book follows substantive topics, first in international security and then in international political economy . The book is published by John Defterios, a professor of international politics and international diplomacy .
 Chapter 1 introduces the study of IR; explains the collective goods problem and the core principles of dominance, reciprocity, and identity . Also provides some geographical and historical context for the subject .
 The historical perspective places recent trends, especially globalization, in the context of the evolution of the international system over the 20th century . The global orientation reflects the diversity of IR experiences for different actors, especially those in the global South .
 Chapter 4 discusses the formulation and implementation of foreign policy . Chapter 4 includes a discussion of the key institutions involved in that process . Chapter 5 discusses the development of the foreign policy process .
 Chapter 5 introduces the main sources of international conflict, including ethnic, religious, territorial, and economic conflicts . Chapter 5 includes ethnic and religious conflicts, including religious and territorial conflicts .
 The conditions and manner in which such conflicts lead to the use of violence are discussed in Chapter 6, on military force and terrorism . Chapter 6 discusses the conditions and ways in which military force is used in conflicts .
 Chapter 7 shows how international organizations and law, especially the United Nations, have evolved to become major influences in security relations . Chapter 7: How human rights have become increasingly important. Chapter 7 also shows how the U.N. has evolved to be a major influence in international relations .
 The study of international organizations bridges international security topics with those in international political economy . The study also bridges international issues with international political issues .
 The remaining chapters move through the various topics that make up the study of international political economy . This includes microeconomic principles and national economies through trade and finance .
 Chapter 8 introduces theoretical concepts in political economy (showing how theories of international security translate into IPE issue areas) Chapter 8 discusses the most important topic in international political economy, namely, trade relations .
 Chapter 9 describes the politics of global finance and multinational business operations in an era of globalization . Chapter 9: The politics of international business in a world of economic and political power .
 Chapter 10 explores the processes of international integration, telecommunications, and cultural exchange on both a regional scale— the European Union—and a global scale . Chapter 10 is the first chapter of Chapter 10 .
 Chapter 11 shows how environmental politics and population growth expand international bargaining and interdependence both regionally and globally . Chapter 11: Population growth and environmental politics expand international cooperation and inter-reliance .
 Chapter 12 addresses global North-South relations, with particular attention given to poverty in the global South . Chapter 12 is dedicated to the global North and South .
 Chapter 13 considers alternatives for economic development in the context of international business, debt, and foreign aid . Chapter 13 then considers alternatives to international business and debt .
 Chapter 14—a brief postscript—reflects on the book’s central themes and encourages critical thinking about the future . Chapter 14: Reflect on the themes of the book and encourage critical thinking .
 Critical thinking is a key skill for college students to develop in IR . In a subject such as IR, knowledge is tentative and empirical developments can overtake theories . Critical thinking should be a key learning tool for students .
 In each example, we highlight how one of the core principles (dominance, reciprocity, and identity) has been used successfully in the provision of the good .
 The one-page “Policy Perspectives” feature in each chapter places students in the decision-making perspective of a national leader .
 This feature bridges international relations theory to policy problems while demonstrating the trade-offs often present in political decision-making . It also highlights the interconnectedness of foreign and domestic politics .
 The topics in each chapter are chosen to pick up on important concepts discussed in that chapter . Each chapter is chosen to discuss important concepts in the book .
 This feature deepens the treatment of particular topics, while reinforcing the general themes in each chapter . It also reinforces the themes of each chapter, while deepening the treatment .
 Many people find information easier to grasp when linked with pictures . The book uses color photographs extensively to illustrate important points .
 Students who are visual learners should find the photos and color graphics especially useful . Students should find not only the photos but also the many color images especially useful for students .
 Basic data presented simply and appropriately at a global level . Students can form their own judgments and to reason through the implications of different policies and theories .
 Text uses global-level data (showing the whole picture), rounds off numbers to highlight what is important, and conveys information graphically where appropriate . The text uses global level data to highlight the importance of certain areas .
 IR is a large subject that offers many directions for further exploration . IR is the subject of much of an ongoing debate about IR and IR .
 Footnotes in this book, updated for the tenth edition, suggest further reading on various topics . The footnotes are an updated version of this edition of this book .
 MyPoliSciLab is a state-of-the-art interactive and instructive solution for the International Relations course . Designed to be used as a supplement to a traditional lecture course, or to completely administer an online course .
 MyPoliSciLab provides access to a wealth of resources all geared to meet the individual teaching and learning needs of every instructor and every student .
 An assignment calendar and gradebook allow you to assign specific activities with due dates and to measure your students’ progress throughout the semester . The gradebook includes an assignment calendar, gradebook and assignment calendar .
 eText for International Relations features integrated videos, simulation activities, and interactive self-quizzes . The eText is designed to help students understand international relations issues .
 This layered approach promotes better critical thinking skills, helping students succeed in the course and beyond . The layered approach is designed to encourage students to think critically about their work .
 New Feature in MyPoliSciLab includes simulations that connect with topics from the text . Simulations engage students with the concepts and dynamics of international relations and decision-making .
 Pearson is pleased to offer several resources to qualified adopters of International Relations and their students that will make teaching and learning from this book even more effective and enjoyable . Supplements Pearson offers several resources that will help teachers and students .
 Instructor Resource Center is an online hub that allows instructors to quickly download bookspecific supplements . Several of the supplements for this book are available at the instructor Resource Center .
 IRC welcome page at www.pearsonhighered.com/ ire to register for access to access to the site . IRC welcome welcome page is at the bottom of the page . Please visit the welcome page to see how IRC welcomes people to IRC .
 Instructor's Manual/Test Bank includes chapter summaries, learning objectives, lecture outlines and lecture outlines . Multiple-choice questions, true/false questions, and essay questions for each chapter . This resource includes chapters summaries .
 Pearson test results are available at www.mypearsontest.com or contact your Pearson representative . Pearson tests can be used to test your knowledge of Pearson tests .
 Many scholars, colleagues, and friends have contributed ideas that ultimately influenced the ten editions of this book . Acknowledgments: Many of the ideas contributed to this book have been published in ten editions .
 The book owes a special debt to the late Robert C North, who suggested that the concepts of bargaining and leverage could be used to integrate IR theory across four levels of analysis .
 For help with military data issues, we thank the late Randall Forsberg for his help .
 For suggestions, we thank our colleagues, and students in our world politics classes, for suggestions .
 For help with the footnotes and glossary, thanks to Louis Cooper and Peter Howard . For help, please visit the book by clicking here for details .
 We thank Tana Johnson, Felicity Vabulas, Stephanie Dufek, Ben Zimmerman, and Roberta Braga for help with data research and bibliographic work .
 We appreciate the years of support we received from our late colleague, teacher, and friend Deborah “Misty” Gerner . Finally, we thank the late teacher, Deborah "Misty," Gerner, for her support .
 To the Student: The topics studied by scholars are like a landscape with many varied locations and terrains . To the student: "To the Student, The topics ... are like landscapes with many different terrains"
 This map is a map that can orient you to the main topics, debates, and issue areas in international relations . This textbook is a guide to the most important issues in international diplomacy .
 This text is a phrase book that can translate such lingo and explain the terms and concepts that scholars use to talk about international relations . This text can be used to help students understand international relations in the world .
 The text translates some of the voices of presidents and professors, free traders and feminists . The text will help you sort out the contours of the subject and the state of knowledge about its topics .
 In this tenth edition, we have especially tried to streamline and clarify this complex subject of international relations . This edition of this year's edition has been updated to help you understand and understand international relations.
 The synthesis presented in this book is that of the authors. But ultimately, the synthesis presented by the authors will be that of those authors .
 "This book is only a starting point for conversations and debates," author says . The book is "a starting point" for discussions and debates .
 With map and phrase book in hand, you are ready to explore a fascinating world . With map, phrase book and map book, you can explore the world with maps and phrases .
 The great changes taking place in world politics have made the writing of this textbook an exciting project . The great change taking place has made the project exciting .
 A Note on Nomenclature: Names are politically sensitive . Different actors may call a territory or an event by different names .
 This book cannot resolve such conflicts; it has adopted the following naming conventions for the sake of consistency . This book has adopted a number of naming conventions .
 The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is called Britain . Britain is the name of the United Kingdom .
 Burma, renamed Myanmar by its military government, is referred to as Burma . Burma is now known as Myanmar by the military government .
 The Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly called the Belgian Congo and then Zaire) is here called Democratic Congo . The Democratic Congo was formerly known as Zaire .
 We refer to the Sea of Japan, which some call the East Sea, and to the Persian Gulf, which is also called the Arabian Gulf . The Persian Gulf is also known as the Arabian Sea .
 The 1991 U.S.-led multinational military campaign that retook Kuwait after Iraq’s 1990 invasion is known as the Gulf War . The United States war in Iraq after 2003 is called the Iraq War .
 The war between Iran and Iraq in the 1980s is called the Iran-Iraq War . The war was the first of its kind in Iraq and Iran .
 Jobs in government and diplomacy offer team players the chance to affect policy, but require patience . Jobs in Government and Diplomacy require patience with large bureaucracy .
 Despite differences between careers in IGOs and governments, there are numerous similarities . Despite differences in careers, there is numerous similarities between IGO's and governments .
 Both organizations are hierarchical organizations, with competitive and highly regulated working environments . Both organizations have highly regulated environments .
 The United States State Department is regulated by exams, performance evaluations, and tenure with the organization . Admission into and promotion in these organizations is regulated .
 Another similarity lies in the challenges of being pulled in many directions concerning policies . The challenges are similar to the challenges faced by the White House in Washington .
 Governments face competing pressures of public opinion, constituencies, and interests groups—each with distinct policy opinions . Governments face pressures from public opinion and constituencies to make policy decisions .
 IGOs also deal with interest groups, but an IGO’s constituents are states, which disagree among themselves . An IGO's constituents are state governments .
 Many employees of IGOs or governments thrive on making decisions that influence policies . Many employees thrive on being able to influence policies, says John Defterios . He says he hopes to see more transparency in the world .
 Both work environments attract coworkers with deep interests in international affairs . The resulting networks of contracts can bring professional and intellectual rewards . Both work and work environments also attract coworkers who have deep interests .
 Jobs in governments or IGOs may involve travel or living abroad, which many enjoy . Many jobs in governments involve travel and living abroad .
 Usually, only individuals with advanced degrees or technical specializations achieve non-entry level positions . The position is usually non entry level . The job is often filled with people with technical skills or advanced degrees .
 It can take years to climb within the organization and the process may involve working in departments far from your original interests . It can be difficult to find a job within your organization .
 Both IGOs and governments are bureaucracies with formal rules and procedures, requiring patience . In addition, both governments require patience, patience, and patience, says the author .
 The key to working in IGOs or government is to get your foot in the door . The key is to getting your foot into the IGO's door .
 Be flexible and willing to take entry positions that are not exactly in your area of interest . Be flexible . Be willing to accept positions that may not be in your interest .
 Foreign language training is also important, especially for work in large IGOs with many field offices . Foreign language skills are also important .
 The ability to work well in groups and to network within and across organizations is an important asset . Work well with groups and networks is a key asset in your career, experts say .
 People who can strengthen lines of communication can gain support from many places in an organization . People with strong lines of communications can strengthen their relationships with others .
 Strong analytical and writing abilities are extremely important . Strong writing ability is extremely important for a writer .
 Both IGOs and governments deal with massive amounts of information daily . Both governments are dealing with huge amounts of data daily .
 The ability to analyze information (even including mathematical or computational analysis) and to write clear, concise interpretations will make one invaluable .
 As the pace and scope of globalization have accelerated, opportunities to work in international business have blossomed . The cost of international business has also increased in recent years .
 For many large companies, the domestic/global distinction has ceased to exist . For many, it has been impossible to make the distinction between domestic and global distinction .
 This new context provides opportunities and challenges for potential employees, says CNN.com.com .
 Business jobs can pay substantially more than those in governments or NGOs . They can open opportunities to travel extensively and network globally . Business jobs pay more than government jobs .
 Foreign-based jobs mean relocation to another country to work and immerse oneself in another culture . Foreign jobs are often relocated to a new country to live in .
 Many jobs require extensive hours, grueling travel, and frequent relocation . Many jobs involve extensive hours and travel, often involving frequent relocation.
 Promotions and advancement may fall victim to external circumstances such as global business cycles . As with any job, promotion and advancement can fall victim of external circumstances .
 Banking, marketing, sales, and computing/telecommunications have seen tremendous growth in recent years . Banks, marketing and sales have also seen a huge increase in sales and marketing .
 Traditional MBA and business xviii school programs will be helpful for all three types of jobs . Employers often also look for a broader set of skills taught in economics, political science, and communications skills .
 Language and cultural skills are essential in business success in China . Language and culture skills are also essential in the country's business success .
 Employers look for those who have knowledge of a country’s human and economic geography as well as culture . Employers also look for people with knowledge of the country's human, economic geography .
 Experience with study abroad, especially including working abroad, can help show an ability to adapt and function well in other cultures . Work abroad will help show that you can adapt to other cultures, especially working abroad .
 Strong analytical and especially writing abilities also matter greatly to employers . Strong writing abilities are also important in the job market . Strong analytical skills and writing skills are key to success .
 Employers often look for knowledge of a particular industry or company, in order to make best use of an employee’s language and cultural skills . Employers are often looking to make use of a person's language skills in their work .
 The practices, customs, and models of business in one country may not apply well abroad . Of course, while experience in non-international business never hurts, be mindful .
 Cross-cultural skills combined with substantive business knowledge in order to translate the operational needs of companies from the business world to the global realm are highly valued . Cross-Cultural skills combined . combined with . substantive business . knowledge .
 Nearly 30,000 NGOs ex ist, and that number grows daily, are now part of the movement . The number of NGOs ex-isnieses is growing daily, with many of the world's most successful ex-natives .
 Thousands of individuals are interested in working in these organizations . Thousands of people want to work for the organizations .
 While working for an NGO can be extremely rewarding personally, it is rarely rewarding financially . Working for a charity can be very rewarding personally and financially .
 Most NGOs are nonprofit operations that pay workers meagerly for long hours . Most of them are nonprofits that pay people meagerly, working long hours at a time .
 Many smaller NGOs engage in a constant fight for funding from governments, think tanks, private foundations, or individuals .
 Despite the large number of NGOs, relatively low pay, and long hours, finding a job with an NGO can be difficult . Despite the low pay and relatively low work, it is difficult to find an NGO job .
 Try to narrow down your interests in terms of substantive areas (e.g., human rights, environment) and/or geographic region . Focus on human rights and environment .
 Think about whether you want to work in your own country or abroad . Also think about if you want a job in the U.S. or overseas .
 Positions abroad may be more rewarding but are in lower supply and higher demand . Positions overseas may be in lower demand but are more rewarding than in demand .
 Basic office skills are essential, but employees also need to cover a range of duties every day . Basic skills are also essential, and employees need to be able to cover the full range of tasks .
 Writing and communication skills are key, especially when fundraising is part of the job . Writing and communicating skills are essential for fundraising success .
 Foreign language skills also matter since many NGOs maintain or work with field offices abroad . Foreign language is important for many NGOs .
 Often, NGOs ask potential employees to volunteer for a period while they train, before being hired . Often, volunteers are asked to volunteer while they are in training for a job .
 Some companies place workers in an NGO or volunteer opportunity for a price . Increasingly, some companies place employees in NGOs or volunteer opportunities at a cost .
 By paying to work, you can gain a probationary period to develop your skills and familiarize yourself with the operation so as to become efficient before going on the payroll . Paying to work is a good way to get your skills on the job .
 In Washington, D.C., personal networks play an important role in finding good opportunities . Personal networks play a key role in helping people find good opportunities for NGOs . In cities where NGOs cluster (e.g., Washington, DC.)
 For this reason, many volunteer or accept jobs with NGOs not in their immediate area of interest to gain experience and contacts, which can help future career advancement . Volunteering with NGOs is a good way to gain more experience and experience .
 People follow various your own time schedule, balancing other duties such as teaching and researching in the work as a teaching or research assistant . People can also follow various other duties (such as balancing time with other duties)
 Many who complete the instructor is likely to have a unique story about how he coursework for an advanced degree do not finish their or she became interested in international affairs or take many years to do so . Many of the instructor's stories are likely to be unique stories .
 One advantage of an academic and research career, is intellectual freedom, says author . Whether one wants to pursue an adsearch university, is that intellectual freedom . One advantage is that the university is a teaching-oriented institution .
 One can spend vanced degree for the purposes of teaching in an academic a career approaching a variety of topics that are intersetting or engaging in applied research . There are imporesting and constantly evolving, that may involve travel tant skill sets to develop .
 First and foremost is critical abroad for fieldwork, and that may let you network with thinking . That may be critical abroad, that may help you connect with thinking.
 Second, there is little or no teaching. Third, think about developing a set of applied skills to involved. Fourth, think of developing a new set of skills to involve .
 For those interested in IR research, such use as a toolbox while analyzing questions . Still, IR research can be useful for IR research .
 The contents of the contents jobs can result in a wider dissemination of one’s work to of this toolbox might include other languages to facilia broader audience that often includes policy makers . tate fieldwork abroad .
 To teach IR at an advanced level or perform skills to facilitate quantitative analysis . It could include statistics and data . Could include statistics, data .
 It could include research for think tanks and government agencies to use game theoretic models . Or it could use game theory models for government agencies .
 A Ph.D. in international relations usually takes a minimum of five years to complete . Masters of international relations often take between one and two years to answer questions .
 Online at chronicle.com/ to travel internationally or get work experience to hone American Political Science Assoc. Get work experience at the University of California's Political Science Association .
 Ernest J Wilson. Washington, D.C., 2004. to extend their education if they find a job that allows Ernest J. Wilson. to continue their education . If they found a job, they would be able to stay in the U.S. if they found it .
 Is There Really a Scholarthem to achieve their personal and career goals. Is There really a Schollarthem? See www.istherereally.com.com for more information .
 In completing most advanced degrees, a large amount of self-direction is necessary . Political Finally, in completing . Science and Politics, January 2007 January 2007 .
 White l*orse Ydfcnknife alpfeaf ‘Stove late l&ttwti of ■ Ye tvfou ‘talar) if Hudson Bay Happy ViHcvCopjte Bay Happy .
 Try ihr 5fl\*Tl Ihri'i II' itfriiiiwiSniJi] El; R.iwi. Kamclwllkii' OffSto ■ j£f ^ \ X o# j \ . ,
 International relations concerns relationships among the world’s governments . Narrowly defined, the field of international relations concerns the relationships of the world's governments . International relations is defined as international relations .
 They are closely connected with other actors (such as international organizations, multinational corporations, and individuals) with other social structures and processes . They are also connected with geographical and historical influences, such as geographical, historical influences .
 These elements together power the central trend in IR today, globalization . IR: Globalization is the central theme in IR's coverage of the world .
 The young protesters of the Arab Spring who overthrew several governments in 2011-2012 used Facebook and cell phones to plan and coordinate their revolutions . The Arab Spring used Facebook to coordinate their revolution .
 The global economic recession of 2008-2009 began with the collapse of the U.S. home mortgage market . It spread quickly to other nations . The global recession began in the United States and spread to other countries .
 Highly integrated global financial markets created a ripple effect across the globe that is still being felt today . The ripple effect is still felt today as a result of highly integrated global markets .
 Two hallmarks of globalization: expanding communications technology and integrated markets . The events that impacted our daily lives were the result of globalization .
 The prospects for getting jobs after graduation depend on the global economy and international competition . The prospect of getting jobs in the U.S. depends on the quality of the job market .
 Those jobs also likely to involve international travel, sales, or communication . Those jobs are more likely to be more likely than ever .
 The rules of the world trading system affect the goods that students consume every day, such as electronics, clothes, and gasoline . And the rules affect electronics and clothes that students use every day .
 Globalization has distinct positive impacts on our daily lives as well . Globalization is a positive part of our daily life, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Better communication and transportation capabilities constantly expand the ordinary person’s contact with people, products, and ideas from other countries . Better communication means better communication and transport capabilities .
 In addition to feeling the influence of globalization and international relations on our daily lives, individual citizens can influence the world as well . Individual citizens are able to influence their own lives as well as the rest of the world .
 Often, international relations is portrayed as a distant and abstract ritual conducted by a small group of people such as presidents, generals, and diplomats . International relations is often portrayed as an abstract, abstract ritual .
 Although leaders do play a major role in international affairs, many other people participate . Many people participate in the world's most important decisions .
 College students participate in international relations every time they vote in an election or work on a political campaign, buy a product or service traded on world markets, and watch the news . College students and other citizens participate in the international community .
 The choices we make in our daily lives ultimately affect the world we live in, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Every person makes a unique contribution, however small, to the world of international relations . Through those choices, every person makes an impact on international relations, CNN.com editor writes .
 The purpose of this book is to introduce the field of IR, to organize what is known and theorized about IR, and to convey key concepts used by political scientists to discuss relations among nations .
 This first chapter defines IR as a field of study, introduces the actors of interest, and reviews the geographical and historical aspects of globalization within which IR occurs . The first chapter of this chapter reviews the geography and historical aspect of globalization .
 Underneath this complexity, however, there are a few basic principles that shape the field .
 We will lay out the range of theories and approaches in Chapters 2 through 4, but here we will present the most central ideas as free from jargon as possible . The most important ideas will be laid out in Chapters 1 through 4 .
 Every country has an interest in stopping global warming, a goal that can be achieved only by many countries acting together . For example, every country has a interest in global warming .
 Each country has an individual interest in burning fossil fuels to keep its economy going . Yet each country also has a personal interest in using fossil fuels .
 All members of a military alliance benefit from the strength of the alliance, but each member separately has an interest in minimizing its own contributions in troops and money . Similarly, all members of an alliance benefit . All members benefit from each other's contributions, but all have a different interest in their
 Individual nations can advance their own short-term interests by seizing territory militarily, cheating on trade agreements, and refusing to contribute to peacekeeping or vaccination campaigns . Individual nations should not contribute to international efforts such as peacekeeping, vaccination campaigns, they say .
 If all nations acted this way, they would find themselves worse off, says President Obama . Mutual gains from cooperating on issues of security and trade would disappear, he says .
 We will refer to the general case as the collective goods problem, that is the problem of how to provide something that benefits all members of a group regardless of what each member contributes to it . We will use this to explain the problem in detail .
 In a small group, the cheating of one member is harder to conceal, has a greater impact on the overall collective good, and is easier to punish . In small groups, cheating of a member is hard to conceal and has a larger impact on collective good .
 The advantage of small groups helps explain the importance of the great power system in international security affairs . Small groups are key to the success of the G20 industrialized countries in economic matters, he says .
 Explore the Simulation ""Why Study International Relations"" at MyPoliSciLab 1 Olson, Mancur. Explore the simulation ""Why study International Relations?" at MyPoliciLab .
 The collective goods problem occurs in all groups and societies, but is particularly acute in international affairs . Each nation is sovereign, with no central authority such as a world government to enforce on individual nations .
 A government can force individuals to contribute in ways that do not serve their individual self-interest, such as paying taxes or installing anti-pollution equipment on vehicles and factories . By contrast, in domestic politics within countries, individuals must contribute to the cause of pollution .
 Although this solution is far from perfect, it mostly works well enough to keep societies going . Cheaters and criminals sometimes are not caught, and governments sometimes abuse their power .
 These three principles are fundamental across the social sciences . They recur in such disciplines as the study of animal societies, child development, social psychology, anthropology, anthropology and economics .
 To explain each principle, we will apply the three principles to a small-scale human example and an IR example . We will apply each principle to an example of a human experiment .
 The principle of dominance solves the collective goods problem by establishing a power hierarchy in which those at the top control those below . It's a bit like a government but without an actual government .
 Social conflicts such as who gets resources are resolved automatically in favor of the higher-ranking actor . Then social conflicts such a high-ranking person can be resolved automatically by the highest-ranking .
 Fights over the dominance position have scripted rules that minimize the harm inflicted on the group members . Rules have been scripted to minimize, some extent, according to the rules .
 Symbolic acts of submission and dominance reinforce an ever-present status hierarchy . Symbolic sexual violence is a form of dominance in the world of women .
 Staying on top of a status hierarchy does not depend on strength alone, though it helps . Staying top of the status hierarchy is not a matter of strength, but it helps.
 The top actor may be the one most adept at forming and maintaining alliances among the group’s more capable members . He may be able to form and maintain alliances among others .
 In international relations, a handful of countries dictate the rules for all the others . The principle of dominance underlies the great power system, which is based on dominance of countries .
 Sometimes a socalled hegemon or superpower stands atop the great powers as the dominant nation . Sometimes the hegeman or superpower is seen as a dominant nation in the world's most powerful nations .
 The UN Security Council, in which the world’s five strongest military powers hold a veto, reflects the dominance principle . The five-strongest military powers in the world have vetoes in the Security Council .
 The advantage of the dominance solution to the collective goods problem is that, like a government, it forces members of a group to contribute to the common good . The advantage is that it forces people to work for the good of their group .
 This stability comes at a cost of constant oppression of, and resentment by, the lower-ranking members in the status hierarchy . However, the disadvantage is that this stability comes with constant oppression .
 Conflict over position in the hierarchy can occasionally harm the group’s stability and well-being, such as when challenges to the top position lead to serious fights . Also, conflicts over positions in the group's hierarchy can sometimes harm its stability, say experts .
 In the case of international relations, the great power system and the hegemony of a superpower can provide relative peace and stability for decades on end . But then can break down into costly wars among the great powers .
 The principle of reciprocity solves the collective goods problem by rewarding behavior that contributes to the group and punishing behavior that pursues selfinterest at the expense of the group . Reciprocity is a reward system that punishes self-interested behavior .
 Reciprocity is very easy to understand and can be “enforced” without any central authority, says John Defterios . It's a robust way to get individuals to cooperate for the common good, he says .
 A disadvantage of reciprocity as a solution to the collective goods problem is that it can lead to a downward spiral as each side punishes what it believes to be negative acts by the other .
 Psychologically, most people overestimate their own good intentions and underestimate the value of the actions of their opponents or rivals . Psychologists say most people underestimate their good intentions .
 To avoid tit-for-tat escalations of conflict, one or both parties must act generously to get the relationship moving in a good direction .
 In international relations, reciprocity forms the basis of most of the norms and institutions in the international system . reciprocity is a key part of international relations in the world .
 Many central arrangements in IR, such as World Trade Organization agreements, explicitly recognize reciprocity as the linchpin of cooperation . Many central agreements in IR include reciprocity, reciprocity .
 If one country opens its markets to another’s goods, the other opens its market in return . For instance, if one country is open to another's goods, it will be open to each other's goods .
 On the negative side, reciprocity fuels arms races as each side responds to the other’s buildup of weapons . The U.S. and Russia are the two countries involved in the arms race .
 Two sides match each other’s actions in backing away from the brink of war . Arms control agreements and other step-by-step conflict-resolution measures are also possible .
 Collective goods are provided to all members of a group regardless of their individual contributions, just as these migrant workers crossing the Sahara desert in 2006 all depend on the truck's progress even while perhaps jostling for position .
 In many issue areas, such as global warming, the international community of nations is similarly interdependent . In many issues such as climate change, nations are interdependent in the global warming process .
 The provision of collective goods presents difficult dilemmas as players seek to maximize their own share of benefits . However, the provision of collectively goods presents challenges .
 A third potential solution to the collective goods problem lies in the identities of participants as members of a community . Identity is the identity of participants in a community, rather than collective goods .
 The identity principle does not rely on self-interest . The dominance and reciprocity principles act on the idea of achieving individual self-interested .
 Identity communities care about the interests of others in that community enough to sacrifice their own interests to benefit others . Identity communities sacrifice their interests to help others in their communities .
 "The roots of this principle lie in the family, the extended family, and the kinship group," says the author .
 This potential is not limited to the close family; it can be generalized to any identity community that one feels a part of . But this potential can be extended to the identity community of any community, such as the family of a child .
 As members of a family care about each other, so do members of an ethnic group, a gender group, or a nation, or the world’s scientists . As family members care, scientists care about other people, scientists do .
 In each case, individual members will accept solutions to collective goods problems that do not give them the best deal as individuals . The benefits are “all in the family,” so to speak .
 A biologist retiring at a rich American university may give away lab equipment to a biologist in a poor country because they share an identity as scientists . The donation will be given to a lab in poor countries .
 A European Jew may give money to Israel because of a shared Jewish identity . A computer scientist from India may return home to work for lower pay after receiving training in Canada, in order to help the community .
 Millions of people contribute to international disaster relief funds after tsunamis, earthquakes, or hurricanes because of a shared identity as members of the community of human beings . Millions Globalization, International Relations, and Daily Life .
 Identity communities play important roles in overcoming difficult collective goods problems, such as the issue of who contributes to development assistance, world health, and UN peacekeeping missions . Identity communities are important role models in overcoming problems such as development assistance .
 The relatively large foreign aid contributions of Scandinavian countries, or the high Canadian participation in peacekeeping, cannot be explained well by self-interest . The contributions arise from these countries’ self-defined identities as members of the international community, writes Peter Bergen .
 Even in military forces and diplomacy, shared identities can take edge off conflicts . Shared identities of military professionals and of diplomats can help ease tensions . Diplomats and military professionals share traditions and expectations .
 Military alliances mix identity politics with raw selfinterest, as shown by the U.S.-British alliance . Shared interests alone cannot explain as well as shared identity does . And shared interests alone can't explain the strength of the alliance .
 Nonstate actors, such as nongovernment organizations or terrorist networks, also rely on identity politics to a great extent . Identity politics is a key part of identity politics in the U.S. government .
 Identity principle has been brought to greater prominence in IR theory in recent years . Increasing roles of groups such as women's groups, churches, jihadists, and multinational corporations have brought it to prominence . The identity principle is a key to IR theory .
 An Everyday Example is an example of two friends who are in a romantic relationship . Use the three core principles to help you understand your friends' relationship .
 "Traditionally, relationships work best when the man wears the pants," the author says . "Relationship works best when it's the man," she says .
 For thousands of years the man has made the decision and the woman has followed it . The man has followed the woman's decision to marry in order to have a family .
 This might be better for both of them than spending all their evenings arguing about where to go out .
 This solution might leave the woman resentful at the unequal nature of the outcome . On the other hand, this solution may leave her permanently resentful .
 You could help the couple set up agreements, accounting systems, and shared expectations to govern the implementation of this simple solution .
 Get past superficial issues and strengthen the core feelings that brought you together . Get past the superficial issues to strengthen your core feelings .
 This approach could powerfully resolve your friends’ conflict and leave them much happier . It could leave them both much happier than they were before .
 Over time, one partner might actually begin to prefer the other’s favorite activity after more exposure . This could lead to a change in identity in the relationship .
 One partner can subtly exploit the other’s commitment to get past superficial conflicts . Indeed, one partner can . exploit the others’ commitment to getting past the superficial conflicts.
 This recurring problem results when two or more members of a group share an interest in some outcome of value to them all, but have conflicting individual interests when it comes to achieving that valued outcome . It is a recurring problem when two members of the group share a shared interest in an outcome of
 The world’s countries share a desire to avoid global warming, but each one benefits from burning fossil fuels to run its economy . For example, each country's economy benefits from fossil fuel use to run it .
 If too many do so, then the collective good will not be provided for anyone . But if too many people do so they will not provide for anyone, it will be good for everyone .
 For instance, if too many countries burn too much fossil fuel, then the whole world will suffer the effects of global warming . For example, the entire world could suffer from global warming, says Dr. John Defterios .
 Governments solve collective goods problems by forcing members of society to contribute to common goals, such as paying taxes . Within domestic societies, governments solve problems by making people contribute to collective goals .
 Three core principles—dominance, reciprocity, and identity—offer different solutions to the collective goods problem . The collective goods solution is based on the three core principles of dominance and identity .
 Globalization, International Relations, and Daily Life 9 An IR Example . Now consider the problem of nuclear proliferation . Consider the threat posed by nuclear weapons proliferation .
 All countries share an interest in the collective good of peace and stability, which is hard to achieve in a world where more countries make more and more nuclear weapons . The U.S. and the world share a common interest in peace, stability, says President Obama .
 Within a society, if individuals acquire dangerous weapons, the government can take them away to keep everyone safe . The government can also take weapons away from individuals, the author says .
 In 2006, North Korea tested its first nuclear bomb and Iran continues uranium enrichment that could lead to a nuclear bomb . North Korea has defied UN resolutions in both cases, defying UN resolutions .
 One approach to nuclear proliferation legitimizes these weapons’ ownership by just the few most powerful countries . This approach legitimizes nuclear proliferation by legitimizing these weapons' ownership by only a handful of countries .
 The “big five” with the largest nuclear arsenals hold veto power on the UN Security Council . The "big five" have veto power over veto power . The ‘big 5’ have the largest nuke arsenals in the world .
 The existing nuclear powers actively try to keep their exclusive hold on these weapons and prevent smaller nations from getting them . Through agreements like the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Proliferation Security Initiative, the nuclear powers are actively trying to keep these weapons from getting smaller nations .
 In 2003, the U.S. thought Iraq’s Saddam Hussein might have an active nuclear weapons program, as he had a decade earlier . The United States invaded Iraq and overthrew its government in 2003 .
 In 1982, Israel bombed Iraq's nuclear facility, setting back the program by years . Israel bombed the facility in 1982, when Iraq had begun working toward a nuclear bomb, in 1982 .
 One drawback to these dominance solutions is the resentment they create among smaller countries . One drawback of these solutions is that they create resentment among smaller nations .
 NPT states that existing nuclear powers should get rid of their own bombs as other countries refrain from making new ones . Those countries point to an unenforced provision of the NPT stating that existing . powers should remove their own nuclear bombs as others refrain from . making them .
 Israelis ask what gives Israel right to bomb another country, or the U.S. right to invade one . They ask: What gives Israel the right to attack another country? And what gives the United States the right?
 The NPT is the basis of the provision in the NPT about the existing nuclear powers’ obligation to disarm in exchange for smaller countries’ agreement to stay nonnuclear . The provision is based on the fact that existing nuclear power powers are obliged to disarm .
 Reciprocity also underlies arms control agreements, used extensively in the Cold War to manage the buildup of nuclear bombs by the superpowers .
 The identity principle has proven equally effective against nuclear proliferation, if less newsworthy . Identity principle is equally effective at preventing nuclear weapons proliferation .
 Many nations that have the technical ability to make nuclear weapons have chosen not to do so . Many nations in the U.S. have not been able to make nukes .
 They have constructed their national identities in ways that shape their self-interests so as to make nuclear bombs undesirable . They have also constructed their own national identities .
 Others, like Germany, belong to alliances in which they come under another nation’s nuclear ‘umbrella’ and don’t need their own bomb . Others belong under the umbrella of a nuclear "umbrella"
 South Africa actually developed nuclear weapons in secret but then dismantled the program before apartheid ended . The program kept the bomb out of the hands of the new majority-rule government .
 Japan’s experience of the catastrophic results of militarism, culminating in the destruction of two of its cities by nuclear bombs in 1945, continues generations later to shape its identity as a country that does not want nuclear weapons . Japan has the knowhow and even the stockpile of plutonium to
 Collective goods problems fascinate social scientists, especially scholars of IR, precisely because they have no easy solutions . Collective goods are a problem that is not easy to solve .
 In later chapters, we will see how these three core principles shape the responses of the international community to various collective goods problems across the whole range of IR issues . We will also see how the IR community responds to these issues .
 There is a close connection between scholars in colleges, universities, and think tanks and the policy-making community working in the government, especially in the United States .
 Professor Condoleezza Rice became national security advisor in 2001 and secretary of state in 2005 under President George W Bush . Sometimes professors publicize ideas about foreign policy through newspaper columns or TV interviews .
 Influencing their government’s foreign policy gives these scholars a laboratory in which to test their ideas in practice . Influencing the government's foreign policy is a test for their ideas, they say. Influencing a foreign policy makes these scholars feel more comfortable .
 Diplomats, bureaucrats, and politicians can benefit from the knowledge produced by IR scholars . IR scholars can help diplomats, bureaucrats and politicians benefit from their work .
 Theoretical debates in the field of IR are fundamental, but unresolved . Theoretically debates are fundamental but unresolved in the world .
 It will be up to the next generation of IR scholars to achieve a better understanding of how world politics works . The IR scholar says IR scholars will help students understand world politics better .
 The goal of this book is to lay out the current state of knowledge without exaggerating the successes of the discipline . The book is written in the first edition of this year's edition of The Open .
 IR is about international politics — the decisions of governments about foreign actors, especially other governments . IR is a part of political science, and IR is part of a history of international politics .
 To some extent, however, the relationship between theory and policy in international relations can be described as one of the world's most complex issues .
 International policy makers confront a variety of problems every day . The U.N. Security Council is meeting in Washington, D.C. for the first time in a year .
 The first, ""Background,"" provides information about a political problem faced by the leader . The second, "Background,"," provides information on the political problems facing the leader.
 Background information is factual and reflects real situations faced by these decision makers . This background information reflects the reality of life in the United States .
 The second section, ""Domestic Considerations,"" reflects on the implications of the situation for domestic politics within the leader's government and society .
 The third section, ""Scenario,"" suggests a new problem or crisis confronting the leader . The section is titled "Scenario"
 These hypothetical crises are hypothetical, all are within the realm of possibility and would require difficult decisions by the leaders and their countries . Although these crises would be hypothetical, they would be difficult decisions .
 The fourth section, ""Choose Your Policy,"" asks you to make a choice responding to the Scenario . The fourth part of the book is a choice to respond to the scenario .
 As you consider each problem faced by the decision maker, try to reflect on the process and logic by which you have reached the decision . Try to think carefully about each decision maker's decision and process .
 At times, it is difficult to choose between two good and bad options . At other times, one has to decide which is the least bad option, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Political relations among nations cover a range of activities—diplomacy, war, trade relations, alliances, cultural exchanges, participation in international organizations, and so forth . Political relations include war, war and trade relations between nations .
 Issue areas include global trade, the environment, and specific conflicts such as the Arab-Israeli conflict . Examples of issue areas include trade and environment .
 Policy makers of one nation can behave in a cooperative manner or in a conflictual manner . Policy makers can behave either friendly or hostile toward the other nation, experts say .
 IR scholars often look at international relations in terms of the mix of conflict and cooperation in relationships among nations among nations . IR scholars look at IR scholars as a way to understand international relations . The IR scholar says that international relations should be seen as a model of international relations between nations .
 The scope of the field of IR may also be defined by the subfields it encompasses . IR is defined by its scope of subfields, such as IR .
 Some scholars treat topics such as international law or international relations as subfields, but here we will reserve the term for two macro level topics . The book's chapters include international law and international relations .
 Traditionally, the study of IR has focused on questions of war and peace . International security studies is a subfield of international security studies . IR is a form of study that focuses on international security issues, such as war .
 The movements of armies and of diplomats, the crafting of treaties and alliances, the development and deployment of military capabilities, were the subjects that dominated the study of IR in the 1950s and 1960s . These subjects were the subject of IR research in the past, and they continue to hold
 IR concerns trade and financial relations among nations and focuses on how nations have cooperated politically to create and maintain institutions that regulate the flow of international economic and financial transactions . IR is a subfield of international political economy, where nations cooperate politically to maintain institutions . IR focuses on international trade and
 Multilateral economic institutions such as the World Trade Organization have pushed IPE scholars to focus on developing states as well . Although these topics previously centered on relations among the world’s richer nations, the widening of globalization and multilateral institutions has pushed these topics .
 North-South relations pay growing attention to relations between developed and developing nations . Topics include economic dependency, debt, foreign aid, technology transfer, and technology transfer .
 Also newly important are problems of international environmental management and of global telecommunications . Also important is problems of global environmental management, global telecommunications and international economic relations .
 Theoretical knowledge accumulates by a repeated cycle of generalizing and then testing . Theories accumulate by generalizing, then testing and generalizing . This cycle of testing is repeated over and over .
 Various theories can explain the result as a case of a more general principle . For a given puzzle, various theories can be used to explain the results .
 Each theory logically predicts other outcomes, and these can be tested empirically . Each theory can also logically predict other outcomes of the experiment .
 A laboratory science, controlling all but one variable, can test theoretical predictions efficiently . A test of theoretical predictions can be done with a simple laboratory science .
 IR does not have this luxury, because many variables operate simultaneously . IR doesn't have the luxury of having multiple variables working simultaneously . The IR team has no choice but to work around the clock clock .
 It is especially important to think critically about IR events and consider several different theoretical explanations before deciding which (if any) provides the best explanation .
 I Watch the Video 'Conflict Diamonds and the Kimberley Process' at MyPoliSciLab . The principal actors in IR are the world’s governments .
 Scholars of IR traditionally study the decisions and acts of those governments in relation to other governments . IR scholars of IR study the actions and decisions of the governments .
 The international stage is crowded with actors large and small that are intimately interwoven with the decisions of governments . This is not the first time the world has seen an international stage full of actors like this . The world's most powerful actors are often involved in the making of governments.
 A state is a territorial entity controlled by a government and inhabited by a population . Actors and Influences include 13 State Actors . State is a state of its own .
 The locations of the world’s states and territories are shown in the reference map at the front of this book, after the Careers section .
 A state government answers no higher authority; it exercises sovereignty over its territory . A state is sovereign to make and enforce laws, collect taxes, and so forth . The U.S. is a state of its own, not a state government .
 The population inhabiting a state forms a civil society to the extent of it has developed institutions to participate in political or social life . The population of a state must also have institutions that participate in social life, such as a state .
 The state’s government is a democracy to the extent that the government is controlled by the members of the population, the author says . The state's government is to be controlled by its citizens, he says .
 Each state has a capital city, the seat of government from which it administers its territory . With few exceptions, each state has an individual who acts in the name of the state . The state's capital city is often the capital city .
 In some countries, such as the United States, the same person is head of state and government . In some cases, the person is also head of government and head of country .
 In other countries, the positions of the president or royalty, or even the prime minister, are symbolic . The positions are symbolic in some countries, such as Norway .
 In any case, the most powerful political figure is the one we mean by “state leader” These figures are key individual actors in IR, regardless of whether these leaders are democratically elected or dictators .
 The state actor includes the individual leader as well as bureaucratic organizations that act in the name of the state . Foreign ministries such as foreign ministries are also involved in the act of state .
 International system is the set of relationships among the world’s states, structured according to certain rules and patterns of interaction . The international system is structured in accordance with certain rules, patterns and rules .
 The system includes who is considered a member of the system, what rights and responsibilities the members have, and what kinds of actions and responses normally occur between states . The system is designed to allow members of the U.S. to join the system .
 People were organized into more mixed and overlapping political units such as city-states, empires, and feudal fiefs . Before then, people were . organized into city-state, empire-state-based, city-city-states and feudal .
 Since World War II, decolonization process in Asia and Africa has added many new states . Some not at all nation-states, some not at least nation-state states .
 A major source of conflict and war at present is the frequent mismatch between perceived nations and actual state borders . A major problem is that perceived nations are perceived as nations, not borders, states are perceived borders .
 Leaders of Britain, the United States, and Germany watch a British-German soccer game (overtime shootout) together during a G8 summit at Camp David, 2012 .
 Substate nationalism is only one of several trends that undermine the present system of states, says David Cameron . This substate nationalism, he says, is one of a number of trends undermining the system of state .
 Others include globalization of economic processes, the power of telecommunications, and the proliferation of ballistic missiles . Others include the globalization of . economic processes .
 The independence of former colonies and the breakup into smaller states of large multinational states have increased the number of states in the world .
 The exact total depends on the status of a number of quasi-state political entities . It keeps changing as political units split apart or merge, and it keeps changing .
 The population of the world’s states varies dramatically, from China and India with more than 1 billion people each, to microstates such as San Marino with 32,000 . San Marino is the smallest state in the world, with a population of 32,500 .
 With the creation of many small states in recent decades, the majority of states have fewer than 10 million people each . More than half of the rest have 10 to 50 million each .
 17 states with populations of more than 80 million people together contain about two-thirds of the world’s population . The 17 states have populations of over 80 million, together, contain about 2.3% of the global population .
 The world economy is dominated by a few states, just as world population is . World population is also dominated by the world economy, as is world economy .
 Each is an important actor in world affairs, especially the nine in the center that are largest in both population and economy . The nine countries are the largest in the world and the largest economies .
 A few of these large states possess especially great military and economic strength and influence, and are called great powers . The United States is one of the most powerful nations in the world .
 The most powerful of great powers, those with truly global influence, have been called superpowers . Those with global influence have the power of the world's most powerful .
 This term generally meant the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War . It now refers to the U.S. alone . This term was used to refer to the two Cold War countries .
 Some political entities are often referred to as states or countries although they are not formally recognized as states . Some other political entities, such as countries, are often called states .
 It operates independently in practice but is claimed by China (a claim recognized formally by outside powers) and is not a UN member . The country is not UN member but operates independently and claims sovereignty .
 Formal colonies and possessions still exist; their status may change in the future . Formal possessions and possessions are still in existence, but may change their status .
 Hong Kong reverted from British to Chinese rule in 1997 and retains a somewhat separate identity under China’s “one country, two systems” formula . Hong Kong is one of China's "one country and two systems" formula .
 Other would-be states such as Kurdistan, Abkhazia, and Somaliland may fully control the territory they claim but are not internationally recognized .
 Such data is difficult to compare across nations with different currencies, economic systems, and levels of development . Such data are difficult to use across nations .
 In particular, comparisons of GDP in capitalist and socialist economies, or in rich and poor countries, should be treated cautiously, says economist .
 Left and center columns listed in population order, right column in GDP order . Left and right column lists population growth order; left column lists GDP order.
 These actors are transnational actors when they operate across international borders . Transnational actors are also called transnational agents .
 First, states often take actions through, within, or in the context of intergovernmental organizations . Intergovernmental organizations —organizations whose members are national governments .
 IGOs fulfill a variety of functions and vary in size from just a few states to virtually the whole UN membership . They range from a small number of states to a large number of nations .
 The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the World Trade Organization and military alliances such as NATO are all IGOs . Political groupings such as the African Union are all part of an IGO .
 Another type of transnational actor, nongovernmental organizations, are private organizations, some of considerable size and resources . Private organizations are some of the largest in the world and some of their size .
 NGOs are being recognized, in the UN and other forums, as legitimate actors along with states, though not equal to them . Increasingly NGOs are now recognized as legitimate agents along with state .
 Some of these groups have a political purpose, some a humanitarian one, some an economic or technical one . Some of the groups are political, some humanitarian, some economic, some technical . Others have a social or political purpose .
 Sometimes NGOs combine efforts through transnational advocacy networks . Sometimes NGOs use transnational networks to coordinate efforts .
 The interests of a large company doing business globally do not correspond with any one state’s interests, the company says . It says .
 MNCs often control greater resources, and operate internationally, than many small states . They operate internationally with greater efficiency, than small states, says the author .
 The United Fruit Company may prop up friendly foreign governments, as it did in the ‘banana republics” of Central America a century ago . The company has a history of using bananas in banana republics in Central America .
 MNCs also provide poor states with much-needed foreign investment and tax revenues . But poor states also provide foreign investment, tax revenues to poor states .
 MNCs depend on states to provide protection, well-regulated markets, and a stable political environment . MNCS in turn depend on state protection and stable political environments .
 MNCs as international actors receive special attention in Chapters 9 and 13 . MNCAs as international . actors . focus on international actors .
 The terrorist attacks since September 11, 2001, have demonstrated the increasing power that technology gives terrorists as nonstate actors . For example, the terrorist attacks in 2001 have demonstrated that technology can be used by terrorists .
 Nonstate actors participate in IR alongside states, although generally in less central roles . Just as Greenpeace can travel to a remote location and then beam video of its environmental actions there to the world, so too can al Qaeda place suicide bombers in world cities .
 Bono helps present an Amnesty International award to Burma's Aung San Suu Kyi, 2012 . The singer and activist is a strong advocate for democracy in Myanmar .
 Nongovernmental Organizations Members are individuals and groups Amnesty International, Lions Clubs, Red Cross . MNCs Multinational Corporations Companies that span borders include ExxonMobil, Toyota, Wal-Mart Others Individuals, Cities, Constituencies, etc.
 "Global reach" once an exclusive capability of great powers, now is available to many others, for better or worse . Actors and Influences 17 global banking system, and reach a global audience with videotaped appeals, “Global reach” is now available to others .
 The state of Ohio is entirely a United States entity but operates an International Trade Division to promote exports and foreign investment . Ohio has offices in Belgium, Japan, China, Canada, Israel, India, Australia, and Mexico .
 Companies, consumers, workers, investors create context of economic activity against which international political events play out, and within which governments must operate . The actions of substate economic actors — companies, consumers and workers — help create the context of global political events .
 In this world of globalization, of substate actors and transnational actors, states are still important . State of state is still important in today's globalized world, says U.S. President Obama .
 Companies, groups, and individuals deal ever more directly with each other across borders . But to some extent they are being pushed aside as companies, groups and individuals are increasingly integrated .
 Now more than ever, IR extends beyond the interactions of national governments . IR is now an important part of the U.S. intelligence community .
 Both state and nonstate actors are strongly affected by the revolution in information technologies now under way . Both states and non-state actors will be affected by information technologies, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 The new information-intensive world promises to reshape international relations profoundly . New information-intelligent world will reshape the world of information-driven nations .
 Technological change dramatically affects actors' relative capabilities and even preferences . Technological changes can affect actors' capabilities and preferences, experts say .
 Telecommunications and computerization allow economics, politics, and culture alike to operate on a global scale as never before . Technology allows the world to operate in a global way never before before .
 The ramifications of information technology for various facets of IR will be developed in each chapter of this book . Information technology will be used in the development of IR .
 The many actors involved in IR contribute to the complexity of competing explanations and theories . Levels of Analysis: The complexity of IR is complex and complex . IR is the subject of multiple levels of analysis .
 A level of analysis is a perspective on IR based on a set of similar actors or processes that suggests possible explanations to “why” questions . A level analysis is based on similar actors and processes that suggest possible explanations .
 The individual level of analysis concerns the perceptions, choices, and actions of individual human beings . The analysis is concerned with the perceptions and choices of individual humans .
 Great leaders influence the course of history, as do individual citizens, thinkers, soldiers, and voters . Great leaders can influence history, and individual citizens can influence it, says historian .
 The study of foreign policy decision making, discussed in Chapter 3, pays special attention to individual-level explanations of IR outcomes . The importance of psychological factors in the decision-making process is important .
 The domestic level of analysis concerns the aggregations of individuals within states that influence state actions in the international arena . The domestic levels of analysis are concerned with individuals within countries that influence international affairs .
 Aggregate aggregations include interest groups, political organizations, and government agencies . The aggregations are aggregated by interest groups and political organizations .
 These groups operate differently in different kinds of societies and states, states . The groups operate in different ways of society and states .
 For instance, democracies and dictatorships may act differently from one another, and democracies may act different in an election year 12 Singer, J David.
 Levels of Analysis: Many influences affect the course of international relations . Levels of analysis: Influence on international relations is a key part of the world's history .
 Levels of analysis provide a framework for categorizing these influences and thus for suggesting various explanations of international events . Levels can be used to suggest various explanations for international events, such as the origin of events such as terrorism .
 Assassinations, accidents of history from the way they act at other times . Decision making in crises . Assassinations . Assassination, accidents . from way they acted at times .
 The politics of ethnic conflict and nationalism, bubbling up from within states, plays an increasingly important role in the relations among states, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Foreign policy agencies often fight bureaucratic battles over foreign policy decisions . Within governments, foreign policy agencies are often fighting bureaucratic battles .
 The interstate level of analysis concerns the influence of the international system upon outcomes . The interstate levels of analysis are concerned with the impact of the global system on outcomes .
 This level of analysis focuses on the interactions of states themselves, without regard to their internal makeup or the particular individuals who lead them . The analysis therefore focuses on state interactions, rather than the internal makeup of states .
 This level pays attention to states’ relative power positions in the international system and interactions among them . This level of attention is paid attention to state’s relative power position in international system .
 It has traditionally been traditionally the most important of the levels of analysis . It has been traditionally an important part of the analysis process .
 Levels of analysis offer different sorts of explanations for international events . For example, many possible explanations exist for the 2003 U.S.-led war against Iraq .
 At the individual level, the war could be attributed to Saddam Hussein’s gamble that he could defeat the forces arrayed against him, or to President Bush's desire to remove a leader he personally deemed threatening .
 At the domestic level, the war could be attributed to the rise of the powerful neoconservative faction that convinced the Bush administration and Americans that Saddam was a threat to U.S. security in post-September 11 .
 At interstate level, the war might be attributed to the predominance of U.S. power .
 With no state willing to back Iraq militarily, the United States (as the largest global military power) was free to attack Iraq without fear of a large-scale military response . The U.S. was able to launch an attack on Iraq without fearing a military response from other nations
 War might be attributable to a global fear of terrorism, or even a clash between Islam and the West . War might also be linked to a fear of Islam, or a clash with the West, writes Peter Bergen .
 IR scholars often focus their study mainly on one level of analysis . Other levels bear on a problem simultaneously . IR scholars are often focused on one aspect of the problem .
 Levels of analysis help suggest multiple explanations and approaches to consider in explaining an event, rather than just one explanation . The analysis suggests multiple levels of analysis in order to explain an event .
 Scholars and students should look beyond the immediate and superficial aspects of an event to explore the possible influences of more distant causes, they say .
 Processes at higher levels tend to operate more slowly than those on the lower levels . Note that processes at higher level tend to be slower than those at lower levels.
 Individuals go in and out of office often; the structure of the international system changes rarely . Individuals go into office often, but the structure in the world is rarely changed .
 Globalization encompasses many trends, including expanded international trade, telecommunications, monetary coordination, multinational corporations, technical and scientific cooperation, cultural exchanges, and migration and refugee flows .
 Although globalization clearly is very important, it is also not well explained by any one theory . It is also rather vaguely defined and not well defined, says CNN.com .
 One view sees globalization as the fruition of liberal economic principles . Another view sees globalization as the culmination of the liberalization process .
 David Held, David, Anthony McGrew, David Goldblatt, and Jonathan Perraton: "This economic process has made traditional states more vulnerable" David, David and Anthony held, David McGrew: "It's a good thing for traditional states to be able to do this
 States are losing authority to supranational institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the European Union . States are also losing power to transnational actors such as MNCs and NGOs .
 The values of technocrats and elite, educated citizens in liberal democracies are becoming global values . They are reflecting an emerging global civilization, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says .
 The old North-South division is seen as less important, because the global South is moving in divergent directions depending on countries’ and regions’ integration with world markets . The old division is less important now, because of countries' integration with the world market .
 The skeptics doubt regional and geographic distinctions such as the North-South divide are disappearing in favor of a single global market . The skeptics also doubt that regional and . geographic . distinctions such a . regional . differences such as . the North and South divide will disappear, they say .
 The economic integration of states may be leading not to a single world free trade zone, but to distinct and rival regional blocs in America, Europe, and Asia . Also, the economic integration may lead to a separate and rival blocs .
 The supposed emerging world civilization is disproved by the fragmenting of larger units into smaller ones along lines of language, religion, and other such cultural factors . The fragmenting is the result of cultural factors such as religion, language and culture .
 State power is not strengthened or weakened by globalization, but transformed to operate in new contexts with new tools . State power will operate in a new context, says John Defterios . He says state power will be transformed by globalization .
 As the world economy becomes more integrated, markets and production are becoming global in scope . Popular debates focus on the growing power of large corporations operating globally, the disruptive costs associated with joining world markets .
 The key 2001 WTO meeting to launch a new trade round was held in Qatar, where protesters had little access . The 2001 meeting was in Qatar where protesters were not allowed access .
 At the 2003 WTO meeting in Cancun, Mexico, thousands of protesters marched against the talks and economic elites conducting them . Thousands of protesters were kept away from the conference center .
 At the 2005 Hong Kong WTO meeting, protesters blocked nearby roads and some even tried to swim across Hong Kong harbor to disrupt the meeting .
 Just as scholars disagree on conceptions of globalization, so do protesters disagree on their goals and tactics . Protesters disagree on what they want and how they want to change the world .
 Union members from the global North want to stop globalization from shipping their jobs south . Union members want to protect their jobs from being shipped south . The global North wants to stop the shipping of jobs south.
 Window-smashing anarchists steal media attention from environmentalists seeking to amend the trade agenda . Window-slamming anarchists steal attention from environmentalists .
 Globalization is changing both international security and IPE, but it is changing IPE more quickly and profoundly than security . Globalization will change both security and international security, as we will see in the coming chapters .
 The coming chapters address a broad range of topics, each affected by globalization . The chapters address topics such as globalization and globalization .
 Chapter 4 shows how nonstate actors influence foreign policies of states . Chapter 4: Nonstate actors can influence foreign policy in the world .
 Chapter 7 discusses global institutions, international law, and human rights, all of growing importance as globalization continues . Chapter 7 also discusses the role of international institutions and international law .
 Chapters 8 and 9 look at economic globalization in trade, finance, and business . Chapters 9 and 10 look at globalization’s influences in finance, business, trade and finance . Chapters 10 and 11 look at the effects of globalization in business, finance and trade .
 Chapter 10 considers the information technology side of globalization, as the world becomes wired in new ways . Chapter 10: The world is wired in a new way of communicating with technology .
 Chapter 11 discusses the global environment and examines how increasing interaction through globalization influences our physical environment . Chapter 11 examines how interaction between globalization and the physical environment influences the environment. Chapter 11 also discusses the impact of globalization .
 Chapters 12 and 13 cover the global North-South divide, which is central to the concept of globalization . Chapter 12 covers the North and South divide, as well as the North-North divide . Chapter 13 covers the concept, which was central to globalization .
 The rest of this chapter takes up two contextual aspects of globalization that shape the issue areas discussed in subsequent chapters . The relations among the world’s major regions, especially the rich North and poor South; and the evolution of the international system over the past century .
 Global Geography divides the world into nine regions . To highlight the insights afforded by a global level of analysis, this book splits the world .
 These world regions differ from each other in the number of states they contain and in each region’s particular mix of cultures, cultures, geographical realities, and languages .
 Each represents a geographical corner of the world, and together they reflect the overall larger divisions . But each represents a different geographical region, and each represents the world's larger divide .
 The global North-South gap between the relatively rich industrialized countries of the North and the relatively poor . of the South is the most important gap . Watch the video ""Global Food Prices and Changing Diets" at MyPoliSciLab 17 Broad Broad, Robin. Broad .
 Russia /CIS Europe North merica China The North The South South Asia Latin merica 2000 Kilometers Japan / Pacific Global Geography 23 geographical element at the global level of analysis .
 The regions used in this book have been drawn so as to separate the rich countries from the poor ones . The regions were drawn to separate rich and poor countries from poor .
 The North includes both the West (the rich countries of North America, Europe, and Japan) and the old East . The old East, including the former Soviet Union and the Commonwealth of Independent States, includes the Commonwealth .
 The South includes Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, and much of Asia . The South is the most populous region in the world, with Latin America and Africa .
 The South is often called the third world (third after the West and East) The term is still widely used despite the second world’s collapse .
 Countries in the South are also referred to as “developing’ countries or “less-developed” countries . This is in contrast to the “developed’s countries of the North . South is also known as ‘less developed” or ‘
 Several criteria beyond income levels help distinguish major geographically contiguous regions . These criteria include income levels and geographic location .
 Countries with similar economic levels, cultures, and languages have been kept together where possible . Countries that share similar economic and cultural values are kept together in the U.S.
 States with history of interaction, including historical empires or trading zones, placed together in a region . States with histories of interaction are placed together .
 Countries that might possibly unify in the future are kept in the same region . South Korea with North Korea and China with Taiwan are kept together in the region .
 Some states, such as Turkey, are pulled toward two regions . Of course, no scheme works perfectly, and some states, like Turkey, have been pulled toward the two regions.
 Most of the regions correspond with commonly used geographical names, but a few notes may help . Most of these regions correspond to commonly used geographic names .
 Southeast Asia refers to countries from Burma through Indonesia and the Philippines . Southeast Asia is known as Southeast Asia .
 Russia is considered a European state although a large section is in Asia . A large section of Russia is located in Asia and Russia has a large part of the world .
 Pacific Rim usually means East and Southeast Asia, Siberia, and the Pacific coast of North America and Latin America . The Pacific Rim is the region of East, Southeast Asia and Siberia .
 Narrow definitions of the Middle East exclude both North Africa and Turkey . Narrow definition of Middle East excludes North Africa, Turkey .
 The Balkans are the states of southeastern Europe, bounded by Slovenia, Romania, and Greece . The Balkans is the region of the Balkans, which borders Slovenia, Greece and Romania .
 Income levels per capita are, overall, more than five times as high in the North as in the South .
 North contains only 20 percent of the world’s people but 55 percent of its goods and services . North contains the majority of North Korea's population, but it also contains 55% of North's goods and goods .
 The other 80 percent of world’s people, in the South, have only 45 percent of the goods and services they need . The South has the most of the world's goods, services, but the South has 45 percent .
 Russia and CIS states lag behind in income levels, having suffered declines in the 1990s . Within the global North, Russia and the CIS states lags behind in incomes levels .
 In the global South, the Middle East, Latin America, and China have achieved somewhat higher income levels than have Africa and South Asia, which remain extremely poor . The Middle East and Latin America have achieved some higher income .
 Even in the somewhat higher-income regions, income is distributed quite unevenly and many people remain very poor . Income is distributed very unevenly across the world, even in the very rich regions .
 More than half of the world’s population lives in the densely populated regions of South Asia and China .
 From Korea, China and Russia are to the west, and Japan and the United States are the east . From Korea and Russia, the U.S. is to the east, and from Korea is to Japan .
 On world-level geography, see Kidron, Michael, Ronald Segal, and Angela Wilson . On world level geography, visit Kidron and Michael Kidron .
 Estimates for Russia, CIS, China, and other nonmarket or transitional economies are particularly suspect and should be used cautiously . Estimates are also suspect for Russia and CIS countries .
 We will review briefly the key events of the 20th century and focus on the post-Cold War era since 1990 . Here we will review the past 20 years of the Cold War era .
 Nothing like those wars has happened since, and they remain a key reference point for the world in which we live today . But they shaped the character of the century, and shaped the world of 1914-1919 .
 For many people, World War I symbolizes the tragic irrationality of war . With perhaps just two other cases in history, the two world wars were global or hegemonic wars in which almost all major states participated .
 Niall Ferguson: It fascinates scholars of IR because it was a catastrophic war that seems unnecessary and perhaps even unnecessary . Ferguson, Niall. Ferguson: The war was a disastrous war that seemed unnecessary, perhaps even perhaps unnecessary .
 The Two World Wars, 1900-1950 Europe mobilization plans developed Balkan crises World War 1 Sarajevo United States enters war — Italy invades Ethiopia Munich Agreement — World War II United States entered war D-Day Germany naval arms race with Britain .
 U.S. Defense Department N5 28 Chapter 1 The Globalization of International Relations accidental accidental . United States Defense Department .
 After a century of relative peace, the great powers marched off to battle for no good reason . The Great War ended with a disastrous World War II in 1945 .
 There was even a popular feeling that Europe would be uplifted and reinvigorated by a war . Young men could once again prove their manhood on the battlefield in a glorious adventure, says historian .
 Such ideas were soon crushed by the immense pain and evident pointlessness of the war. Such ideas soon proved to be crushed, the author says .
 The previous major war had been the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-1871, when Germany executed a swift offensive using railroads to rush forces to the front .
 All the great powers made plans for a quick railroad-borne offensive and rapid victory . The cult of the offensive has been called the cult of offensive . The American Revolution was founded by Napoleon Napoleon III .
 Under these doctrines, one country’s mobilization for war virtually forced its enemies to mobilize as well . The U.S. could mobilize for war under the doctrines of the U.K. under these doctrines .
 When a Serbian nationalist assassinated Archduke Ferdinand of Austria in 1914 in Sarajevo, a minor crisis 'l 'l escalated' and the mobilization plans pushed Europe to all-out war . Contrary to expectations, the war was neither short nor decisive, and certainly not glorious .
 In 1917 at the Battle of Passchendaele, the British in three months fired five tons of artillery shells per yard of front line, over an 11-mile-wide front, then lost 400,000 men in a failed ground attack .
 The horrific conditions were worsened by chemical weapons and attempts of Britain and Germany to starve each other’s population into surrender . The horrific situation was worsened by the use of chemical weapons .
 The entry of the U.S. into the war on the anti-German side quickly turned the tide . The U.N. entered the war in 1941, but the war was never won .
 In the Treaty of Versailles of 1919, Germany was forced to give up territory, pay reparations, limit its future armaments, and admit guilt for the war . Germany was also forced to pay reparation and limit its armaments .
 German resentment against the harsh terms of Versailles would contribute to Adolf Hitler’s rise to power in the 1930s . The harsh terms contributed to the rise of Hitler in Germany .
 Woodrow Wilson led the effort to create the League of Nations, a forerunner of today’s United Nations . Wilson was president of the United States during World War I . Wilson is credited with leading efforts to create today's U.N.
 The United States Senate would not approve United States participation, and the League did not prove effective . The League was unsuccessful .
 United States isolationism between the world wars and declining British power left a power vacuum in world politics . Declining British power and a Russia crippled by its own revolution led to a world vacuum in politics .
 Japan had already occupied Taiwan and Korea after defeating China in 1895 and Russia in 1905 . It had already taken control of Taiwan, Korea and Korea .
 Japan occupied Manchuria (northeast China) in 1931, set up a puppet regime there . In 1931, Japan occupied the region and established a regime in the region .
 In 1937, Japan invaded the rest of China and began a brutal occupation that continues to haunt Chinese-Japanese relations . The occupation of China is still a thorn in Japanese relations .
 Nazi Germany intervened to help fascists win the Spanish Civil War, and grabbed territory from its neighbors under the rationale of reuniting ethnic Germans in those territories with their homeland . Meanwhile, in Europe in the 1930s, Nazi Germany under Hitler under Hitler had re-armed, intervened to .
 Hitler was emboldened by the weak response of the international community and the League of Nations to aggression by fascist regimes in Italy and Spain . Hitler's rise in fascism was seen as a major factor in the rise of fascism in Europe .
 Appeasement has since had a negative connotation in IR, because the Munich Agreement seemed only to encourage Hitler’s further conquests .
 Germany invaded Poland in 1939, leading Britain and France to join the war against Germany . In 1939, Poland was invaded by Germany, leading France and Britain to join forces in the war .
 Hitler signed a nonaggression pact with his archenemy, Joseph Stalin of the 22 Van Evera, Stephen. The pact was signed by Hitler and Stalin in 1941 .
 The Evolving International System 29 Soviet Union, and threw his full army against France, occupying most of it quickly . France was occupied by the Soviet Union in the 1930s .
 Hitler then double-crossed Stalin and invaded the Soviet Union in 1941 . Hitler then then went on to invade the USSR in 1941. Hitler then died in 1945 .
 This offensive ultimately bogged down and was turned back after several years . The offensive was ultimately turned back and turned into a failed mission .
 The trauma continues to be a powerful memory that shapes views of IR in Russia and Eastern Europe . It is a powerful trauma that shaped views of the Russian government in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The United States economy produced critically important weapons and supplies for allied armies . The U.S. economy produced critical weapons, supplies to allied armies.
 The U.S. played an important role with Britain in the strategic bombing of German cities . The firebombing of Dresden in February 1945 caused 100,000 civilian deaths .
 British-American forces pushed into Germany from the west while the Soviets pushed from the east . In 1944, after crossing the English Channel on June 6, British-U.S. forces crossed into Germany .
 At its peak, Nazi Germany and its allies had occupied virtually all of Europe, except Britain and part of Russia . At the peak of World War II, Germany occupied Europe's most of Europe .
 While the war in Europe was raging, Japan fought a war over control of Southeast Asia with the U.S. and its allies . The war in Southeast Asia was Japan's war with the United States and allies .
 The U.S. built vast new military forces and retook a series of Pacific islands in subsequent years . The United States, however, built vast . military forces in the region .
 U.S. strategic bombing of Japanese cities culminated in the only historical use of nuclear weapons in war . The destruction of the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki triggered Japan’s quick surrender .
 From the failure of the Munich Agreement in 1938 to appease Hitler, many people have concluded that only a hardline foreign policy with preparedness for war will deter aggression and prevent war .
 Hardline policies in 1914 led Europe into a disastrous war, which might have been avoided by more conciliatory policies . Yet in 1914 it was just such hardline policies that apparently led Europe to war, it led to disastrous war .
 Each had its ideological mission (capitalist democracy versus communism), its networks of alliances and clients, and its deadly arsenal of nuclear weapons . Each had their ideological mission, networks, and weapons .
 Europe was divided, with massive military forces of the U.S. and its allies on one side . The Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies on the other .
 Three-quarters of Germany was occupied by the U.S., Britain, France, and France . Germany itself was split, with the United States, Britain and France taking control of the country .
 The remainder of West Berlin was occupied by the Soviet Union . The rest of the West Berlin area remained occupied by West Berliners .
 Crises in Berlin in 1947-1948 and 1961 led to armed confrontations but not war . Crises occurred in Berlin between 1947 and 1961, but were not followed by war .
 In 1961, East Germany built the Berlin Wall separating East from West Berlin . Berlin Wall was built in 1961, separating East and West Berlin.
 Despite the hostility of East-West relations during the Cold War, a relatively stable framework of relations emerged . Conflict never escalated to all-out war between the largest states .
 At a U.S.-Soviet-British meeting at Yalta in 1945, the Western powers acknowledged the fact of the Soviet army’s presence in Eastern Europe, allowing that area to remain under Soviet influence . The Soviet army's presence in the area was acknowledged at a U
 The United Nations (unlike the ill-fated League of Nations) managed to maintain almost universal membership and adherence to basic structures and rules throughout the Cold War era .
 The central concern of the West during the Cold War was that the Soviet Union might gain control of Western Europe . The West was concerned about the possibility of communist taking power in war-weary and impoverished countries of Europe .
 This could have put the entire industrial base of the Eurasian landmass (from Europe to Siberia) under one state . It could have been a state of Russia .
 The Marshall Plan — U.S. financial aid to rebuild European economies — responded to these fears, as did the creation of NATO alliance . NATO alliance was created by the Marshall Plan, and the NATO program .
 Half of the entire world’s military spending was devoted to the European standoff . The European crisis has been dubbed the worst of the world's military budget .
 The U.S. sought to halt the expansion of Soviet influence globally on several levels at once . The policy of containment, adopted in the late 1940s, was meant to halt Soviet influence .
 The United States maintained an extensive network of military bases and alliances worldwide . The U.S. maintained a network of diplomatic relations with many of its allies .
 Virtually all of U.S. foreign policy in subsequent decades came to serve the goal of containment . U.N. policy came to the end of the Cold War era .
 China became fiercely independent in the 1960s following the Sino-Soviet split . China opposed Soviet moves toward peaceful coexistence with the U.S. But China became independent after the split .
 In the late 1960s, young radicals, opposed to both superpowers, ran China during the chaotic and destructive Cultural Revolution . The Cultural Revolution was the result of the Cultural Revolution, which began in 1966 .
 China’s leaders developed a growing affiliation with the United States during the 1970s . The U.S. president Richard Nixon made a dramatic visit to China by China in 1972 .
 During the Cold War, China generally tried to play a balancer role against whichever superpower seemed most threatening at the time . China generally played a role as a balancing role against whoever was perceived to be most threatening .
 In 1950, the Korean War broke out when communist North Korea attacked and overran most of U.S.-allied South Korea . The Korean War began in 1950, when North Korea overran U.N. South Korea and invaded South Korea.
 The United States and its allies counterattacked and overran most of North Korea . The U.S. and allies (under UN authority obtained after the Soviets walked out of the Security Council in protest) Counterattacked .
 China sent masses of ‘volunteers’ to help North Korea, and the war bogged down near the original border until a 1953 truce ended the fighting . A 1953 truce between North Korea and North Korea ended the war .
 The Korean War hardened U.S. attitudes toward communism . It set a negative tone for future East-West relations, especially in the 1950s . It was the Korean War .
 The first summit meeting between superpower leaders took place in Geneva in 1955 . First summit meeting was held in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1950s .
 This thaw in relations led both sides to agree to reconstitute Austria . Austria had been split into four pieces like Germany like Germany . Austria was reconstititized into Austria in 1945 .
 The Soviet Union sent tanks to crush a popular uprising in Hungary in 1956 . The Soviet missile program that orbited Sputnik in 1957 alarmed the U.S.
 The shooting down of a U.S. spy plane over the Soviet Union in 1960 scuttled a summit meeting between superpower nations . The shooting of a United States spy plane in the 1960s also scuppled the summit meeting .
 America’s Embargo Against China and the Sino-Soviet Alliance, 1949-1963, was the result of the U.S. embargo against China . The embargo was imposed against China in 1949-1955 .
 The U.S. attempted a counterrevolution in the botched 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion in Cuba . Meanwhile in Cuba, after Fidel Castro’s communist revolution in 1959, the United States attempted to overthrow the Castro regime .
 The Soviet aims were to reduce the Soviet Union’s strategic nuclear inferiority, to counter the deployment of United States missiles on Soviet borders in Turkey, and to deter another United States invasion of Cuba .
 U.S. leaders considered missiles threatening and provocative . United States leaders, however, considered the missiles threatening .
 As historical documents revealed years later, nuclear war was quite possible . Nuclear war was actually possible .
 Some U.S. policy makers favored military strikes before the missiles became operational, when in fact some nuclear weapons in Cuba were already operational . Instead, President John F Kennedy imposed a naval blockade to force their removal .
 The Soviet Union backed down on the missiles, and the United States promised not to invade Cuba in the future . The U.S. promised to never invade Cuba .
 Leaders on both sides were shaken, however, by the possibility of nuclear war . Leaders in both countries were shaken by the prospect of nuclear warfare .
 They signed the Limited Test Ban Treaty in 1963, prohibiting atmospheric nuclear tests . They began to cooperate in cultural exchanges, space exploration, aviation, and other areas .
 The two superpowers often jockeyed for position in the global South, supporting proxy wars in which they typically supplied and advised opposing factions in civil wars . They typically supplied, advised opposing sides in civil war in the South .
 The U.S. backed the Ethiopian government and the Soviets backed next-door rival Somalia in the 1970s . However, when an Ethiopian revolution caused the new government to seek Soviet help, the United States switched support to Somalia .
 One flaw of U.S. policy in the Cold War period was to see all regional conflicts through East-West lenses . The Cold War saw regional conflicts in the region as East-west .
 Its preoccupation with communism led the United States to support unpopular pro-Western governments in a number of poor countries . The U.S. supported unpopular governments during the Vietnam War in the 1960s .
 The war in Vietnam divided U.S. citizens and ultimately failed to prevent a communist takeover . The war ended in Vietnam, but failed to stop the communist takeover of the country .
 The fall of South Vietnam in 1975 appeared to signal U.S. weakness, especially combined with other setbacks in the Middle East . The 1973 Arab oil embargo against the United States and the 1979 overthrow of the shah of Iran by Islamic fundamentalists were among those setbacks .
 In this period of apparent U.S. weakness, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in 1979 . In this time of apparent United States weakness, it invaded Afghanistan .
 During the Cold War, the United States and Soviet sides sought spheres of influence . But, like the U.S. in Vietnam, the Soviet Union could not suppress rebel rebels .
 Europe was divided, and Germany itself was split, with its capital, Berlin, also divided . Germany was divided and Berlin was also divided in the 1990s .
 In 1961 the communist side built the Berlin Wall, seen here in 1962, to keep its population from leaving . The Berlin Wall was built in 1961 to keep people from leaving the city . In 1961 it was built to stop the population leaving .
 The Evolving International System 33 armies supplied by the opposing superpower . The Evolved International System was created by the UN .
 The Soviets withdrew after almost a decade of war that considerably weakened the Soviet Union . The Soviets ultimately withdrew after the war .
 President Ronald Reagan built up U.S. military forces to record levels . Reagan supported rebel armies in the Soviet-allied states of Nicaragua and Angola as well as Afghanistan .
 Superpower relations slowly improved after Mikhail Gorbachev, a reformer, took power in the Soviet Union in 1985 . Superpowers relations between Russia and the U.S. slowly improved in recent years .
 Some of the battlegrounds of the global South continued to suffer from brutal civil wars into the new century . But some of the world's worst civil wars are still raging in the South .
 In retrospect, it seems that both superpowers exaggerated Soviet strength . The Soviet Union had exaggerated its strength, and the Soviet Union did not .
 In the early years of the nuclear arms race, the U.S. military superiority was absolute, especially in nuclear weapons . In the 1960s and '90s, the United States was dominant in the nuclear weapons arms race .
 The Soviets managed to match the U.S. over time, from A-bombs to H-Bombs to multiple-warhead missiles . The Soviet Union managed to outmatch the United States .
 By the 1970s the Soviets had achieved strategic parity, meaning neither side could prevent its own destruction in a nuclear war . Neither side was able to prevent the destruction of their own nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet Union lagged far behind the West in everything else, including wealth, technology, infrastructure, and citizen/worker motivation . Behind this military parity lay the Soviet Union's military parity, but behind it was a gap in the West .
 In June 1989, massive pro-democracy demonstrations in China’s capital of Beijing were put down violently by the communist government . Pro-democracy protests in China's capital were held in 1989 by the government .
 Later that year, as the Soviet Union stood by, one Eastern European country after another replaced its communist government under pressure of mass demonstrations .
 The toppling of the Berlin Wall in late 1989 symbolized the end of the Cold War division of Europe . Berlin Wall's toppling symbolized end of Cold War .
 China remained a communist, authoritarian government but liberalized its economy and avoided military conflicts . China remained authoritarian, but liberalizing its economy, avoiding military conflict .
 In contrast to the Cold War era, China developed close ties with both the U.S. and Russia . China joined the world’s liberal trading regime in the 1950s .
 Scholars do not agree on the important question of why the Cold War ended . One view is that U.S. military strength under President Reagan forced the Soviet Union into bankruptcy .
 A different position is that the Soviet Union suffered from internal stagnation over decades and ultimately imploded because of weaknesses that had little to do with external pressure . A different view is that internal stagnation caused the collapse of the USSR .
 Some scholars think the Soviet Union might have fallen apart earlier without the U.S. as a foreign enemy to bolster the Soviet government’s legitimacy with its own people .
 The Post-Cold War era began with a bang while the Soviet Union was still disintegrating . The post-cold war era, 1990-2013, is a look at the history of the Cold War .
 In 1990, Iraq occupied its neighbor Kuwait in an aggressive grab for control of Middle East oil . Iraq occupied Kuwait in 1990, perhaps believing that the end of the Cold War had left a power vacuum in its region .
 Western powers alarmed about the example that unpunished aggression could set in a new era . Western powers were alarmed, both about the direct threat to energy supplies for the world economy .
 The United States mobilized a coalition of the world’s major countries (with almost no opposition) to counter Iraq . The U.S. mobilized the world's major countries with no opposition .
 Working through the UN, the U.S.-led coalition applied escalating sanctions against Iraq . The U.N. has imposed escalating sanctions on Iraq since 2003 . The coalition applied the sanctions to Iraq .
 When Iraq did not withdraw from Kuwait by the UN’s deadline, the U.S. and its allies easily smashed the Iraqi military and evicted its army from Kuwait in the Gulf War . The United States evicted Iraq from Kuwait after the UN's deadline .
 The costs of the Gulf War were shared among the participants in the coalition, with Britain and France making 26 . The costs were shared by all the countries involved .
 The pass-the-hat financing for this war was an innovation, one that worked fairly well . It's not the first time the U.S. government has been involved in a major war in the Middle East .
 The 15 republics of the Soviet Union, of which Russia was just one, had begun taking power from a weakened central government, declaring themselves sovereign states . The final collapse of Soviet Union followed only months after the Gulf War .
 This process raised complex problems ranging from issues of national self-determination to the reallocation of property . The process raised issues of issues such as issues of sovereignty, property rights .
 Russia and the other former republics struggled throughout the 1990s against economic and financial collapse, inflation, corruption, war, and military weakness . They remained political democracies, although they were political democracies . Russia, the other ex-Soviet republics, struggled against economic collapse .
 A failed Russian military coup attempt in 1991 led to the collapse of the Soviet Union . A prominent role of Russian president Boris Yeltsin in opposing it helped accelerate the collapse . A failed military coup in 1991 accelerated the fall of the USSR .
 Both capitalism and democracy were adopted as the basis of the economies and political systems of the former Soviet states . Capitalism and democracy became the basis for the economies .
 Of the former Soviet republics, only the three small Baltic states and Georgia are nonmembers of the group .
 Western relations with Russia and the other republics have been mixed since the 1990s . Western relations between the two countries have been muddled since the 1980s .
 Western countries provided only limited aid for the region’s harsh economic transition, which had drastically reduced living standards . Because of their own economic problems, and because of a sense that Russia needed internal reform more than external aid, Western countries did not provide much aid .
 Russia’s brutal suppression of its secessionist province of Chechnya in 1995 and 1999 provoked Western fears of an expansionist, aggressive Russian nationalism . Western fears that Russia is an aggressive, expansionist state .
 Russian leaders feared NATO expansion into Eastern Europe that placed threatening Western military forces on Russia’s borders . Russia feared the threat posed by NATO forces on its borders . Russian President Vladimir Putin was assassinated in 2011 .
 Despite these problems, the world’s great powers overall increased cooperation after the Cold War . Meanwhile, Japan and Russia could not resolve a lingering, mostly symbolic, territorial dispute/ u .
 Russia accepted as the successor state to the Soviet Union and took its seat on the Security Council . Russia was accepted as a successor state and took part in the UN system . Russia is now one of the world's most powerful nations .
 Russia and U.S. agreed to major reductions in their nuclear weapons in the 1990s . Russia and the United States carried out the reductions in nuclear weapons .
 The former Yugoslavia broke up after the Gulf War in 1991, with several republics declaring independence . Several republics declared independence in 1991 .
 With help from Serbia, the Yugoslav army, they killed hundreds of thousands of non-Serb Bosnians and Croatians and expelled millions more . Millions more were expelled to create an ethnically pure state of Yugoslavia .
 The international community recognized the independence of Croatia and Bosnia, admitting them to the UN and passing dozens of Security Council resolutions to protect their territorial integrity and their civilian populations . Bosnia and Croatia were both recognized as part of the U.N.
 The great powers showed no willingness to bear major costs to protect Bosnia . But in contrast to the Gulf War, the great powers were not willing to bear costs . Bosnia was the only country in the world to join Bosnia in the war .
 O 1 tried to contain the conflict by . assuming a neutral role as peacekeeper and intermediary . Instead they tried to . contain the . conflict by assuming a . neutral role .
 In 1995, Serbian forces overran two UN-designated ‘safe areas’ in eastern Bosnia, expelling the women and slaughtering thousands of the men . Thousands of men were slaughtered by Serbian forces in those areas .
 Two weeks of NATO airstrikes and losses to Croatia on the ground induced Serbian forces to come to terms with Croatia . Serbian forces finally agreed to leave Croatia in July .
 The treaty to end the war (authored by United States negotiators) formally held Bosnia together but granted Serbian forces autonomy on half of their territory . About 60,000 heavily armed troops were placed on the ground to maintain a cease-fire .
 Serbian strongman Slobodan 27 Freedman, Lawrence, and Efraim Karsh. Lawrence, Karsh, Lawrence and Karsh were assassinated in 1998 .
 Milosevic was indicted for war crimes by the UN tribunal for the former Yugoslavia . He was delivered to the tribunal in 2001, and died in 2006 near the end of a lengthy trial . The Evolving International System 35 was 35 .
 Western powers acted decisively in 1999 when Serbian forces carried out “ethnic cleansing” in the Serbian province of Kosovo . Kosovo was predominantly populated by ethnic Albanians . Kosovo is a predominantly ethnic Albanian province .
 NATO came under criticism from Russia and China for acting without explicit UN authorization and for interfering in Serbia’s internal affairs . NATO has been criticized for acting in Serbia without UN authorization . NATO acted in violation of the UN resolution .
 Kosovo declared independence in 2008, bringing protests from Serbia and its allies . In the end, Serbian forces withdrew from Kosovo and NATO has controlled the province .
 In 2010, the World Court declared Kosovo’s declaration of independence legal, although its substantive status remains in dispute . Kosovo declared independence in 2010, but substantive status of its sovereignty remains disputed . Kosovo is one of the most successful countries in the Middle East .
 Other Western military intervention decisions since 1990 have been less effective . The U.S. has been involved in Iraq and Afghanistan since 1990 .
 In Somalia, a U.S.-led coalition sent tens of thousands of troops to suppress factional fighting and deliver relief supplies to a large population that was starving . The coalition has been fighting in Somalia since 2003 .
 In Rwanda in 1994, the genocide of more than half a million civilians in a matter of weeks was virtually ignored by the international community . However, when those forces were drawn into the fighting and sustained casualties, the U.S. abruptly pulled out of Rwanda .
 The great powers, burned by failures in Somalia and Bosnia, decided that their vital interests were not at stake . Great powers decided not to intervene in Somalia or Bosnia .
 In 1997, the Rwanda conflict spilled into neighboring Zaire, where rebels overthrew a corrupt dictator . The Rwanda conflict ended in 1997, when the Rwandan government was overthrown in Zaire . Rwanda is one of Africa's most violent countries .
 Neighboring countries were drawn into the fighting, but the international community steered clear . Millions of civilians died of hunger and disease during the fighting in the region .
 The United States military intervened in Haiti to restore the elected president, but Haiti remains mired in poverty . The U.S. military intervened to restore Haiti to Haiti .
 New rifts opened in 2001 between the United States and both China and Europe . The rifts could signal a realignment against United States predominance in world affairs . Issues range from global warming to the proposed International Criminal Court .
 Russia and China signed a treaty of friendship in 2001, and European countries voted the United States off two important UN commissions . European countries helped vote the U.S. off two UN commissions.
 These divisive issues receded when the U.S. was attacked by terrorists on September 11, 2001 . The U.N. has a long history of anti-gay marriage .
 The attacks mobilized support for the U.S. by a very broad coalition of states, says CNN's John Sutter .
 President Bush declared a “war on terrorism” that lasted for years and spanned continents . The war employed both conventional and unconventional means, including conventional . methods .
 The great power divisions reappeared as the U.S. and Britain tried to assemble a coalition to oust Iraq’s Saddam Hussein by force in early 2003 .
 France and Germany bitterly opposed the war, as did millions of protesters around the world . Millions of protesters across the world protested against the war in the 1930s .
 The dispute disrupted the Atlantic alliance for several years . It weakened the UN’s role as the U.S.-led coalition went forward despite its failure to win Security Council authorization for war .
 A United States military force of 250,000 troops with advanced technology overpowered the Iraqi army in three weeks . A U.S. military force with advanced tech overpowered the Iraq army in just three weeks.
 Many Iraqis welcomed the end of a dictatorial regime, as had most Afghans in late 2001 . But the war in Afghanistan was still raging in Afghanistan's early years .
 Insurgent forces in Iraq gained strength as the U.S. occupation stretched on for years . Within several years United States public opinion had turned against protracted war .
 After a U.S. troop surge in 2007 and the arming of Sunni communities, violence in Iraq fell . After a United States troop surge, Sunni communities fed up with foreign Islamist radicals, violence fell .
 Estimates of Iraqi deaths caused by the war range from tens of thousands to more than 600,000 . Iraqi deaths from the war are estimated to be tens to thousands .
 Elections in 2010 were relatively peaceful, but left the country divided along ethnic lines . Elections in 2011 were relatively quiet, but the country was divided on ethnic lines. Election in 2010 was peaceful .
 In Afghanistan, fighting worsened beginning in 2007 as the Taliban ran an insurgency campaign from bases in Pakistan . In 2007, fighting began in Afghanistan, but worsened in 2007 when the Taliban took control of Afghanistan .
 Disputed elections, corruption, and “insider’s attacks by Afghan security forces on NATO troops all made the foreigners’ jobs difficult . NATO troops were attacked by Afghan forces in Afghanistan in 2009 .
 NATO sent in tens of thousands of additional troops in 2009, but then began a withdrawal set to conclude in 2014 . NATO's withdrawal of troops is set to end in 2014, with a withdrawal expected to last until 2014 .
 One goal of the Afghan intervention was to kill Osama bin Laden in 2011 . The U.S. special forces killed the terrorist in Pakistan .
 U.S. drone attacks on other militants inside Pakistan and elsewhere weakened al Qaeda but raised thorny legal and political issues . United States drone attacks have raised thorn-legal and political questions about al Qaeda .
 Meanwhile, nuclear weapons programs in North Korea and Iran raised alarms . Meanwhile, Iran has also raised alarms over its nuclear weapons program .
 North Korea produced possibly a half-dozen nuclear bombs and tested three in 2006, 2009, and 2013 . North Korea has tested three nuclear bombs in the past three years .
 In 2012, North Korea successfully tested an advanced long-range missile in defiance of a UN Security Council ban . In 2012 it successfully tested a missile that was banned by the UN . North Korea tested the missile despite a UN ban on it .
 Starting in 2004, Iran made and broke several agreements to suspend the enrichment of uranium that could be used to build nuclear weapons . Iran has been accused of violating those agreements since the 1980s .
 UN Security Council passed a series of sanctions against Iran in response to its enrichment program . Iran has been accused of enriching Iran's nuclear facilities . The UN has passed sanctions against the country .
 In 2010, centrifuges key to its enrichment program began mysteriously destroying themselves . Investigation pinned the problem on the sophisticated Stuxnet computer virus, a creation of Israeli and American defense scientists .
 Arab Spring uprisings in 2011-2012 began with nonviolent protests in Tunisia and Egypt . The Arab Spring ended with the overthrow of dictators and the holding of free elections .
 Egypt elects a leader of the long-banned Muslim Brotherhood as president . Egypt has banned the Muslim Brotherhood . The Muslim Brotherhood has been banned for decades .
 In Libya and Syria, violent repression against protesters sparked violent uprisings, leading to the bloody overthrow of Libya’s dictator with NATO air support . The international community has been unable to respond effectively to the protests in both countries .
 Yemen had its own revolution—a mix of peaceful protest, violent repression, ethnic conflict, and political compromise leading to a transitional government . Yemen's revolution was a mix of protest, violence, and ethnic conflict leading to political compromise .
 Burma's military regime finally made a concerted move toward democracy . And far away in Burma (Myanmar), a longstanding military regime has finally moved to democracy .
 Latin America and Russia have nearly extinguished wars in their regions, joining a zone of peace already encompassing North America, Europe, Japan/Pacific, and China . Old wars have ended faster than new ones have begun .
 Warfare is diminishing even in the arc of conflict from Africa through the Middle East to South Asia . Warfare in the region has also been diminishing in recent years .
 Since 1990, long, bloody wars have ended in South Africa, Mozambique, Angola, southern Sudan, and Ethiopia-Eritrea . The various conflicts in Central America and the civil war in Sri Lanka have also ended .
 General David Patraeus and the American Military Adventure in Iraq in Iraq, 2006-2008. General David Petraeus and the U.S. Army in Iraq: Iraq War, Iraq War .
 After the Cold War, world order did not spiral out of control with rampant aggression and war . World order not spiraled into war after Cold War. World order does not spiral into war, says CNN.com .
 The Israeli-Palestinian conflict saw rising expectations of peace in the 1990s . However, a proposed peace deal fell through in 2000 . A proposed deal with the Palestinians fell through after talks broke out in 1998 .
 With the 2006 Palestinian election victory of the militant Islamist party Hamas, hopes for a durable peace faded . Hamas is responsible for many violent attacks on Israel, including many attacks on it .
 In 2006, Israel fought a brief but intense war with Hezbollah guerrillas in southern Lebanon, while violent clashes between Israel and Hamas continued from 2009 to 2012 .
 Israel deployed a new “Iron Dome’s” missile defense system against Hamas missiles in a 2012 clash . Israel deployed the system in response to the 2012 clash in Gaza .
 In international economic relations, the post-Cold War era is one of globalization . In international relations, globalization is a key part of post-cold war relations .
 New hubs of economic growth are emerging, notably in parts of Asia with remarkable economic growth . Asia is one of the world's most important economies .
 Globalization has created backlashes among people who believe their identities are threatened by foreign influences . Globalization is creating backlash among those who believe they are adversely affected by foreign influence .
 The resurgence of nationalism and ethnic-religious conflict results partly from that backlash . The resurgence is partly due to the backlash against nationalism and religious nationalism .
 Protests against capitalist-led globalization take place in the U.S. So does the significant protest movement against global capitalism .
 With increasing globalization, transnational concerns such as environmental degradation and disease have become more prominent as well . Transnational concerns include environmental degradation, disease and environmental degradation .
 Global warming looms as a more present danger, underscored in 2005 by the toll of Hurricane Katrina on New Orleans and the accelerating melting of arctic ice . The threat of global warming was underscored by the death toll of New Orleans Hurricane Katrina .
 In 2008-2009, a virulent swine flu spread worldwide, triggering efforts to control the virus through quarantines and a new vaccine . The virus was a major threat to the United States .
 Major oil spills in the Gulf of Mexico and China in 2010 refocused international attention on the issue of pollution and the environment . Oil spills refocused attention in the context of the global race for natural resources .
 China becoming more central to world politics as the 21st century begins . China is becoming more important to the world as a key player in politics .
 Some scholars liken China's rise to Germany’s rise a century earlier . China's size and rapid growth make China a rising power .
 Historically, such shifts in power relations have caused instability in the international system . Historically, this has caused instability around the world, especially in Africa .
 Its poor record on human rights makes it a frequent target of Western criticism from both governments and NGOs . The country's human rights record has been criticized by both governments .
 China holds veto power in the UN Security Council, and it has a credible nuclear arsenal . China also has veto power over Syria, but it has nuclear weapons .
 China adjoins several regional conflict areas and affects the global proliferation of missiles and nuclear weapons . China is one of the world's most populous countries and has a key role in regional conflicts .
 Peaceful trends mark the post-Cold War era, though war and terrorism continue . It claims disputed territory in the resource-rich South China Sea and disputes ownership of islands with Japan in the East . Peaceful trend marks the end of the Cold War era .
 Arab Spring popular uprisings in 2011-2013 brought the world's latest wave of democracy to the Middle East . The Arab Spring was the Middle Eastern country's biggest uprising in history .
 They overthrew governments in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and Yemen; sparked civil war in Syria . They reshaped the region's international dynamics, reshaping international dynamics .
 Supporters of newly elected Islamist president Mohammed Morsi celebrate in Tahrir Square in 2012 . Supporters of the newly elected Egyptian president celebrate in the heart of Egypt .
 China is a big factor in the future of global environmental trends such as global warming . Its population size and rapid industrialization from a low starting point make China a big player in global warming trends .
 All these elements make China an important actor in the coming decades . China will be an important player in the world's economic and political transition, says President Xi Jinping .
 It remains to be seen whether, in the coming years, the international system can provide China with appropriate status and respect to reflect its rising power . China in turn can come to conform with international rules and norms .
 The Chinese leadership will decide whether to encourage or discourage the rising tide of nationalism among China’s young people as communist ideology loses its hold . So will the Chinese leadership decide whether or not to encourage the rise of nationalism?
 The transition into the post-Cold War era has been a turbulent time, full of changes and new possibilities both good and bad . The transition to the Cold War era is full of new possibilities, good and good, good .
 It is likely that the basic rules and principles of IR will continue to apply, though their contexts and outcomes may change . IR is an attempt to understand the nature of IR, but it has been difficult to do so .
 Most central to those rules and principles is the concept of power, to which we now turn . Most of those rules are based on the power of the state .
 The process may be weakening, strengthening, or transforming the power of states . It may also be weakening or transforming, or changing, states' power .
 Antiglobalization activists oppose growing corporate power but disagree on goals and tactics . They disagree on what they want to achieve in the world of globalization .
 The bipolar standoff created stability and avoided great power wars, including nuclear war, but turned states in the global South into proxy battlegrounds . This bipolar standoff has created stability .
 The United States military campaign in Iraq overthrew a dictator, but divided the great powers, heightened anti-Americanism worldwide . The campaign led to years of insurgency and sectarian violence in Iraq . The U.S. military campaign overthrew the dictator but led to a surge in anti-
 In 2011, Special Forces killed Osama bin Laden in Pakistan, where drone attacks targeted other militants . U.S. Special forces killed bin Laden .
 Pick a current area in which interesting international events are taking place . Pick one of the most interesting places in the world to watch events taking place in the region .
 The idea of the state as a key organizing principle dates back hundreds of years . The state is a key organizer principle in the world's history .
 Political philosophers such as Thomas Hobbes saw governments as providing individuals protection from the state of nature and from other groups of individuals . Hobbes: Life without the state was ""nasty, brutish, and short"
 As Europeans spread throughout the world in efforts to colonize and settle new lands, they brought the idea of a nation-state with them . Yet, as Europeans spread around the world, the idea was still a problem .
 World was organized as a set of states interacting on the world stage . In a relatively short period of time, the world was organized .
 States became the central actors providing services to individuals, while coming into conflict or cooperating with one another . States are now the central players providing services for individuals .
 In the era of globalization, the power of the state is being challenged . Yet in the age of globalization it's being challenged, he says . He says the state's role in power is under attack in the world .
 Technology, nonstate actors, fluid state borders are eroding state's ability to control what goes on within and across its borders . The rise of technology and non-state actors is eroding the state's control of its borders, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Nonstate actors are now as important as the state . State power is on the decline, says Julian Zelizer . State is now more important than state power, he says .
 Nonstate actors play an increasingly important part in world politics . Whether they are nongovernmental organizations or multinational corporations, nonstate actors are increasingly important . Nonstate organizations play increasingly important role in politics .
 NGOs pressure governments to change human rights practices . MNCs compel states to adapt laws to suit their businesses . Terrorist groups undermine state security, according to the UN .
 These challenges to state power have grown in the past decade and will continue to grow as globalization allows citizens more access to one another . These challenges have grown, says CNN's John Sutter .
 MNCs and private investors control more resources and capital than many nation-states . Except for the economically largest states such as the United States and Japan, the U.S. and Japan control most of the world’s resources .
 States are but one category of player in the global economic game . Add to this list the powerful IGOs such as the World Bank, the World Trade Organization and the International Monetary Fund .
 While nationalism was a powerful force supporting the state in the past, other ideas have emerged to challenge it . While nationalism has been powerful force behind the state, it has been replaced by ideas that challenge it.
 Religion has replaced allegiance to the state for some for some, and strong ethnic ties also challenge loyalty . Strong ethnic ties have also challenged loyalty to state .
 If more individuals' loyalty is to something besides their nation-state, state power will decline . State power will continue to decline if more individuals are loyal to something else than their nation .
 States have always been challenged, but they have always persevered . States are down, but not out of the woods, and they have never been out .
 The state has emerged as the central power in international relations . Whether the threat was from nonstate actors or NGOs, it has emerged that the state is central to international relations.
 States still perform functions that cannot be handed off to other actors . States are still performing functions that can't be handed over to others .
 Despite the rise of nonstate actors, certain functions will always fall to states, such as collecting taxes, making laws and protecting citizens from external threats .
 States will always need help to perform these duties, but no other entity can perform them outright . States need help from the federal government, but it's not enough to perform it .
 Nationalism will remain a powerful ideological force for the foreseeable future . Nationalism is an ideological force in the U.S. and will continue to be strong in the future .
 Separatist groups still try to achieve their independence as a state . Witness the number of separatist groups still trying to achieve an independence as state .
 Europe was a series of citystates, then slightly larger kingdoms, then larger principalities, then nation-states, and now a larger union . Centuries ago, Europe's citystates were citystates and kingdoms .
 This approach, called realism, is favored by some IR scholars and vigorously contested by others, but almost all take it into account . This approach is called realism and contested by some scholars .
 Realism is a school of thought that explains international relations in terms of power . Realism means that international relations is defined by power . The school of thinking is based on the power of nations in power .
 The exercise of power by states toward each other is sometimes called realpolitik, or just power politics . Realpolitik is a form of power politics in the United States, or power politics.
 Idealism emphasizes international law, morality, and international organizations, rather than power alone, as key influences on international events . Idealism is a philosophy of international law and morality, not power .
 Idealists were particularly active between World War I and World War II . Woodrow Wilson and others placed their hopes for peace in the League of Nations as a formal structure for the community of nations .
 The structure proved helpless to stop German, Italian, and Japanese aggression in the 1930s . Those hopes were dashed when that structure failed .
 Realists have blamed idealists for looking too much at how the world ought to be instead of how it really is . Since World War II, realists blamed idealism for looking at the world instead of the world .
 Realists set out to understand the principles of power politics without succumbing to wishful thinking . Realists were inspired by the experiences of World War II .
 Realism provided a theoretical foundation for the Cold War policy of containment . U.S. policy makers not to appease the Soviet Union and China as the West had appeased Hitler at Munich in 1938 .
 Sun Tzu argued that moral reasoning was not very useful to the state rulers of the day . The ruler was faced with armed and dangerous neighbors, faced with an armed enemy .
 Thucydides wrote an account of the Peloponnesian War focusing on relative power among the Greek city-states . He showed rulers how to use power to advance their interests .
 Niccold Machiavelli urged princes to concentrate on expedient actions to stay in power, including the manipulation of the public and military alliances . Much later, in Renaissance Italy, he urged Princes to focus on the best interests of the people .
 Today the adjective Machiavellian refers to excessively manipulative power maneuvers . Today the word Machiavian is used to refer to excessively manipulating power moves . Machavellian is a term used to describe a person who is manipulative and manipulative .
 The Prisoner's Dilemma Study and Review the Pre-Test & Flashcards at MyPoliSciLab . The International System, 1500-2000 Alliances, NATO and other Alliances .
 Hobbes favored a strong monarchy (which he labeled a Leviathan ) to tame this condition . Hobbes advocated a dominance approach to solve the collective goods problem in domestic societies .
 Realists see in these historical figures evidence that the importance of power politics is timeless and cross-cultural . Realists believe that power politics can be traced back to pre-colonial times .
 He reasoned that no nation had ‘God on its side’ and that all nations had to base their actions on prudence and practicality . The Bible was written in the Bible, and the Bible was translated into the Bible .
 He opposed the Vietnam War, arguing in 1965 that a communist Vietnam would not harm U.S. national interests . The Vietnam War ended in 1965, and he opposed it .
 IR scholars’ ad targets neoconservatives, who advocated more energetic use of U.S. power, especially military force, to accomplish ambitious and moralistic goals such as democratizing the Middle East . IR scholars' ad was the group of foreign policy makers in the Bush administration known as
 The foundation of realism’s foundation is the principle of dominance . Alternatives based on reciprocity and identity will be reviewed in Chapter 3 .
 Realists tend to treat political power as separate from morality, ideology, and other social and economic aspects of life . Realists treat politics as separate and predominant over morality and ideology .
 Theories of IR Individual Domestic Levels of AnalysisInterstate Realism Neorealism Global Liberal Theories Democratic Liberal Institutionalism Peace CjOCAW-"" thE 0WES_.
 Realists see states with very different religions, ideologies, or economic systems as quite similar in their actions with regard to national power . Realists say states with different religions and ideologies are quite similar to each other .
 Power is a central concept in international relations, but it is surprisingly difficult to define or measure . Power Power is the central concept for realists, but is surprisingly hard to define .
 A variation on this idea is that actors are powerful to the extent that they affect others more than others affect them . A variation of this is to say that actors affect people more often than others do .
 One problem with this definition is that we seldom know what a second actor would have done in the absence of the first actor’s power . One problem is that it is not known what second actor might have done without first actor's power .
 Power is not influence itself, however, but the ability or potential to influence others . "Power is not power itself, but it is the ability to influence other people," the author says .
 IR scholars believe that such potential is based on specific characteristics or possessions of states, such as their sizes, levels of income, and armed forces . IR scholars say such potential could be based on characteristics of states such as size and income .
 Capabilities are easier to measure than influence and are less circular in logic . Capabilities can be measured, rather than influence, in a way that is more circular .
 Measuring capabilities to explain how one state influences another is not simple, however, however . "Measuring capabilities is not easy, however," says CNN.com .
 States possess varying amounts of population, territory, military forces, and so forth . States possess different amounts of territory, population, and military forces . States have varying populations, territories, and forces .
 Morgenthau, Hans J. and Kenneth W. Thompson. The best single indicator of a 6.6.6 . Thompson. A 6.5-6 .
 Even GDP is at best a rough indicator, and economists do not even agree how to measure it . But even GDP is a rough indication, economists don't even know how to use it .
 GDP is a useful estimator of material capabilities but not a precise one . GDP is used to estimate material capabilities, but not precise ones . GDP can be a useful estimate of material capability, but it's not always a precise measure .
 Capabilities give a state the potential to influence others only to the extent of political leaders can mobilize and deploy these capabilities effectively and strategically . Political leaders must use these capabilities to mobilize and use them effectively, strategically, to influence other nations .
 This depends on national will, diplomatic skill, popular support for the government (its legitimacy), and so forth. This depends upon national will and diplomatic skill . The government's legitimacy is its legitimacy, and so is national will .
 Some scholars emphasize the power of ideas —the ability to maximize the influence of capabilities through a psychological process . Some scholars say ideas can be used to maximize capabilities through psychological processes .
 This process includes the domestic mobilization of capabilities, often through ideology, or nationalism . This is often through reli1 gion, ideology or nationalism, and often through nationalism .
 International influence is also gained by forming the rules of behavior to change how others see their own national interests . International influence can also be gained by forming the rules to change the way others see themselves .
 If a state’s own values become widely shared among other states, it will easily influence others . The values of a state can be shared widely among others, it can easily influence other states .
 The United States has influenced many other states to accept the value of free markets and free trade . For example, the U.S. has influenced others to accept free markets, free trade.
 Realists emphasize dominance approaches, they acknowledge that Power is the ability to influence the behavior of others . Realists say Power is a person who can influence others' behavior .
 Military force and economic sanctions are among the various means that states and nonstate actors use to try to influence each other .
 Russia's position as a major energy supplier to Europe has increased its power in recent years . Russia's military threat to Europe in the past has decreased, but its military threat has decreased .
 The shutoff, visible here in a pressure gauge reading zero, left customers across Europe without heat . Customers across Europe were left without heat after the shutoff .
 Ukrainians elected a new president more friendly toward Russia in 2010 . In 2010, Ukraine's new president was more friendly to Russia .
 Even realists recognize that power provides only a general understanding of outcomes . Furthermore, even realists realize that power can only be used to predict outcomes .
 Real-world outcomes depend on many other elements, including accidents or luck, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Real-life outcomes depend upon other elements such as luck .
 A state can have power only relative to other states’ power . Because power is a relational concept, a state can only have power relative to others' power . The U.S. Supreme Court is considering a new state of power .
 Relative power is the ratio of the power that two states can bring to bear against each other . Relative power means the power two states have can bring together to fight each other, relative power is relative power . Relative Power is the relative power of two states to bring together relative power against each
 It matters little to realists whether a state’s capabilities are rising or declining in absolute terms, only whether they are falling behind or overtaking the capabilities of rival states . Realists are concerned about whether their capabilities are growing or falling behind rivals .
 The logic of power suggests that in wars, the more powerful state will generally prevail . Estimating power is difficult to do, but the logic suggests that the most powerful will prevail .
 Estimates of the relative power of the two antagonists should help explain outcomes . Thus, estimates of their relative power should explain outcomes.
 These estimates could take into account the nations’ relative military capabilities and popular support for each one’s government, among other factors .
 Most important is the size of each nation’s economy, the GDP, which reflects both population size and income per person . GDP is the total GDP of each country's GDP . GDP reflects the population and income levels of each individual country .
 With a healthy enough economy, a state can buy a large army, popular support, and even allies . With a large enough economy it can buy an army and popular support . State can buy large armies, allies, and allies .
 Libyan revolutionaries fighting against dictator Muammar Gaddafi in 2011 had passion and determination but could not defeat the government with its heavy weaponry . For example, the Libyan revolutionaries in 2011 were passionate and determined, but were not able to defeat Gaddafi .
 The U.S. and NATO allies began an air campaign that decisively turned the tide in Syria . Then, with the government poised to crush the rebels with tanks, the government began a bombing campaign .
 In GDP, NATO held an advantage of about 300:1, and NATO forces were much more capable technologically . NATO forces are much more able technologically, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In the end, Gaddafi lay dead, his supporters routed, and NATO had not suffered a single casualty . Gaddafi's supporters were routed, but NATO was not casualties .
 Despite the decisive outcome of this lopsided conflict, the exercise of power always carries risks of unintended consequences . Despite the outcome of the conflict, this is not the end result of the war, says President Obama .
 In 2012, an armed Islamic faction that Gaddafi had previously kept in check attacked a U.S. consulate in Libya . The United States ambassador was killed in the attack .
 Ethnic fighters and Islamic militants who had fought for Gaddafi crossed the desert to northern Mali, where they seized control of half the country . Other ethnic fighters took large quantities of weapons from Gaddafi's forces .
 In early 2013, France had to intervene militarily in Mali to stop them, and the Islamist militants crossed into Algeria . They seized hundreds of foreign hostages at a gas facility in Algeria, where they killed dozens of them .
 A big GDP may help a country win a war, but does not eliminate the elements of complexity and luck as situations evolve over the longer term . Thus, a big GDP can help a nation win an election, but doesn't eliminate the element of complexity, luck .
 Elements that an actor can draw on over the long term include total GDP, population, territory, geography, and natural resources . Elements that can be drawn on are total GDP and population, population .
 Less tangible long-term power resources include political culture, patriotism, education, education of the population, and strength of the scientific and technological base .
 The credibility of its commitments (reputation for keeping its word) is also a long-term power base for a state . State's credibility is important to its reputation, and its credibility is also important for the state .
 The importance of long-term power resources was illustrated after the Japanese surprise attack on the United States fleet at Pearl Harbor in 1941 . In the short term, Japan had superior military power and was able to occupy territories in Southeast Asia .
 In the longer term, the U.S. had greater power resources due to its underlying economic potential . The United States had greater economic potential due to the strength of its economic potential, experts say .
 It built up military capabilities over the next few years . It gradually matched and then overwhelmed those of Japan . Japan's military capabilities gradually matched that of Japan's .
 Other capabilities allow actors to exercise influence in the short term . The U.S. government says it has more than 1,000 troops in the world's most populous state .
 The size, composition, and preparedness of two states’ military forces matter more in a short-term military confrontation than their respective economies or natural resources . The size and composition of two state’s military forces are more important than their economies or resources .
 Another capability is the military-industrial capacity to quickly produce weapons . The U.S. has the ability to quickly make weapons, experts say .
 The quality of a state’s bureaucracy is another type of capability, allowing the state to gather information, regulate international trade, or participate in international conferences . Quality of state's bureaucracy is a key part of the state's ability to gather international trade .
 The support and legitimacy that an actor commands in the short term from constituents and allies are capabilities that the actor can use to gain influence . Less tangibly, an actor can also gain influence from constituents or allies .
 Given the limited resources that any actor commands, trade-offs among possible capabilities always exist . Trade-offs always exist among the resources available for the best .
 Building up military forces diverts resources that might be put into foreign aid, such as foreign aid . Building up a military force could be a waste of resources, experts say .
 Or buying a population’s loyalty with consumer goods reduces resources available for building up military capabilities . Buying a population's loyalty with consumers reduces resources . Or buying population loyalty will reduce resources .
 Money is the most fungible capability because it can buy other capabilities . Money is often the most valuable asset that can be used to buy other things .
 Realists tend to see military force as the most important element of national power in the short term . Other elements such as economic strength, diplomatic skill, or moral legitimacy as being important to the extent that they are fungible into military power .
 Military power may be only one of many elements of power, depending on the nature of the conflict in question . Military power can be used in many of the most violent conflicts in history .
 Robert Gates called for a “dramatic increase” in spending on diplomacy and economic aid . Gates: Despite very high military spending, these “other elements of national power” have lagged behind in an era of asymmetric warfare .
 Secretary Gates went on to point out that the U.S. has more members of military marching bands than foreign service officers . Gates said that the United States has more than any foreign service officer .
 In 2009, the top U.S. military officer added that armed forces may not always be the best choice’s to achieve foreign policy goals . The top United States military officer said in 2009 that the armed forces are not always best choice .
 The large United States economy supports United States military predominance . The large U.S. economy supports the United States' military dominance .
 In 2003, the U.S. could afford to send a large and technologically advanced military force to the Middle East . In the 2003 United States invasion of Iraq, the United States could afford a large military force .
 Morality can contribute to power by increasing the will to use power and by attracting allies . The International System 49 aid has increased dramatically since the attacks of 9/11 .
 If a state uses moralistic rhetoric to cloak self-interest too often, it loses credibility . Of course, if a state loses credibility even with its own population, it will lose credibility . The U.S. State of the State of China is one of the world's most powerful
 In geopolitics, as in real estate, the three most important considerations are location . Location, location, location is the most important factor in geopolitics .
 States increase their power to the extent they can use geography to enhance their military capabilities, such as securing allies and bases close to a rival power or along strategic trade routes . States also control key natural resources such as natural resources and allies .
 Control of oil pipeline routes, especially in Central Asia, is a major geopolitical issue . Control of pipeline routes is a key geopolitical issue in the region .
 The melting of the continental ice shelf has opened new shipping routes for military purposes, creating new a geopolitical issue for Russia and the U.S. Military strategists have also pointed out that the melting of continental ice shelves has opened .
 States interact within a set of long-established “rules of the game” governing what is considered a state and how states treat each other . The International System of States is known as the International System . States interact with each other within the international system .
 Realists believe that the international system exists in a state of anarchy . In domestic society, governments can enforce contracts, deter citizens from breaking rules, and use their monopoly on legally sanctioned violence to enforce a system of law .
 Both democracies and dictatorships provide central government enforcement of a system of rules . Both dictatorships and democracies and democracies have central government .
 Realists contend that no such central authority exists to enforce rules and ensure compliance with norms of conduct . Realists say there is no central authority in the world to enforce norms and standards .
 States must rely on self-help, which they supplement with allies and the constraining power of international norms . States must also rely on allies, allies and international norms, which are constraining themselves, they say .
 In this anarchic world, realists emphasize prudence as a great virtue in foreign policy . Realists say prudence is a virtue for foreign policy in an increasingly unpredictable world . The U.S. should be careful of its foreign policy, the author says .
 States should pay attention not to the intentions of other states, but rather to their capabilities . Thus states should be careful not to pay attention to other states' intentions, but to their capability, the author says .
 The great majority of state interactions closely adhere to norms of behavior, such as what is considered proper . State interactions closely resemble norms, shared expectations about what behavior is considered normal .
 Norms change over time, slowly, but the most basic norms of the international system have changed little in recent centuries . Norms of the world's international system change slowly, with little change in recent decades .
 Government has the right, in principle, to do whatever it wants in its own territory . Sovereignty is the most important norm in the world, but sovereignty is not the norm .
 sovereignty means states are not supposed to interfere in the internal affairs of other states . Sovereignty also means that states should not interfere in other states' internal affairs .
 Although states do try to influence each other on matters of trade, alliances, war, and so on, they are not supposed to meddle in internal politics and decision processes of other states .
 Some states claim that sovereignty gives them the right to treat their own people in any fashion, including behavior that other states call genocide . More controversially, some states claim they are entitled to treat themselves as a nation .
 The lack of a “world police” to punish states if they break an agreement makes enforcement of international agreements difficult, says the U.N. agency .
 The international community used a mix of positive incentives and threats to persuade North Korea to stop producing nuclear material . North Korea has produced nuclear material in the past .
 In practice, most states have a harder and harder time warding off interference in their affairs . The U.S. has been hit by interference in its own affairs .
 Such “internal” matters as human rights or self-determination are, increasingly, concerns for the international community . Such ‘internal’ matters are increasingly, increasingly important for the world, writes Peter Bergen .
 International organizations monitor ethnic conflicts for genocide . For example, election monitors increasingly watch internal elections for fraud .
 Integration of global economic markets and telecommunications makes it easier than ever for ideas to penetrate state borders . Also, the integration of global . economic markets . and telecommunications make it easier . than ever to think about ideas for state borders, experts say .
 Many of today’s borders are the result of past wars or were imposed arbitrarily by colonizers . The borders were imposed by colonialists or by warring nations . Many of the world's borders are still visible today .
 The territorial nature of the interstate system developed long ago when agrarian societies relied on agriculture to generate wealth . The International System 51 PASSPORT PLEASE t t .
 In today’s world, in which trade and technology rather than land create wealth, the territorial state may be less important . The territorial state is less important in today's world than land .
 Information-based economies are linked across borders instantly, and the idea that the state has a hard shell seems archaic . The idea that state has to be hard shells seems archaic, but it's not archaic .
 The accelerating revolution in information technologies may dramatically affect the territorial state system in the coming years . Information technology may dramatically change the territorial system .
 States have developed norms of diplomacy to facilitate their interactions with each other . States have also developed norms to facilitate diplomatic relations .
 Ecuador’s embassy in Britain harbored the founder of Wikileaks, who had been ordered extradited to Sweden, in 2012-2013 . British authorities did not simply come in and take him away from the Ecuadorian embassy .
 China did not make an issue of it (the plane had not gone into service) and a U.S.-China summit the next month went forward .
 In the post-Cold War era, spying continues, even between friendly states . In post-cold war era, even friendly states spy continue .
 Realists acknowledge that the rules of IR often create a security dilemma . States’ actions taken to ensure their own security (such as deploying more military forces) threaten the security of other states .
 The responses of those other states, such as deploying more of their own military forces, in turn threaten the first state . The response of those responses is also threatened by other states such as Russia .
 The dilemma is a prime cause of arms races in which states spend large sums of money on mutually threatening weapons that do not ultimately provide security . Arms races are often linked to each other's failure to provide security, experts say .
 The security dilemma is a negative consequence of anarchy in the international system . The security dilemmas are a result of an anarchy in international system, he says . He says .
 If a world government could detect and punish aggressors who arm the world, it would be easier to do so . Sovereignty and territorial integrity are central norms governing the behavior of states . The world government would be able to detect aggressors and punish them .
 Terrorism and secessionist movements present two challenges to these norms . The world's mostly stable borders uphold these norms, but the world is mostly stable .
 Millions of people cross international borders every day, mostly legally and peacefully, respecting states' territorial integrity . Every day, millions of people across international borders, mostly legal and peacefully .
 Tightrope walker Nik Wallenda crosses the U.S. and Canadian border at Niagara Falls, 2012 . Wallenda crossed the border in 2012 .
 IR scholars find states practically obsolete as the main actors in world politics . Some IR scholars say states are obsolete as some integrate into larger entities and others fragment into smaller units .
 One of its most enduring features is the balance of power . Other scholars find the international system quite enduring in its structure and state units .
 Most reliable brake on power of one state is the power of other states . Balance of Power in the anarchy of the international system is the most reliable brake . The balance of power can be found in the world's anarchy .
 The term balance of power refers to the general concept of one or more states’ power being used to balance that of another state or group of states . Balance of power is a state’s power to balance its power against that of a group of other states .
 Balance of power can refer to any ratio of power capabilities between states or alliances, or it can mean only a relatively equal ratio . It can be used to refer to power capabilities of a state or alliance, or only to relatively equal power .
 Balance of power can refer to the process by which counterbalancing coalitions have repeatedly formed in history to prevent one state from conquering an entire region . Alternatively, balance of power may refer to a balance in order to prevent a single state from taking control of a region .
 The theory of balance of power argues that such counterbalancing occurs regularly and maintains the stability of the international system . The theory is based on the theory of balancing power in the world .
 This stability does not, however, imply peace; it is rather a stability maintained by means of recurring wars that adjust power relations . This stability is not necessarily peace, but it is maintained by recurring wars, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Building up one’s own capabilities against a rival is a form of power balancing . Forming an alliance against a threatening state is often quicker, cheaper, and more effective .
 In the Cold War, the U.S. encircled the Soviet Union with military and political alliances to prevent Soviet territorial expansion . In the 1980s and '90s, the United States tried to keep Russia from expanding its borders .
 Sometimes a state deliberately becomes a balancer, shifting its support to oppose whatever state or alliance is strongest at the moment . Sometimes a particular state deliberately shifts its support .
 Britain played role on European continent for centuries, and China played it in the Cold War . Britain played this role on Europe for centuries and China did it in Cold War. Britain played it on the European continent .
 Sometimes smaller states “jump on the bandwagon” of the most powerful state . This has been called bandwagoning as opposed to balancing . This is a form of bandwagoning, not balancing .
 After World War II, a broad coalition did not form to contain U.S. power; rather, most major states joined the United States bloc .
 States may seek to balance threats rather than raw power . Small states create variations on power-balancing themes when they play off rival great powers . United States power was greater than Soviet power but less threatening to Europe and Japan .
 Cuba during the Cold War received massive Soviet subsidies by putting itself in the middle of the U.S.-Soviet rivalry . For instance, Cuba received massive subsidies by . putting itself . in the midst of the . Cold War rivalry .
 Balance-of-power theory would predict closer relations among Russia, China, and even Europe to balance U.S. power . Other small states may, 'l 'Z for domestic reasons, fail to mobilize to balance against threats/ In the post-Cold War era of United States
 Russian-Chinese relations improved dramatically in such areas as arms trade and demilitarization of the border . And indeed, Russia-China relations improved significantly in recent years .
 More countries are balancing against China and fewer against the United States . The United States is stretched thin in Afghanistan and Iraq, its economy also weak . China is on the rise, but the U.S. is on its own .
 In 2012-2013, Japan struck military agreements with former enemies South Korea and the Philippines . In response to China’s growing power, Japan reaffirmed its U.S. ties .
 In 2003, as the Iraq war began, widespread anti-American sentiment revealed itself in Muslim countries . Anti-U.S. sentiment was widespread in many Muslim countries during the war .
 In Indonesia, Pakistan, Turkey, and Nigeria, more than 70 percent worried that the United States could become a threat to their own countries . 71 percent of Russians worry that the U.S. could be a threat, a worry shared by 71 percent in Russia .
 A survey of 38,000 people in 44 nations showed a dramatic drop in support for the U.S. from 2002 to 2003 . The survey was conducted in the United States in 2004 .
 After 2008, opinions turned upward after the U.S. sought to exit its wars and exert its power less forcefully around the world . Then after 2008, with the United States seeking to exit wars, opinion turned upward .
 These shifts in public opinion make the governments in those countries more or less likely to cooperate with the U.S. on the world stage . The shifts in opinion make those countries' governments more or more likely to oppose the United States .
 The most powerful states in the world exert most of the influence on international events . Great Powers and Middle Powers exert the most influence in international events and therefore get the most attention .
 By almost any measure of power, a handful of states possess the majority of the world’s power resources . The U.S. is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 At most a few dozen states have any real influence beyond their immediate locality . At most of those states have no real power beyond their local areas .
 These are called the great powers and middle powers in the international system . The great powers are the middle powers and great powers in international system.
 Great powers are generally considered the half-dozen or so most powerful states . Although there is no firm dividing line, great powers are considered the most powerful state .
 Great powers' status is formally recognized in an international structure such as the 19th-century Concert of Europe or today’s UN Security Council . Sometimes great powers’ status is formal recognized in international structures such as today's UN Security council .
 In general, great powers are defined as states that can be defeated militarily only by another great power . Great powers are often defined as nations that can only be defeated by a major power .
 Great powers tend to share a global outlook based on national interests far from their home territories . Great powers also tend to have global interests based on their national interests .
 The great powers generally have the world’s strongest military forces, and the strongest economies to pay for them . Great powers have the strongest economic and military capabilities, and other power capabilities .
 Large economies rest on some combination of large populations, plentiful natural resources, advanced technology, and educated labor forces . These large economies in turn rest on large populations . Large economies are also key to their success .
 Power is based on the underlying resources of the nation's great power system . "The power system changes slowly. Because power is based upon these underlying resources, membership in it changes slowly," he says .
 Only rarely does a great power—even one defeated in a massive war—lose its status as a great country, because its size and long-term economic potential change slowly . The U.S. is losing its status in the world because of its size, economic potential and size
 Germany and Japan decimated in World War II are powerful today, and Russia, after gaining and then losing the rest of the Soviet Union, still considered a great power .
 The five permanent members of the UN Security Council are also members of a "club" with large nuclear weapons arsenals . They include the five who are also in the ‘club’ of the “club” openly possessing large nuclear arsenals.
 The United States is considered the world’s only superpower because of its historical role of world leadership (especially in and after World War II) and its predominant military might . The U.S. is considered to be the only superpower in the world .
 China has the world’s largest population, rapid economic growth (8-10 percent annually over 30 years) and a large and modernizing military, including a credible nuclear arsenal . China also has a large military, with a large, modernized military, as well as a credible
 Both countries have large and capable military forces, which they have begun to deploy abroad, especially in peacekeeping operations . The U.S. and France have large military forces that they have deployed abroad .
 Russia, France, and Britain were winners in World War II and have active military powers since then . Russia and France have been active military forces since then.
 Although much reduced in stature from their colonial heydays, they still qualify as great powers . The British Empire is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 Middle powers rank somewhat below the great powers in terms of their influence on world affairs . Middle powers have little influence on the world's most powerful powers .
 Some are large but not highly industrialized; others have specialized capabilities but are small . Others are small but highly industrialized, some are small; others are specialized capabilities .
 Some aspire to regional dominance, and many have considerable influence in their regions . Some of the world's most powerful nations are African-Americans .
 A list of middle powers might include Canada, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Poland, Ukraine, South Korea and Australia .
 India, Indonesia, Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, Nigeria, South Africa, Israel, Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan . It could also include large or influential countries in the global South .
 Middle powers have not received as much 'll attention in IR as have great powers . Middle powers are not receiving as much attention in the past as they are great powers. Middle powers not receiving more attention than great powers have received .
 Global Forecast by American Intelligence Expects al Qaeda’s Appeal to Falter . American Intelligence expects al Qaeda to appeal to al Qaeda in Afghanistan .
 Power distribution as a concept can apply to all the states in the world or states in one region . Most often it refers to the great power system, but most often refers to great power systems .
 Neorealism, sometimes called structural realism, is a 1990s adaptation of realism . Neorealist is an adaptation of structural realism from the 1990s to the 2000s .
 The polarity of an international power distribution refers to the number of independent power centers in the system . Recently, neoclassical realists have sought to restore some of these lost aspects .
 This concept encompasses both the underlying power of various participants and their alliance groupings . This concept includes both the . underlying power and the power of the various participants .
 A multipolar system typically has five or six centers of power, which are not grouped into alliances . The International System 57 is the largest multipolar power system in the world .
 Each state participates independently and on relatively equal terms with the others . The U.S. participates in the United Nations program .
 Tripolar systems, with three great centers of power, are rare, owing to the tendency for a two-against-one alliance to form . In the classical multipolar balance-of-power, the great power system itself was stable but wars occurred frequently to adjust power relations . Trip
 Aspects of tripolarity colored the ‘strategic triangle’ of the U.S., the Soviet Union, and China during the 1960s and 1970s . The United States, Soviet Union and China were the three countries involved in the 'stratic triangle'
 Some scholars imagine a future tripolar world with rival power centers in North America, Europe, and East Asia . Some scholars have suggested a future world of power centers .
 A bipolar system has two predominant states or two great rival alliance blocs . The bipolar system is a bipolar system with two dominant states or great rival blocs.
 IR scholars do not agree about whether bipolar systems are relatively peaceful or warlike . IR scholars say bipolar systems can be peaceful or violent .
 The U.S.-Soviet standoff seemed to provide stability and peace to great power relations . But rival blocs in Europe before World War I did not .
 At the far extreme, a unipolar system has a single center of power around which all others revolve . At the end of the system, a single power center revolve around the world's most powerful .
 Some might argue that peace is best preserved by a relatively equal power distribution . Then no country has an opportunity to win easily easily, they say . Peace is best served by an equal distribution of power .
 Power transition theory holds that the largest wars result from challenges to the top position in the status hierarchy . A rising power is surpassing (or threatening to surpass) the most powerful state .
 At such times, power is relatively equally distributed, and these are the most dangerous times for major wars . These are the times when power is equally distributed . The most dangerous time of major wars is when it is relatively evenly distributed .
 Status quo powers that are doing well under the old rules will try to maintain them . Challengers that feel locked out by the new rules may try to change them . Status quo power will try and maintain them, but challengers may try and change it .
 Germany’s rise in the 19th century gave it great power capabilities even though it was left out of colonial territories and other signs of status . This tension may have contributed to the two world wars .
 It is possible China and the United States may face a similar dynamic in the future . China's relationship with the U.S. has been described as one of the world's largest economies .
 China may increasingly bristle at international rules and norms that it feels serves the interests of the U.S. China may be increasingly wary of international rules that it believes serves the United States' interests .
 The United States may fear that growing Chinese economic and military power will be used to challenge U.S. power . For its part, the United States fears that growing China power will use it to challenge its own power .
 According to power transition theory, peace among great powers results when one state is firmly in the top position . Peace among great power results when the positions of the others in the hierarchy are clearly defined and correspond with their actual underlying power . Peace is peace when the position of one state in the
 Antonio Gramsci used the term hegemony to refer to the complex ideas that rulers use to gain consent for their legitimacy and keep subjects in line, reducing the need to use force to accomplish the same goal .
 Britain’s predominance followed the defeat of its archrival France in the Napoleonic Wars . The French defeat of the British Empire in the 18th century led to dominance in Europe .
 In the late 1940s, the United States GDP was more than half the world’s total . Only the U.S. had nuclear weapons . The United States vessels carried the majority of the world's shipping .
 United States industry led the world in technology and productivity, and U.S. citizens enjoyed the world’s highest standard of living . United States citizens enjoy the highest standards of living, according to President Obama .
 Hegemonic decline may occur, particularly when hegemons overextended themselves with costly military commitments . As power disparities resulting from major wars slowly diminish, states rebuild over years and decades .
 IR scholars do not agree about how far or fast U.S. hegemonic decline has proceeded, if at all, and whether o C international instability will result from such a decline .
 The modernization of China's military will increase China's power over the coming decades, experts say . China's rapidly growing economy will increase the country's power, they say .
 Some observers fear instability in Asia if the balance of power among states in the region shifts rapidly . Some observers say instability could be caused by the shift in power balance .
 Hegemons can help resolve or at least keep in check conflicts among middle powers or small states . They can be used to help resolve conflicts among small states or middle powers .
 When one state’s power dominates the world, that state can enforce rules and norms unilaterally, avoiding the collective goods problem . This is when one state's power can enforce norms unilaterally . When that state dominates, it avoids collective goods problems .
 In particular, hegemons can maintain global free trade and promote world economic growth . Hegemons are responsible for maintaining free trade, he says .
 This theory attributes the peace and prosperity of the decades after World War II to U.S. hegemony . The theory attributes it to a global framework of economic relations supporting relatively stable and free international trade, as well as security .
 The Great Depression of the 1930s and the outbreak of World War II have been attributed to the power vacuum in the international system at that time . Britain was no longer able to act as hegemon, and the United States was unwilling to begin doing so . By contrast, the Great
 As the most advanced state in productivity and technology, the hegemon does not fear competition from industries in other states . Hegemon fears only that its own superior goods will be excluded from competing in others states .
 Hegemons use their power to achieve free trade and the political stability that supports free trade . Thus, hegemons are able to achieve trade and political stability, he says . The world's free trade is a key to free trade, he said .
 Hegemony provides both the ability and the motivation to provide a stable political framework for free international trade, according to hegemonic stability theory . Free international trade is a key part of the theory of global economic stability, he says .
 From the perspective of less powerful states, hegemony may seem an infringement of state sovereignty . The order it creates may seem unjust or illegitimate, or unjust, to the less powerful .
 China chafed under U.S.-imposed sanctions for 20 years after 1949, when China was encircled by United States military bases and hostile alliances led by the United States .
 To this day, Chinese leaders use the term hegemony as an insult, and the theory of hegemonic stability does not impress them . China's leaders use this term as a term of insult .
 Even in the United States there is considerable ambivalence about U.S. hegemony . There are ambivalent feelings about the American role in the Middle East .
 U.S. foreign policy has historically alternated between internationalist and isolationist moods . It was founded as a breakaway from the European-based international system, and its growth in the 19th century was based on industrialization .
 The United States acquired overseas colonies in the Philippines and Puerto Rico . The U.S. did not relish a role as an imperial power .
 In World War I, the U.S. waited three years to weigh in and refused to join the League of Nations afterward . The U.N. refused to participate in World War II .
 The U.S. isolationism peaked in the late 1930s when polls showed 95 percent of the public opposed to participation in a future European war .
 U.S. leaders after that war feared Soviet communism and pushed United States public opinion toward a strong internationalism .
 In the post-Cold War era, U.S. internationalism was tempered by a new cost consciousness . The isolationist camp was born in reaction to the displacements caused by globalization and free trade .
 The terrorist attacks of September 2001 renewed public support for U.S. interventionism in distant conflicts that no longer seemed so distant . Public support for interventionism grew in the wake of the 9/11 attacks .
 The U.S. role in Afghanistan is uncertain, but its ability and will to resume a role as hegemon is still uncertain . The United States role in the Middle East is uncertain .
 America's difficult economic times at home have willingness to absorb casualties will affect its role in the U.S. role . America's willingness to deal with casualties will impact its role as a nation's ambassador .
 Soldiers return from Afghanistan spurred a new isolationist trend in the Afghanistan, 2009 .
 A second area of U.S. ambivalence is unilateralism versus multilateralism when the United States does engage internationally . The United States is ambivalent about whether to engage in multilateral action .
 Multilateral approaches—working through international institutions—augment United States power and reduce costs, but limit U.S. freedom of action . The United States should not rely on multilateral approaches to solve its problems, says President Obama .
 The United States cannot always always get the UN to do what it wants . For example, the U.S. cannot always get what it says from the UN .
 Polls show that a majority of U.S. citizens support working through the UN and other multilateral institutions . Polls also show that the first Bush administration supported working through UN .
 Members of the United States Congress have expressed skepticism of the UN and of international agencies . However, members of the U.S. Congress have generally favored a more unilateralist approach .
 The 2003 U.S.-led war in Iraq, with few allies and no UN stamp of approval, marked a peak of United States unilateralism . The 2003 War in Iraq marked the peak of unilateralism in the United States .
 NATO has assumed new importance in Afghanistan and in the 2011 Libya campaign . UN dues have been repaid, and UN dues are repaid . NATO has been involved in both Afghanistan and Libya .
 The International System 61 The Great Power System, 1500-2000 . To illustrate how these concepts such as balance of power, power transition, and hegemony have operated historically .
 These rules of state relations did not, however, originate at Westphalia . They took form in Europe in the 16th century .
 Key to this system was the ability of one state to balance the power of another state so that it could not gobble up smaller units and create a universal empire . Key to system was balance of power of a state, or coalition, to balance power between two .
 This power-balancing system placed special importance on the handful of great powers with strong military capabilities, global interests and outlooks .
 A system of great power relations has existed since aroundd.00, and the structure and rules of that system have remained fairly stable through time .
 The structure is a balance of power among the six or so most powerful states, which form and break alliances, fight wars, and make peace, letting no single state conquer the others . No single state is allowed to conquer any of the other states .
 The most powerful states in 16th-century Europe were Britain, France, Austria-Hungary, and Spain . Britain was the most powerful state in Europe, France and Austria .
 Ottoman Empire recurrently fought with the European powers, especially with Austria-Hungary . The Ottoman Empire was one of the most powerful powers in Europe .
 Within Europe, Austria-Hungary and Spain were allied under the control of the Hapsburg family, which also owned the territory of the Netherlands . Within Europe within the borders of Austria and Spain, the two countries were allied . The Netherlands was also allied with Spain under control of Austria
 The Hapsburg countries were defeated by mostly Protestant countries in northern Europe in the Thirty Years’ War of 1618-1648 . France, Britain, Sweden, and the newly independent Netherlands won the war .
 States defeated in war might have been stripped of some territories but were generally allowed to continue as independent states rather than being subsumed into the victorious state . Since then, states defeated in wars might have had some territories stripped but were allowed to remain independent states .
 In the 18th century, the power of Britain increased as it industrialized, and Britain’s great rival was France . France was the country's most powerful rival .
 Sweden, the Netherlands, and the Ottoman Empire all declined in power . Russia and later Prussia emerged as major players in Europe .
 In the Napoleonic Wars, France was defeated by a coalition of Britain, the Netherlands, Austria-Hungary, Spain, Russia, and Prussia . The French Revolution followed the French Revolution, and the French revolution .
 Congress of Vienna ending war reasserted principles of state sovereignty in reaction to the challenges of the French Revolution and Napoleon’s empire . Congress ended the war in Vienna ending that war in response to challenges of Napoleon's empire .
 Britain joined alliances against whatever state emerged as the most powerful in Europe . In this period, Britain became a balancer, joining alliances against any state emerging as most powerful .
 Powerful states were industrializing, extending the scope of their world activities and the might of their militaries . Powerful states began industrializing in the 1930s and 'were industrializing'
 After Prussia defeated Austria and France in wars, a larger Germany emerged to challenge larger Germany . Germany was defeated by France and Austria in wars .
 The Great Power System, 1500-2000 o> IS5 Wars Spain conquers Portugal Spanish Armada 30 Years' War Napoleonic Wars War of the Spanish Succession 7 years' War FrancoPrussian War World War I World Warll Cold War Major Alliances Turkey vs. Turkey
 Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire were defeated in World War I . After a 20-year lull, Germany, Italy, and Japan were defeated by a coalition of the United States, Britain, France, Russia, and China . Germany, Japan, and Italy were
 The five winners of World War II make up the permanent membership of today’s UN Security Council . Those five members of the U.N. Security Council are now permanent members . The UN has a permanent presence in the Security Council since 1945 .
 After World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union became adversaries for 40 years in the Cold War . The U.S. and Russia were allies in the war against Germany, but became adversaries .
 Europe was split into rival blocs—East and West, with Germany split into two states . Europe was divided into rival states, with the West and Germany splitting into two countries .
 The rest of the world became contested terrain where each bloc tried to gain allies or influence, often by sponsoring opposing sides in regional and civil wars . In the 1980s and 1990s, each bloc was trying to gain influence in the region .
 The end of the Cold War around 1990, when the Soviet Union collapsed, returned the international system to a more cooperative arrangement of the great powers . It was similar to the Concert of Europe in the 19th century .
 An alliance is a coalition of states that coordinate their actions to accomplish some end . Alliances are formed by state-to-state alliances that coordinate actions to achieve an end .
 Most alliances are formalized in written treaties, concern a common threat and related issues of international security, and endure across a range of issues and a period of time . Most alliances concern common threats, related issues, such as terrorism and terrorism .
 Shorter-term arrangements, such as the U.S.-led forces in Iraq, may be called a coalition . Shorter term arrangements, like those in Iraq and Syria, may also be called coalition .
 Two countries may have a formal alliance and yet be bitter enemies, such as the Soviet Union and China in the 1960s or NATO members Greece and Turkey today . NATO members Turkey and Greece are NATO members .
 Alliances generally have the purpose of augmenting their members’ power by pooling capabilities . Or, two countries may create the practical equivalent of an alliance without a formal treaty .
 For smaller states, alliances can be their most important power element . For great powers, alliances shapes the configuration of power in the system .
 Of all the elements of power, none can change as quickly as alliances as alliances . alliances can change quickly and decisively as alliances do, says CNN's John Sutter .
 When a state’s power grows and threatens that of its rivals, the latter often form an alliance to limit that power . The alliance is often formed to limit the power of a rival state .
 This happened to Iraq when it invaded Kuwait in 1990, as it had to Hitler's Germany in the 1940s and to Napoleon’s France in the 1800s . This happened again in the 1990s, when Iraq invaded Kuwait, and again in France in France .
 Alliances are based on national interests, and can shift as national interests change . Alliances can be made up of national interests and can be based on changing interests .
 So states often adhere to alliance terms even when it is not in their short-term interest, they do so . So states must adhere to the terms even though it's not in the short term interest of the alliance .
 "Because of the nature of international anarchy, the possibility of turning against a friend is always present," says the author of the book . "I'm not sure how long it will be until the end of the day"
 Realists would agree with the British statesman Lord Palmerston, who told Parliament in 1848, “We have no eternal allies and we have no perpetual enemies.”
 Anticommunist Richard Nixon could cooperate with communist Mao Zedong in 1972 . Nixon and Zedong could cooperate in 1972, but Nixon was a communist .
 Joseph Stalin could sign a nonaggression pact with a fascist, Adolf Hitler, and then cooperate with the capitalist West against Hitler . Stalin could have signed a pact with Hitler, but then cooperated with the West against him . Stalin was a dictator in the 1930s, but he was
 The United States could back Islamic militants in Afghanistan against the Soviet Union in the 1980s, then attack them in 2001 . The U.S. could have backed Islamic militants against the Soviets, then attacked them in Afghanistan .
 History brings another such reversal in international alignments, many people are surprised . Every time history brings such reversals, people will be surprised, experts say .
 If there were only two states, each could match capabilities to have adequate defense but an inability to attack successfully . Each state has an ability to defend but not attack successfully, experts say . If there are only two, each has capabilities to defend itself .
 Each state has to build adequate defenses against the potential alliance of its enemy with the third state . But if a third state is free to ally with either side, then each state must build its own defenses .
 Alliance cohesion is the ease with which the members of an alliance hold together an alliance . Alliance cohesion means the ease that an alliance can hold together a group of allies .
 Cohesion tends to be high when national interests converge and when cooperation within the alliance becomes institutionalized and habitual . Cohesion in the alliance is high when it is institutionalized, and when it becomes habitual .
 Extended deterrence refers to a strong state’s use of threats to deter attacks on weaker clients . The U.S. threat to attack the Soviet Union if it invaded Western Europe was such as the U.K. threat . Extended deterrence is used to deter the threat of attacks on
 Great powers face a real danger of being dragged into wars with each other over relatively unimportant regional issues if their respective clients go to war . Great powers are at risk of being drawn into wars over regional issues .
 If the great powers do not come to their clients’ protection, they may lose credibility with other clients, but if they do, they might end up fighting a costly war .
 Alliances generally result from convergence of practical interests, not ideological reasons . The Soviet Union worried that its commitments to China in the 1950s, to Cuba in the 1960s, were too much to bear .
 A U.S. general gets rival Afghan warlords to patch up relations, 2002 . A United States general gets rivals in Afghanistan to mend relations .
 The Influence of Military Alliances on the Initiation of Militarized Interstate Disputes . The influence of military alliances on interstate disputes can be traced back to the Cold War .
 Alliances 65 and to Syria and Egypt in the 1970s could result in a disastrous war with the United States . North Atlantic Treaty Organization is the most powerful alliance in the world .
 The 28 NATO members possess nearly half the world's power . Using GDP as a measure of power, the 28 NATO nations possess nearly 50% of the world total .
 Members are the United States, Canada, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Denmark, Norway, Iceland, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Turkey, Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia, Slovenia, Slovakia, Bulgaria,
 NATO staffs from the member countries coordinate plans and periodically direct exercises in the field . At NATO headquarters in Brussels, Belgium, military staffs coordinate plans .
 NATO allied supreme commander has always been a U.S. general . NATO's supreme commander is always a United States general . The U.N. general has been in charge of NATO's NATO allies since 2001 .
 In NATO, each state contributes its own military units with its own national culture, language, and equipment specifications . Each state contributes to NATO military units, with their own culture and language .
 The Soviet-led Warsaw Pact was founded in 1955 and disbanded in 1991 . Its counterpart in Eastern Europe during the Cold War, the Warsaw Pact, was founded by the Soviets in 1955 .
 During the Cold War, the U.S. maintained more than 300,000 troops in Europe, with advanced planes, tanks, and other equipment .
 NATO stayed together because its members believed that NATO provided useful stability even though its mission was unclear . NATO's mission is unclear, but its members believe it provides useful stability . NATO has a history of instability in the Middle East .
 Article V, considered the heart of NATO, asks members to come to the defense of a fellow member under attack . Article V asks NATO members to defend a member of the U.S. from attack .
 It was envisioned as a U.S. commitment to help defend Western Europe against the Soviet Union . It was invoked for the first time when Europe came to the defense of the United States after the terrorist attacks in 2001 .
 The first actual use of force by NATO was in Bosnia in 1994, in support of the UN mission there . NATO has never used force in Bosnia, Bosnia .
 The UN feared retaliation against its lightly armed peacekeepers if NATO attacked the Serbian forces to protect Bosnian civilians . A “dual key” arrangement gave the UN control of NATO’s actions in Bosnia, and the UN feared it would be retaliation .
 NATO made threats, underlined by symbolic airstrikes, but then backed down after UN qualms . This waffling undermined NATO’s credibility, writes Peter Bergen . As a result, NATO made symbolic airstrikes but backed down, he says .
 NATO actions in the Balkans (the air war for Kosovo in 1999 and peacekeeping in Macedonia in 2001) went more smoothly in terms of alliance cohesion . Later, NATO actions for the Balkans in the 1990s (Air War for Kosovo, peacekeeping for Macedonia in 1999) went much smoother
 NATO’s intervention in Libya in 2011 also proved effective, as air power turned the tide of the rebel war that overthrew the dictator . NATO intervened in the war that ousted Libya's dictator in 2011 .
 NATO rated the operation a great success . UN Security Council and Arab League backed for a no-fly zone . European countries providing most of the combat planes .
 NATO troops from a number of member countries are fighting Taliban forces in Afghanistan . Currently, NATO troops are fighting the Taliban in Afghanistan.
 Since 2006, these forces, known as the International Security Assistance Forces, have been under NATO leadership . NATO leadership has been in charge of the forces since 2006 .
 Over 100,000 troops serve in the ISAF, with NATO states providing the bulk of the forces . NATO states provide the majority of the troops .
 The decision grew in part from European military weaknesses demonstrated in the 1999 Kosovo war . The United States contributed the most power by far in the Kosovo war, in which the U.S. contributed most .
 NATO forces including U.S. soldiers remain next door to Kosovo . NATO forces include United States soldiers remain in Kosovo .
 Joining in 2004 were Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Slovenia and Romania . Joining was Latvia, Latvia and Lithuania .
 Albania and Croatia accepted membership in NATO in 2009, bringing the total number of members to 28 . Albania joined the alliance in 2009 . Croatia and Albania are the only two countries to have accepted membership .
 Making NATO's militaries compatible with NATO was a major undertaking, requiring increased military spending by existing and new NATO members . Making the new members’ militaries’ . NATO’s ability to reach out to new members requires increased spending .
 NATO expansion justified as a way to solidify new democracies and as protection against possible future Russian aggression . NATO expansion was justified as both a way of solidifying new democracies .
 Turkey refused to let U.S. jh e |\iAT0 alliance have been the world's strongest military force since 1949 . France and GerALLIANCE of the STRONG many strongly opposed the war, and Turkey .
 The U.S. shifted some operations (and money) to new members in Eastern Europe such as Romania . President Kennedy the same time as President Kennedy drew down forces based in Germany .
 Russian leaders oppose NATO’s expansion into Eastern Europe as aggressive and anti-Russian . NATO's expansion of Eastern Europe is seen as an example of Russia's anti-Russia policy .
 NATO expansion is reasserting dividing lines on the map of Europe, but pushed closer to Russia’s borders . Russia views NATO expansion as reasserts dividing lines, but pushes closer to its borders . NATO expansion was reasserted dividing lines in Europe, Russia says .
 These fears strengthen nationalist and anti-Western political forces in Russia . The fears strengthen anti-West sentiment in Russia, according to Russian media .
 The 1999 NATO bombing of Serbia heightened Russian fears regarding NATO’s eastward expansion . NATO cooperation with Ukraine and Georgia, the latter fought a short war against Russia in 2008, has also raised concerns .
 The second most important alliance is the U.S.-Japanese Security Treaty, a bilateral alliance . The treaty is a bilateral agreement between the two countries .
 Under this alliance, the U.S. maintains nearly 35,000 troops in Japan . The United States maintains a large presence in Japan.
 Alliance Politics from the End of the Cold War to the Age of Terrorism . Alliance Politics is a new look at politics in the United States .
 The alliance was created in 1951 against the potential Soviet threat to Japan . It was created to protect Japan from a potential Soviet invasion .
 Because of its roots in the U.S. military occupation of Japan after World War II, the alliance is very asymmetrical .
 The United States is committed to defend Japan if it is attacked, but Japan is not similarly obligated to defend the United States . Japan is also committed to defending the U.S. in any way, but not to defend it if attacked .
 Japan’s only major alliance is with the United States . The United States belongs to several other alliances, but Japan has no alliance with other allies .
 Japan’s constitution renounces the right to make war and maintain military forces . The constitution was written by U.S. General Douglas MacArthur after WWII .
 Japan maintains military forces, called the Self-Defense Forces, strong enough for territorial defense but not for aggression . Self-Defence Forces are strong enough to defend Japan from aggression .
 It is a powerful army by world standards but much smaller than Japan’s economic strength could support . It is smaller than the size of the country's economic strength can support .
 Some Japanese leaders believe that Japan’s formal security role should expand commensurate with its economic power . Nonetheless, some Japanese leaders say it should be expanded .
 Japanese troops participated in Afghanistan in 2001 and Iraq in 2004 . Japan seeks a permanent seat on the UN Security Council . Japan has participated in both Afghanistan and Iraq .
 The UN in turn is pressing Japan to participate fully in peace keeping missions . The UN has also pressed Japan to take part in peacekeeping missions .
 After the terrorist attacks in 2001, NATO member states pledged their assistance in fighting the forces of al Qaeda and its Taliban protectors in Afghanistan .
 Countries formed the multinational International Security Assistance Forces . NATO forces are made up of mostly NATO troops in Afghanistan .
 The forces are trying to provide security for the fledgling Afghan government, train a new military, and build political institutions . They are also trying to prevent the Taliban from retaking power .
 Getting an adequate force to prevail in Afghanistan is a collective good, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Getting adequate force in Afghanistan would be good for the nation, he says .
 NATO members provide troops and equipment for ISAF in Afghanistan . Providing troops is voluntary on the part of NATO members . ISAF is voluntary .
 Regardless of how many troops the different countries send, they share equally the benefit of defeating al Qaeda . Regardless of the number of troops sent, the countries share the benefits of defeating the terrorist organization .
 If too many countries are too stingy in contributing, the overall force will be too small . The goal will not be achieved if too many nations contribute too little to the force, says the U.N. agency .
 Pro-Taliban forces continue to carry out widespread attacks and threaten to undermine progress made to date . The Taliban have been fighting in Afghanistan since 2001 .
 Both the Bush and Obama administrations pressured allies to send more troops and money . But with limited results, they have been able to get the results .
 In 2010, America added 30,000 troops and other NATO members only 10,000 . The 2010 “surge’s” added only 30,500 troops . America added 10,500 in 2010 .
 U.S. has used alliance with Japan as a base to project power in Asia . Japan was a key staging area during the wars in Korea and Vietnam . Japan has been a key ally in the past .
 The continued U.S. military presence in Japan symbolizes the United States commitment to remain engaged in Asian security affairs . The continued United States military presence is seen as a sign of America's commitment to Asian security .
 U.S. forces have drawn down somewhat in the past decade in response to high costs, reduced threats, and more American focus on the Middle East . However, these United States forces have been drawn down slightly .
 In 2010, Japan's prime minister resigned after reneging on his promise to force the U.S. to renegotiate certain aspects of the treaty . The alliance became a major political issue in Japan after Hatoyama's resignation .
 U.S. maintains military alliances with several other states, including Australia and South Korea . 25,000 troops are stationed under an alliance dating to the Korean War .
 Close U.S. collaboration with militaries in other states such as Israel makes them de facto allies . Close United States collaboration with . militaries with . other states makes it de facto United States allies . Israel and the United States have close ties with Israel .
 Russia, the official successor state to the Soviet Union, is the leading member of the group . Ukraine is the second largest country in the world, with Russia the leading state .
 Initial plans for a joint military force did not succeed . Although some military coordination takes place through the CIS, some of the country's military coordination is through Russia .
 GeorgtlP® withdrew from the CIS in 2009, due to its 2008 military conflict with Russia . In 2009, GeorgTLP® pulled out of the CIS due to a military conflict between Russia and Russia .
 In 2010, the Dutch government lost power when it tried to keep Dutch troops in Afghanistan .
 NATO operates on reciprocity -- its members are equals with all contributing to the common good . NATO operates in theory, but in fact, it is not reciprocity-based . NATO is based on the idea that all its members contribute to the same good .
 The group also share an identity as Western democracies fighting violent religious terrorists . The members of the group share a common identity as a Western democracy fighting terrorism .
 NATO members did not find the reasons for sending troops to Afghanistan . But in the hard currency of boots on the ground and flag-draped coffins coming home, not enough found these reasons compelling .
 The solution to the collective goods problem in this case was for the dominant power to provide the good . The solution was to solve the problem by providing the good to others .
 NATO is not really a club of equals, but a hierarchy with one member having more military might than the others combined . NATO's membership is a hierarchy, with one having more might than any other member . NATO is the most powerful military force in the world, with NATO having the most
 Funeral of two Spanish soldiers killed in Afghanistan, 2010. around underlings . Separate Group For Females with verpcation with verplpcation . Funeral for female soldiers will be held in Afghanistan .
 Often the actors best able to stay on top of a hierarchy are those who form alliances well and use power and wealth to keep other members loyal .
 Among the great powers, China and Russia have developed a close relationship . The relationship has developed, but with Russia and China somewhat independent .
 In the global South, many states joined a nonaligned movement during the Cold War, standing apart from the U.S.-Soviet rivalry . Many states joined nonaligned movements in the 1950s and '60s .
 This movement, led by India and Yugoslavia, was undermined by the membership of states such as Cuba that were clearly clients of one of the superpowers . This movement was undermined in the 1980s by membership of Cuba and India .
 At the turn of the century, the 53-member Organization of African Unity, an IGO with few powers, re-formed as the African Union . The African Union is a stronger organization with a continent-wide parliament, central bank, and court .
 The African Union’s first real test came with allegations of genocide in Darfur in 2004 . The AU deployed 3,000 troops, joined by a much larger force of UN peacekeepers .
 AU has also deployed forces, mostly Ugandan, in Somalia, where they routed Islamist militants from most of the country in 2012 .
 The United States tended to favor the Pakistani side as well, but both U.S. and Indian relations have improved since the Cold War ended .
 China also has a loose alliance with North Korea, whom it values as a counterweight to South Korea . China also values North Korea as counterweights to the South Korea.
 China maintains concerns about the North’s political and economic stability . Yet, China still has concerns about its political, economic stability in the North .
 Long-standing U.S. friends in Asia include Japan, South Korea, the Philippines, the Chinese Nationalists on Taiwan , Singapore, and Thailand .
 In the Middle East, the Arab-Israeli conflict created a general anti-Israel alignment of the Arab countries for decades . That alignment broke down as Egypt in 1978 and then Jordan in 1994 made peace with Israel .
 Arab countries continue to express varying degrees of solidarity with each other and opposition to Israel . The Israeli-Palestinian peace process continues to move backward and backward year by year .
 Troughs in Israeli-Arab relations came in 2006, when Israel fought Hezbollah guerrillas in Lebanon . In 2008 and 2012, Israel fought Hamas militants in Gaza .
 Israel and Turkey formed a close military relationship that amplified Israeli power . But relations deteriorated after Israel killed Turkish protesters on a ship trying to break the blockade of Gaza in 2009 .
 Arab Spring uprisings in 2011-2013 threw the region into turmoil . Israeli-Palestinian relations went into a deep freeze after the Arab Spring .
 The main conflict dynamic in the Middle East became the opposition of Shi’ite and Sunni countries, centered on Iran and Saudi Arabia . The U.S. has close relations with Egypt and cooperates closely with Turkey, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Morocco .
 U.S.-Iranian relations remain chilled 30 years after the 1979 revolution . Relations between the two countries remain frosty 30 years on .
 Iran, with its Shi’ite population, has close ties with Iraq’s new U.S.-backed government . The new government is dominated by Shi'ite religious parties . But, oddly, Iran has ties with the new government in Iraq, which is dominated of Shi
 The United States had very hostile relations with Iraq before . The U.S. had a very hostile relationship with Iraq prior to 2003 .
 The U.S. has faced stronger antipathy in the region since the 2003 war . The 2003 war was the first of its kind .
 United States relations with Libya were also hostile for decades until a 2003 agreement . Relations with Libya became more friendly after Libya’s U.S.-backed revolution in 2011 .
 It is unclear what new international alignments may emerge in the years to come . It is not clear what new alignments will emerge .
 The fluidity of alliances makes them a wild card for scholars to understand and for policy makers to anticipate . It's important to understand how the alliances shape the U.S. government .
 Little evidence exists of a coherent or formal rival power alignment emerging to challenge the United States . China, Russia, France, and France keep U.S. hegemony in check .
 Strategy Actors use strategy to pursue good outcomes in bargaining with one or more other actors . Strategy is a way of negotiating with other actors to achieve good outcomes .
 States deploy power capabilities as leverage to influence each other's actions . States use power capabilities to influence other nations' actions .
 Bargaining is interactive, and requires an actor to take account of other actors’ interests even while pursuing its own . Bargaining involves taking account of the interests of others in the interest of the actor .
 Robert North: War, Peace, Survival: Global Politics and Conceptual Synthesis. You Are a Presidential Advisor"" at MyPoliSciLab 5 ^North, Robert C. North: "You Are a President Advisor. You are a President"
 Bargaining, Decision Making, and System Structure in International Crises, is discussed in the U.S. Bargaining and Decision Making in international Crises .
 Your country faces many challenges both at home and abroad . As the world's largest democracy, your country faces challenges . Your country is the largest democracy .
 In the past 50 years, you have fought wars against your two largest neighbors, China and Pakistan . In particular, in particular, you've fought wars with your two biggest neighbors, Pakistan and China . Pakistan .
 China and Pakistan have cooperated with each other in the past, including on sales of high technology military goods such as missiles . Pakistan and China have been involved in a series of high-tech military deals .
 Your generally hostile relationship with Pakistan grows from a territorial dispute over half of the region of Kashmir, which both claim, but India maintains control over . Both sides claim the Kashmir region, but both claim it .
 The territory is coveted not only by your respective governments but by the publics in each country as well . It is coveted by the governments and the public, as well as the public as well.
 Tensions still run high over Kashmir, despite cooperation between the two countries . Kashmir is a major source of tension between India and Pakistan .
 In the aftermath of the November 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai, many in your country blamed Pakistan since it is home to Islamic militant groups . Many in the United States blamed Pakistan for the Mumbai terror attacks .
 China remains a major rival in the region and you still maintain competing claims over territory . Your hostilities with China have cooled over the years, but China remains China's major rival . China's territorial claims have also been disputed .
 China is large economically as well as militarily, and it attempts to exert strong leadership in your region . Like your own country, China is trying to exert leadership in its region . China is a large economic and military presence in the region .
 In the past two years, however, you have increased ties with China . In 2008, you visited China at the beginning of 2008 to open discussions on future trade and military cooperation .
 In December 2007, your armies (the two largest in the world) held joint training exercises . The two largest armies of the world held joint exercises .
 Within your country, neither Pakistan nor China is a popular choice for allies . Pakistan and China are not popular choices for allies in your country .
 Your population is still angered by the Chinese victory in the 1962 Sino-lndian war and the disputed border territory that gave rise to the conflict . Your people are still angry by the loss of their territory to China in the 1960s .
 Kashmir's largely Hindu population is angry at repeated attempts by Muslim Pakistan to gain control of Kashmir . Yet its largely Muslim population is also angry at attempts by Muslims to take control of the region .
 Your advisors also remind you that China still has a healthy relationship with Pakistan, selling large numbers of weapons and giving military assistance to Pakistan . Pakistan has a strong relationship with China .
 Opposition parties argue that you have been too 'soft' on both Pakistan and China in your time as Prime Minister . Pakistan's main political opposition parties say you are too soft'
 Any public backlash against foreign policy could bring calls for new elections that could unseat your government . Any backlash against your foreign policy on these issues could bring new elections .
 The government of Pakistan begins to suffer from large-scale instability . The country's political instability is set to be a major factor in instability .
 Islamist militants are close to overthrowing the government in Pakistan, giving them control of Pakistan's nuclear weapons . Islamist militants have been fighting for control of the country's nuclear arsenal .
 They are also calling for Muslims in Kashmir to rise up against Indian control . They promise to openly assist a rebellion in that province by providing weapons and intelligence .
 Power strategies are plans actors use to develop and deploy power capabilities to achieve their goals . Power strategies plan actors to develop, deploy and use their power capabilities .
 A key aspect of strategy is choosing the kinds of capabilities to develop, given limited resources, in order to maximize international influence . A key part of strategy for the U.S. is choosing to develop capabilities to maximise international influence, he says .
 The capabilities required to manage a situation may need to be developed years before that situation presents itself . This requires foresight because of the capabilities needed to manage such a situation .
 The capabilities chosen often will not be fungible in the short term, say experts . Yet the capabilities of the U.S. military will be limited to the short-term, they say .
 Strategies shape policies for when a state is willing to use its power capabilities . Strategies also shape policies on when state can use its powers .
 Even if leaders make explicit intention to fight over an issue, they might be bluffing . Even if they make explicit intentions to fight, it could be a bluff .
 The strategic actions of China in recent years exemplify the concept of strategy as rational deployment of power capabilities . China's strategy exemplifies the concept as rational deploying power capabilities, say experts .
 Taiwan’s government was set up to represent all of China in 1949 . The nationalists took refuge in Taiwan after losing to the communists in China's civil war . Taiwan's government was established in 1949 to represent the whole of China .
 Taiwan has attempted to operate more and more independently, with many favoring independence . Since the international community’s recognition of the Beijing government as “China,” however, many Taiwanese have favored independence . Many Taiwanese favor independence .
 China has declared repeatedly that it will go to war if Taiwan declares independence . China may not have the military power to invade Taiwan successfully, but it has declared .
 Taiwan has not formally declared independence from Taiwan . So far, even though such a war might be irrational on China’s part, it has deterred Taiwan from formally declaring independence .
 China might lose such a war, but would certainly inflict immense damage on Taiwan . The country might lose a war but it would certainly damage Taiwan, author says .
 China held war games near Taiwan in 1996, firing missiles over the sea . In 1996, China fired missiles into the sea over Taiwan .
 The United States sent two aircraft carriers to signal to China that its exercises must not go too far . The U.S. sent two ships to China to signal that its drills must not be too much .
 Taiwan has engaged in diplomacy to gain influence in the world . Not risking war by declaring independence, Taiwan instead has engaged diplomacy . Taiwan has not declared independence .
 It breaks diplomatic relations with countries that recognize Taiwan, and punishes any moves in the direction of Taiwanese independence . It also breaks diplomatic ties with countries who recognize Taiwan .
 Half the countries that recognize Taiwan are in the Caribbean and Central America, leading to a competition for influence in the region . Taiwan is one of the fastest-growing countries in the world to recognize Taiwan .
 China has tried to counter Taiwanese ties with those countries by manipulating various positive and negative leverages . China has been trying to counter ties with Taiwan's neighbors by manipulating the situation .
 Taiwan has cultivated close relations with Panama, where China is a major user of the Panama Canal . Taiwan has invested in a container port, and suggested hiring guest workers from Panama in Taiwan .
 China has implicitly threatened to restrict Panama’s access to Hong Kong, or to reregister its many Panamanian-registered ships in the Bahamas instead . China has also threatened to re-register its ships with Panama .
 When Kiribati recognized Taiwan in late 2003 to gain Taiwanese aid, China broke off relations and removed a Chinese satellite-tracking station . Similarly, when the Pacific microstate of Kiribat recognized Taiwan, China removed the Chinese satellite tracking station .
 The tracking station played a vital role in China’s military reconnaissance and growing space program . Its dismantling underscored China's determination to give Taiwan priority even at cost to other national goals .
 Two of the seven vetoes China has used in the UN Security Council were to block peacekeeping forces in countries that extended recognition to Taiwan . China has also used vetoes in the past to block UN peacekeepers in countries extending recognition of Taiwan .
 Coherent strategy can help a state make the most of its power, says Realist Theories . These are the results of a state vetoes .
 China's foreign policy is generally directed toward its most important regional interests, above all preventing Taiwan's formal independence . China's policy is aimed at preventing Taiwan from becoming independent .
 China has had no military engagements for 25 years . Despite conflicts with a number of its neighbors, China has not had any military engagements in 25 years.
 China uses its veto in the UN Security Council for only the fifth time ever, to end a peacekeeping mission in Macedonia, which had just established ties with Taiwan, 1999 . demonstrate that if China believes its Taiwan interests are threatened, it can play a spoiler role .
 When its Taiwan interests are secure, China cooperates on issues of world order, China says . By contrast, when its Taiwan interest is secure, it will cooperate with Taiwan's government, he says .
 Although China opposed the 1991 Gulf War, it did not veto the UN resolution authorizing it . For example, although China opposed Gulf War in 1991, it didn't veto a UN resolution that approved it .
 Chinese strategies mobilize various capabilities, including missiles, diplomats, and industrial conglomerates, in a coherent effort to influence the outcome of China’s most important international issue . These Chinese strategies mobilized various capabilities .
 If deterrence works, its effects are almost invisible; its success is measured in attacks that didn't occur . Success is measured by attacks r n that did not occur .
 Advocates of deterrence believe that conflicts are more likely to escalate into war when one party to the conflict is weak . The U.S. should not engage in conflict with Russia or Syria .
 In this view, building up military capabilities usually convinces the stronger party that a resort to military leverage would not succeed, so conflicts are less likely to escalate into violence . Building up capabilities usually convince the strong party that such a use of military leverage will not succeed .
 One strategy used to try to compel compliance by another state is escalation . A series of negative sanctions of increasing severity applied in order to induce another actor to take some action . Strategy 75 INTERNAL DIVISIONS .
 In theory, the less severe actions establish credibility . The pattern of escalation establishes the high costs of future sanctions if the second actor does not cooperate . The less severe action establishes credibility .
 These actions should induce the second actor to comply, assuming that it finds the potential costs of the escalating punishments greater than the costs of compliance . The second actor may find the potential cost of escalating punishments more likely to outweigh compliance costs .
 IR scholars worried that a conventional war could lead to nuclear war if the superpowers tried to apply escalation strategies . During the Cold War, many IR scholars were worried that such escalation strategies might lead to a nuclear war .
 An arms race is a reciprocal process in which two states build up military capabilities in response to each other . It is the reciprocal process of building up military capability .
 Each side wants to act prudently against a threat, the attempt to reciprocate leads to a runaway production of weapons by both sides . Both sides produce weapons in response to the threat of a threat .
 The mutual escalation of threats erodes confidence, reduces cooperation, and makes it more likely that a crisis (or accident) could cause one side to strike first and start a war .
 The U.S.-Soviet nuclear arms race created arsenals of tens of thousands of nuclear weapons on each side . The arms race process was illustrated vividly in the United States and the Soviet Union .
 Unitary actor assumption holds that states make important decisions as though they were single individuals able to act in the national interest . The unitary actor assumes that states act as if they are single individuals who act in national interests .
 In truth, factions and organizations with differing interests put conflicting pressures on state leaders . "Fitsits and organizations" put conflicting pressure on leaders, says CNN.com .
 In extreme cases, weak states do not control the armed factions within them . Weak states are often unable to control armed factions in extreme cases .
 Somali pirates are just one of the internal groups that operate with impunity within Somalia . Internal groups, ranging from autonomous territories to Islamist militants, operate in Somalia .
 Realists assume that those who wield power while engaging in statecraft behave as rational actors in their efforts to influence others . Most realists assume they would behave rational in their dealings with statecraft .
 Realists assume that the actor (usually a state) exercising power is a single entity that can “think” about its actions coherently and make choices . Many realists assume this is the case of a single state exercising power .
 This is called the unitary actor assumption, or sometimes the strong leader assumption . This is known as "Unitary Actor assumption" or "Strong Leader"
 The assumption is a simplification, because the interests of particular politicians, parties, economic sectors, or regions of a country often conflict . It is a simple simplification because of the conflict between political parties, parties and regions .
 Realists assume that the exercise of power attempts to advance the national interest— the interests of the state itself . Yet realists assume power is an attempt to advance its own interests, the state .
 Some realists simply define the national interest as maximizing material power . That's a debatable assumption . But realists say it's important to maximize material power in order to protect the U.S. interests .
 Others compare power in IR with money in economics—a universal measure . Some compare power to money in economic terms . Others say IR power is more powerful than money .
 In this view, states compete for power in the international system . Just as firms compete for money in economic markets, states are competing for power, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Second, rationality implies that actors are able to perform a cost-benefit analysis . The cost of a possible action is calculated by calculating the costs incurred and the benefits it is likely to bring .
 As in the problem of estimating power, one has to add up different dimensions in such a calculation . The problem is similar to estimating power in estimating power .
 States do not initiate wars that they expect to lose, except when they stand to gain political benefits, domestic or international, that outweigh the costs of losing the war . For instance, states presumably do not start wars with the intention of losing, but with political benefits outweighing the costs .
 It's not easy to tally intangible political benefits against the tangible costs of a war . But it is not easy for the politicians to tally the benefits of the war with tangible costs .
 These assumptions about rationality and the actors in IR are simplifications that not all IR scholars accept . Not all IR Scholars accept that the assumptions are about rationality .
 Realists consider simplifications useful because they allow scholars to explain in a general way the actions of diverse actors . Realists say simplifications are useful because it allows scholars to understand diverse actions .
 Game theory is a branch of mathematics concerned with predicting bargaining outcomes . The Prisoner's Dilemma is a form of game theory . Game theory aims to predict bargaining outcomes rather than predict outcomes .
 A game is a setting in which two or more players choose among alternative moves, either once or repeatedly . The game is set in a setting where two players choose between alternative moves .
 Payoffs can be tangible items such as money or any intangible items of value . The payoffs can also be tangible or intangible .
 Game theory aims to deduce likely outcomes (what moves players will make), given the players’ preferences and the possible moves open to them . Game theory is based on the preferences of the players and possible moves they might make .
 Game theory was first used extensively in IR in the 1950s and 1960s by scholars trying to understand U.S.-Soviet nuclear war contingencies . Game theory first used in IR to understand the threat of nuclear war .
 Moves were decisions to use nuclear weapons in certain ways, and payoffs were outcomes of the war . Payoffs are outcomes of war, and decisions were made in certain decisions .
 Strategy 77 years, especially among realists, who accept the assumptions about rationality, is key to realists . The strategy has been successful for 77 years .
 To analyze a game mathematically, one assumes that each player chooses a move rationally, to maximize its payoff . To analyze the game, each player must choose the best move to maximize the payoff .
 Different kinds of situations are represented by different classes of games, as defined by the number of players and the structure of the payoffs . Different classes are defined by different types of games .
 In a zero-sum game there is no point in communication or cooperation between the players because their interests are diametrically opposed . In this case, the players will have to work together in order to achieve their goals .
 In a non-zero-sum game, coordination of moves can maximize the total payoff to the players . But coordination can still be a key to maximizing a player's share of the prize .
 In this situation, rational players choose moves that produce an outcome in which all players are worse off than under a different set of moves . All players in this situation are rational players, and the outcome is worse than under different moves .
 They all could do better, but as individual rational actors, they are unable to achieve this outcome . They all need to be rational actors in order to achieve a better outcome, they say .
 The original story tells of two prisoners questioned separately by a prosecutor . The original version of this story was originally published in 2007 .
 The prosecutor knows they committed a bank robbery but has only enough evidence to convict them of illegal possession of a gun . Unless one of them confesses, they will not be convicted unless one of the robbers confesses .
 The prosecutor tells each prisoner that if he confesses and his partner doesn’t confess, he will go free . The prosecutor says each prisoner will be free if his partner does not confess .
 If neither confesses, they will be convicted on the gun charge and serve a short sentence . If neither will confess, they'll be convicted of a gun charge . They will be sentenced to a short prison sentence .
 The story assumes that neither prisoner will have a chance to retaliate later, that only the immediate outcomes matter . Each prisoner cares only about himself, and that each prisoner cares about himself .
 Consider the decisions of India and Pakistan about whether to build nuclear weapons arsenals . Consider the decision to build sizable nuclear arsenals in both countries .
 Neither side can know whether the other is secretly building up an arsenal unless they reach an arms control agreement with strict verification provisions . The agreement would have to include strict verification of weapons build-up .
 To analyze the game, we assign values to each possible outcome . This is often called a preference ordering order .
 If we misjudge the value a player puts on a particular outcome, we may draw wrong conclusions from the game . We should not be drawn to conclusions about the outcome of the game, we should be careful .
 The first number in each cell is India's payoff, and the second number is Pakistan's . The payoff is India’s payoff, the first number is the Pakistan number . The first and second numbers are India's payouts .
 To keep it simple, 4 indicates the highest payoff, and 1 indicates the lowest . To keep things simple, the payoff is 4 .
 As is conventional, a decision to refrain from building nuclear weapons is called cooperation . A decision to proceed with nuclear arms is called defection . Decision to proceed is called "defection" and "cooperation"
 The model seems to predict an inevitable Indian-Pakistani nuclear arms race . Both states would do better to avoid one, but both states would better avoid one .
 In 1998, India detonated underground nuclear explosions to test weapons designs, and Pakistan promptly followed suit . India detonated the explosions in 1998 to test nuclear weapons designs .
 The two states nearly went to war in 2002, with projected war deaths of up to 12 million . In 2002, the two states were nearly going to war, with projections of 12 million war deaths .
 Each side now has dozens of nuclear missiles, and counting . A costly and dangerous arms race continues, says President Obama .
 Avoiding an arms race would benefit both sides as a collective good, but the IR system, without strong central authority, does not allow them to realize this potential benefit . The IR system is not strong enough to prevent arms race arms race .
 Realists tend to be pessimistic about cooperative solutions to collective goods problems such as the PD game . This example illustrates why realists are pessimistic about collective goods solutions to problems like the one that the game embodies .
 Chicken represents two male teenagers speeding toward a head-on collision . Chicken represents a pair of male teens speeding toward an accident .
 The player who first commits irrevocably not to swerve will win the game . The player will be able to throw away the steering wheel or blindfold while driving .
 Deterrence involves convincing another actor not to undertake an action it otherwise would . Deterrence is a way of persuading someone not to take action it would otherwise do otherwise .
 State leaders attempt to convince others that they will respond harshly if they are attacked . Just as in the game of Chicken, when one driver commits to not swerving, state leaders try to persuade others to stop .
 It is difficult for one side to convince the other that he or she will risk crashing if the other side decides not to swerve . But because not swerving risks disaster for both sides, it is difficult to convince one side that it will risk crash .
 Game theory often studies interdependent decisions — the outcome for each player depends on the actions of the other . Chapter Review 79: Game Theory often studies the outcome of each player's decisions .
 This chapter has focused on the concerns of realists, including the interests of states, distribution of power among states, bargaining between states, and alliances of states . The next chapter will focus on the issues of state sovereignty .
 The chapter has treated states as unitary actors, much as one would analyze the interactions of individual people . The chapter is entitled "The State of the State"
 The actions of state leaders have been treated as concerned with maximizing power through pursuing definable interests through coherent bargaining strategies . State leaders are treated as interested in maximizing power by pursuing definer interests .
 Realistic is not the only way to frame the major issues of international relations . But realism is not only way of framing international relations, it's also possible to make a point .
 Chapter 3 reexamines these themes critically, relying less on the core principle of dominance and more on reciprocity and identity . Chapter 3 focuses on these themes .
 Realists can develop concise and general models and explanations . These simplifications are debatable but allow realists to develop concise models . Realists should be careful not to exaggerate or exaggerate .
 Prisoner's Dilemma game embodies a difficult collective goods problem . The Prisoner’s Dilemmas game is a complex problem of collective goods .
 Choose a recent international event and list the power capabilities that participants used as leverage in the episode . List a list of those participants who used their power capabilities to leverage in this week's episode .
 The modern international system came into being at a time when agrarian societies relied primarily on farmland to create wealth . The modern system came to be formed in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Realists emphasize the idea of the balance of power . States may ally with one another to prevent another state from becoming too dominant . Realists believe that states can ally with each other to prevent a dominant state from losing power .
 The United States is clearly unparalleled in military and economic power . Yet, in the current system, the U.S. is clearly unrivaled in military power .
 Some scholars argue that China will be the state that challenges the leadership position of the United States in the future . Some scholars say China will challenge the U.S. leadership position .
 Historically, the relationship between China and the U.S. has been rocky . China's relationship with the United States is rocky .
 During the Cold War, after the U.S. opened the relationship with China, the two great powers cooperated against a common enemy, the Soviet Union . The United States and China cooperated on a common goal in the 1950s and 1960s .
 After the Cold War, cooperation has varied significantly as China has expanded economically and militarily . China filled the global powervacuum left by the collapse of the Soviet Union . China's cooperation with the U.S. has varied dramatically since the Soviet era ended .
 China is still smaller economically and less powerful militarily than the U.S. If current growth continues, it will eventually surpass the United States in economic might .
 Armed with such a large economy, it will not take long for China to then catch the U.S. militarily . Armed with China's large economy it could catch the United States militarily.
 U.S. and Chinese allies create conflicts between them . China and the United States will find it difficult to peacefully coexist . The United States and China will not be able to coexist peacefully .
 China's ties to North Korea, Iran, and Sudan have strengthened in the past five years . China has ties to Iran, Sudan, Sudan and North Korea .
 The U.S. considers each of these states to be hostile, while China has courted each for economic or strategic reasons . The United States considers each state to be a hostile .
 China regards Taiwan as a renegade province, but U.S. friendliness to Taiwan also creates tensions . On the United States side, although there is no formal alliance, there are no formal alliances .
 China already promotes its interests in conflict with the U.S. China is already promoting its interests with the United States .
 China currently pegs its currency to keep its goods cheap in the U.S. China is currently pegging its currency in order to keep it cheap to the United States .
 Despite protests against this policy, China persists in pegging its currency, which harms domestic manufacturers in the U.S. Despite many protests, China continues to peg its currency .
 China is already attempting to compete with the U.S. as a global superpower . China is attempting to become an international superpower .
 China is also courting states with hostile relationships to the U.S. such as Venezuela and Iran . China is courting countries with hostile relations to the United States .
 All signs point to China attempting to compete with the U.S. for global supremacy . China is expected to launch a bid to rival the United States for supremacy .
 The United States and China agree on many important issues . The U.S. and China can peacefully coexist, argues John Avlon .
 On issues such as terrorism and nuclear proliferation, China sees eye-to-eye with the U.S. On issues like terrorism, nuclear proliferation and terrorism, China says it sees eye to eye with the United States .
 As with the U.S. and the Soviet Union during the Cold War, there is room for agreement on issues of strategic importance that will allow for cooperation between the two great powers .
 China's ""peaceful rise"" strategy has avoided direct conflict with the U.S. for 30 years . In addition, China's "peaceful" rise has avoided directly conflict with United States . The United States has not been involved in any conflict with China in 30 years.
 Both states have large, credible nuclear forces that can deter the opponent from attacking . Both countries have large nuclear forces .
 This suggests that relations will remain civil and stable between the U.S. and China . While this may not rule out proxy wars, it does suggest that this will not be the case .
 America depends on Chinese goods flowing in at reasonable prices, while China depends on the U.S. market for its export-led growth strategy . America relies heavily on China for its success in the United States .
 This situation of mutual dependence will keep relations warm, since hostility would threaten to undermine these trade relationships . This situation will keep the U.S.-U.K. relations warm .
 Although the U.S. does not formally recognize Taiwan, American has signed a friendship treaty with the island . American does not recognize Taiwan .
 Bergsten, C Fred, Charles Freeman, Nicholas Lardy, Nicholas R Lardy and Derek Mitchell. Mitchell. Bergsten . Mitchell . Mitchell. Lardy. Mitchell .
 To many Americans, the world seems more war-prone and violent than ever . The country is at war on a scale not seen since Vietnam . The U.S. has not seen a war since Vietnam.
 For the world as a whole, the current period is one of the least warlike ever . Yet for the world's whole history, it's one of its least-warlike ever, says David Cameron .
 In the first half of the 20th century, world wars killed tens of millions and left whole continents in ruin . World wars left millions dead and continents in ruins . World War II was the first of its kind in the world, with millions killed in it .
 During the Cold War, proxy wars killed millions, and the world feared a nuclear war that could have wiped out our species . In the second half of that century, proxy war killed millions of people in proxy wars .
 In the early 21st century, wars like those in Afghanistan and Syria kill tens or hundreds of thousands . Now, in the early 20th century, such wars kill tens of thousands of people, many of them young .
 We fear terrorist attacks that could destroy a city, but not life on the planet . We fear terrorists could destroy cities, not life, but life on planet . The world's most powerful cities are threatened by terrorist attacks .
 Generation by generation, the world has moved forward, unevenly but inexorably, from tens of millions killed, to millions, to hundreds of thousands . Millions of people have been killed, from millions to millions of thousands, since then .
 "This is still a large number and the impacts of war are still catastrophic," says the president . "The impact of war is still catastrophic. This is still an enormous problem," he says .
 Major wars might fade away altogether, though minor wars and terrorist attacks may continue to kill thousands of people . If we could understand and sustain this trend, major wars may fade away .
 Events in the post-Cold War era continue this long-term trend toward smaller wars, experts say . The U.S. has a long history of smaller wars .
 Most of the wars that flared up after the Cold War ended, such as in Bosnia, Kosovo, Algeria, Rwanda, Rwanda and Burundi, have also come to an end . The Cold War era has also ended in many other countries, including Rwanda and Uganda .
 The Irish Republican Army finished permanently dismantling its weaponry in 2005 . In 2005, the IRA was forced to permanently dismantle its weaponry .
 India and Pakistan began their first cease-fire in a decade . Burma’s government and its largest rebel militia also agreed to a cease-fires . The two nations have been at odds with each other for years .
 Today’s most serious conflicts consist mainly of skirmishing rather than all-out battles . The U.S. has been involved in more than 100 per cent of the world's wars .
 The 2003 invasion of Iraq and the 2008 RussianGeorgian war were both short and one-sided affairs . The last battles between heavily armed forces on both sides were the 2003 Iraq invasion and 2008 Russia-Georgia war .
 Last sustained interstate war, between Ethiopia and Eritrea, ended in 2000 . The last sustained interstate conflict ended in Eritrea-Ethiopia . Eritrea and Ethiopia are neighbors of Eritrea .
 The last great power war (with great powers fighting each other) ended more than 50 years ago . Great power wars were fought between great powers in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In 2012, the world’s most destructive war was in Syria, where 60,000 lives were lost . Syria's government suppression of a rebel rebellion cost more than a million lives over two years .
 In Afghanistan the long war dragged on, and in Democratic Congo fighting flared again in the unstable east . In Democratic Congo the conflict was still raging in the east .
 African Union troops drove Islamist militants out of much of Somalia, and in early 2013, French forces were trying to do the same in Mali .
 Deaths caused by all types of war, including shelling, car bombs, and airstrikes, have fallen dramatically over the past 60 years . Deaths have also fallen dramatically in the last 60 years.
 There is a consistent trend downward in this graph over recent decades, suggesting an overall movement toward less war in the international system . Some years are higher or lower than others, but there is an overall trend downward .
 These approaches generally are optimistic than realism about the prospects for peace . Among other common elements, these approaches are more optimistic than realistic about peace .
 Realists see the laws of power politics as relatively timeless and unchanging . Liberal theorists generally see the rules of IR slowly evolving through time and becoming more and more peaceful .
 The main theories discussed in this and the following chapter all hold that we are not doomed to a world of recurring war but can achieve a more peaceful world . The main theory of the main theories is that we should not be doomed to recurring war .
 This chapter reviews liberal theories of domestic politics and foreign policy making . Liberal theories place importance on domestic and individual levels of analysis in explaining state behavior .
 Liberal theories of IR try to explain how peace and cooperation are possible . Kant and Peace are the result of a Kantian and Peace philosophy .
 Liberal Theories 87 reciprocity principle, was that states could develop organizations and rules to facilitate cooperation, specifically by forming a world federation resembling today’s United Nations . This answer forms the foundation of present-day liberal institutionalism .
 Kant’s second answer, operating at a lower level of analysis, was that peace depends on the internal character of governments . Kant's second answer: Peace depends on a government's internal character .
 He reasoned republics, with a legislative branch that can hold the monarch in check, will be more peaceful than autocracies . He reasoned that republics with legislative branch can be peaceful . He said republics will be peaceful if they have a legislative power .
 This answer, along with Kant’s related point that citizens of any country deserve hospitality in any other country, is consistent with the reciprocity principle, but also relies on the identity principle . This answer is also consistent with Kant's point of reciprocity .
 It explains states’ preferences based on the social interactions within the state . Like the social theories discussed later in this chapter, it explains states' preferences .
 A variation on Kant’s answer, namely that democracies do not fight each other, is the basis of present democratic peace theory . The peace theory is also discussed later in this chapter of this chapter .
 Kant’s third answer, that trade promotes peace, relies on the presumption that trade increases wealth, cooperation, and global well-being . Governments will not want to disrupt any process that adds to the wealth of their state, Kant says .
 As trade between states increases, they will find that they become mutually dependent on each other for goods . The relationship between states and each other will become more dependent on one another .
 This mutual dependence between states is referred to as economic interdependence . The relationship between states and each other is known as 'interdependence' in economic terms .
 Scholars often differentiate situations of sensitivity, vulnerability and vulnerability, where there are few or no alternative suppliers . Scholars often distinguish situations where one state relies on another to provide an important good .
 States worry about their reliance on other states for strategic minerals needed for military purposes, such as special minerals or alloys for aircraft production and uranium for atomic weapons .
 Leaders worry about vulnerability giving other countries leverage over them in instances of conflict . Leaders worry that vulnerability gives other nations leverage over countries .
 Realists point to the fact that arguments about interdependence and peace were common prior to World War I, yet war occurred anyway . Realists say that arguments were common before the war, but war occurred .
 Kant’s first answer to the question of how peace can evolve is that of states to develop and follow mutually advantageous rules, with international institutions to monitor and enforce them .
 Liberal theories treat rational actors as capable of forgoing short-term individual interests in order to further the long-term well-being of a community to which they belong . Theories treat rational people as able to forgo their own interests to help their community .
 In several important institutions, such as the World Trade Organization and the European Union, decisions require consensus among all members, making them all equal in governance . The EU is one of the world's most important institutions .
 To Kant, international cooperation was a more rational option for states than resorting to war . International cooperation was more rational than resort to war, Kant said .
 In realist conceptions of rationality, war and violence appear rational (because they often advance short-term state interests) But in liberal theories, war is seen as irrational deviations that result from defective reasoning . War and violence are seen as rational deviations that harm the interests of warring states .
 The neoliberal approach differs from earlier liberal approaches in that it concedes to realism several important assumptions, including that states are unitary actors rationally pursuing their self-interests in an anarchy system .
 States achieve cooperation fairly often because it is in their interest to do so . States can learn to use institutions to ease the pursuit of mutual gains and the reduction of possibilities for cheating .
 Despite the many sources of conflict in IR, states cooperate most of the time . Despite the fact that many states in IR cooperate, most of them do not . Iran is one of the most powerful countries in the world, but it is also a major source of conflict .
 Neorealists’ pessimism about international cooperation is not valid . Neoliberal scholars try to show that even in a world of unitary rational states, the neorealist’s pessimism is valid .
 States can create mutual rules, expectations, and institutions to promote behavior that enhances cooperation . States can also create institutions that promote cooperation, according to the authors .
 In particular, reciprocity in IR helps international cooperation emerge despite the absence of central authority . The IR is a form of international cooperation that helps to emerge despite central authority in IR .
 Through reciprocity, not a world government, norms and rules are enforced, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 In international security, reciprocity underlies the gradual improvement of relations sought by arms control agreements and peacekeeping missions . The reciprocity of reciprocity is key to peacekeeping efforts, peacekeepers missions .
 The threat to restrict trade in retaliation for unfair practices is a strong incentive to comply with rules and norms . In international political economy, cooperation can create great benefits through trade, the author says .
 The World Trade Organization and its predecessor, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, function on this principle . States that defect on their obligations by increasing tariffs must suffer punishment by allowing other states to place tariffs on their goods .
 Neoliberals argue that reciprocity can be an effective strategy for achieving cooperation in a situation of conflicting interests . The idea of reciprocity is a key part of a successful cooperation strategy .
 Liberal theories emphasize the potential for rivalries to evolve into cooperative relationships . States recognize that achieving mutual benefits is most cost effective in the long run . If one side expresses willingness to cooperate, it could lead to a cooperative relationship .
 The United States and Soviet/Russian space programs began cooperating in the 1960s and continue today, with other countries . For example, the U.S. and Russia are still cooperating .
 Astronauts from the United States, Russia, Germany, and Sweden share the International Space Station, 2006 .
 Liberal Theories 89 and promises to reciprocate the other’s cooperative and conflictual actions . The other side has an incentive to work out a cooperative bargain with the other side .
 The vow of future reciprocity often need not be explicitly stated explicitly . Because reciprocity is relatively easy to interpret, the vow of reciprocity can be easily interpreted .
 In 1969, China’s relations with the United States had been on ice for 20 years . For example, in 1969, the U.S.-China relations with China had been under ice .
 A U.S. economic embargo against China was holding back the latter’s economic development . A United States economic embargo is holding back China's economic development. The embargo was held back by the United States .
 President Nixon relaxed the U.S. trade embargo against China . Nixon decided to slightly relax the United States trade embargo on China .
 China released three U.S. citizens whose boat had earlier drifted into Chinese waters . Three days later, China released the three Americans .
 Nixon visited China in a spirit of rapprochement in 1972 . China reciprocated other U.S. initiatives, and in 1972, Nixon visited .
 In 2009, the Obama administration announced it would stop building a missile defense system in Europe that Russia considered provocative . Similarly, in 2009, it stopped building a system that Russia deemed provocative .
 Some saw this as a move to gain Russian support for sanctions against Iran for its nuclear program . Some thought this move was a bid to gain Russia's support for Iran .
 The UN Security Council approved tighter sanctions on Iran in the spring of 2010, with the Russians voting in favor . The Russians voted in favor of the tighter sanctions .
 Neoliberals use the Prisoner’s Dilemma game to illustrate their argument that cooperation is possible . The game is used to illustrate that cooperation can be achieved .
 Each actor can gain by individually defecting, but both lose when both defect . Each actor loses if both defect, and each loses when both defects .
 In IR, states often have a mix of conflicting and mutual interests . Similarly, in IR, in Iran, states have a mixture of conflicting or mutual interests.
 The dilemma can be resolved if the game is played over and over again . An accurate model of IR, in which states deal with each other in repeated interactions, can resolve the problem .
 A strategy of strict reciprocity after an initial move can bring about mutual cooperation in a repeated PD game . The other player must conclude that any defection will merely provoke a like defection in response .
 reciprocity contains the potential for eliciting cooperation, but it also contains a danger of runaway hostility . reciprocity has the potential to elicit cooperation but it can also be dangerous, says CNN's John Sutter .
 When two sides both reciprocate but never manage to put relations on a cooperative footing, the result can be a drawn-out, nasty, tit-for-tat exchange of punishments .
 This characterizes Israeli relations with Palestinian militants over the years . Israel's relations with Palestinians have been strained in the past, but they have been friendly .
 Note that as one actor exhibits conflictual behavior , the other matches with negative responses . The two actors are shown to be engaged in conflict .
 Cooperative behavior brings reciprocation cooperation in the immediate time period . Likewise, cooperative behavior also brings reciprocity in the short-term .
 The U.S. and Russia have been at odds with each other for decades . Russia and the U.K. are at odds over the future of the world's most successful nations .
 Building on the reciprocity principle, many norms mediate states’ interactions . Building on reciprocity principles, states' interactions mediate state-to-state interactions .
 Diplomats and international organizations are governed by shared expectations about the rules of correct behavior . For example, diplomatic practices and participation in international organizations, they are both strongly governed by social norms .
 As collective goods problems crop up, states rely on a context of rules, norms, habits, and institutions that make it rational for all sides to avoid the self-defeating outcomes that would result from pursuing narrow, short-term self-interest .
 Neoliberals study historical and contemporary cases in IR to see how institutions and norms affect the possibilities for overcoming dilemmas and achieving international cooperation . Neolibals look at historical, contemporary cases to learn how institutions, norms affect international cooperation.
 Reciprocity, Triangularity, and Cooperation in the Middle East, 1979-1997 . The Middle East is now a major region in the world .
 For neoliberals the emergence of international institutions is key to understanding how states achieve a superior rational outcome that includes long-term self-interest and not just immediate self-interested .
 It is difficult to resolve conflicts without a third party to arbitrate or an overall framework to set common expectations for all parties . Because of the contradictory interpretations that parties to a conflict usually have, it is difficult for parties to resolve conflict .
 Regimes can help solve collective goods problems by increasing transparency . Because everyone knows what everyone else else else is doing, cheating is riskier . Cheating is a riskier problem than cheating is a problem .
 The current revolution in information technologies is strengthening regimes, particularly in this aspect . The current information revolution in the world has strengthened regimes .
 Liberal Theories 91 HEALTHY REGIME . States can identify conflicts and negotiate solutions through regimes more effectively . Also, with better international communication, states can identify conflict and negotiate .
 Most common conception of regimes combines elements of realism and liberalism . The most common conception is that regimes combine realism and liberalism .
 States are seen as autonomous units maximizing their own interests in an anarchic context . States can be autonomous units maximising their interests in a state of anarchy . States are autonomous units that maximise their own interest in their interests .
 Regimes do not play a role in issues in which states can realize their interests directly through unilateral applications of leverage . Regimes should not be involved in issues such as Syria's conflict with the West, the author says .
 regimes come into existence to overcome collective goods dilemmas by coordinating the behaviors of individual states, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "Rigime regimes come to existence because they coordinate individual states"
 Regimes do not substitute for the basic calculations of costs and benefits by states . They just open up new possibilities with more favorable benefit-cost ratios . Regimes don't substitute for basic calculations, but they just open new possibilities .
 Regimes do not constrain states, except in a very narrow and short-term sense . Regimes are not constraining states, as they are not in the long-term, short term . Regime is not a state, but it is a form of state in the short
 National governments face issues such as collective goods or coordination problems would otherwise prevent these governments from achieving their ends . They facilitate and empower national governments faced with issues that would otherwise be prevented from achieving these ends .
 For realists, regimes do not negate the effects of power; more often, they codify and normalize existing power relations in accordance with the dominance principle . Realists are realists in particular, they say .
 The nuclear nonproliferation regime protects the status quo in which only a few states have nuclear weapons . For example, the nonprosprocession regime protects only a handful of states with nuclear weapons.
 Regime regimes do not always decline with the power of hegemons that created them . Yet, regimes do, often, decline with power of theygemons, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Although hegemony may be crucial in establishing regimes, it is not necessary for maintaining them, it's not necessary to maintain them, writes David Frum . Frum says .
 Once actors’ expectations converge around the rules embodied in a regime, the actors realize that the regime serves their own interests . Once actors' expectations converge on the rules, they realize that they are in the interests of themselves .
 Working through the regime becomes a habit, and national leaders may not seriously consider breaking out of the established rules . Working through a regime is a habit for national leaders, and not seriously considering breaking out .
 This persistence of regimes was demonstrated in the 1970s, when United States power declined following the decades of U.S. hegemony since 1945 . This persistence was demonstrated when the U.N. power declined .
 In part, the survival of regimes rests on embedding in permanent institutions such as the UN, NATO, and the International Monetary Fund . The survival of these regimes depends on their embedding with permanent institutions like the UN .
 The world health regime includes states, IGOs such as the World Health Organization . The world Health Organization is working with common expectations about activities to improve health .
 IPE is even more institutionalized, again because of the heavier volume of activity and the wealth that can be realized from cooperation . IPE will continue to be institutionalized in the coming years .
 Institutions gain greater stability and weight than do noninstitutionalized regimes . Institutions gained greater stability than noninstitutionized regimes, experts say . The U.S. Senate of Representatives will hold a hearing on the matter .
 With a staff and headquarters, an international institution can actively promote adherence to the rules in its area of political or economic life . With staff and HQs, international institutions can promote adherence of the rules .
 Important institutions in international security and IPE are discussed in Chapters 7 and 8 of the book .
 Liberal institutionalism also places high value on international law . International law receives its own discussion in Chapter 7 .
 The culmination of liberal institutionalism to date is the European Union, which receives in-depth discussion in Chapter 10 . The European Union is the culmination of the liberal institutionalist movement .
 European states enjoy stable peace among themselves with strong international institutions to bind them . After centuries of devastating wars, European states now enjoy a stable peace . European states are now enjoying a stable stability among themselves .
 The concept of collective security grows out of liberal institutionalism . It refers to the formation of a broad alliance of most major actors in an international system for the purpose of opposing aggression by any actor .
 Kant proposed a federation of the world’s states after treaties ending great power wars had never lasted permanently . Kant's proposal was based on the idea of a federation .
 Since its founding at the end of World War II, the United Nations has performed many valuable services for its members, the countries of the world . The UN budget is estimated to be the largest in the world's history .
 Countries use the UN for diplomacy, peacekeeping, and humanitarian assistance, among other things . The UN is a non-profit organization that helps countries around the world .
 Each country enjoys the services regardless of whether it pays more or less of the UN budget . These services are a collective good for the world’s countries, says the UN . Each country has a right to enjoy the services, regardless of who pays more .
 The organization sets dues for its members, and each is supposed to pay on time . But not infrequently, they pay late, or later and later . The organization pays on time, or late .
 In the 1980s, the United States got into a series of conflicts with the UN about how much the U.S. dues should be .
 By the mid-1990s, the UN members owed billions of dollars in back dues, with the United States alone owing more than a billion dollars . Russia owes about half a billion to the U.S. and the United Kingdom .
 Republican Congress did not approve of President Clinton’s budget requests for the UN . They saw the UN as toothless and ineffective at best at best, corrupt and antiAmerican at worst . United States domestic politics contributed to the problem .
 Reciprocity governs UN dues in principle, since all countries contribute according to a formula based on each individual economy’s size, but in pracLiberal Theories 93 federation, Kant proposed, the majority of states could unite to punish any one state that committed aggression .
 The League of Nations was formed to promote collective security . After the horrors of World War I, the League was formed after the war .
 Its membership did not include all the great powers . Its members proved unwilling to bear the costs of collective action to oppose aggression when it did occur in the 1930s, starting with Japan and Italy .
 Several regional IGOs perform collective security functions as well as economic and cultural ones . The Organization of American States, the Arab League, and the African Union are among those performing security functions .
 When a powerful state commits aggression against a weaker one, it often is not in the immediate interest of other powerful states to go to war over the issue . The U.S. should not engage in a war with a weaker state, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 A second requisite for collective security is that enough members must agree on what constitutes aggression . The U.S. military has been in touch with the U.K. President Barack Obama's administration .
 "This collective security system does not work against aggression by a great power," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not going to be able to defend ourselves against aggression."
 When the Soviet Union invaded 14 Kant, Perpetual Peace . tice, countries defected from that formula to promote their own short-term interests . Countries defected to that formula in order to protect their own interests .
 The dominance principle is of little use since the UN cannot use military force to make a country pay its dues . UN cannot force a country to make its dues. It cannot use force to enforce the dominance principle .
 The UN Foundation, founded in 1998 with a large contribution by media mogul Ted Turner, started a campaign to use the identity principle to solve the problem of U.S. nonpayment of dues .
 This appeal to Americans’ concept of their nation as great changed the tone of debate about the UN dues . The UN dues debate has been heated up in recent weeks .
 In 2009, the United States paid up the last of its back obligations . The United States began to catch up on arrears, and in 2009, it paid up .
 It was the first time since the founding of the UN that one member state had invaded, occupied, and annexed another—attempting to erase it as a sovereign state . First time since founding of UN that member state has invaded and occupied another .
 The invasion was so blatant a violation of Kuwaiti sovereignty that the Security Council had little trouble labeling it aggression and authorizing the use of force by a multinational coalition .
 The threat Iraq posed to the world’s oil supplies provided additional incentive for coalition members to contribute money or troops to solve the problem . Coalition members contributed to the solution .
 In 2002-2003, by contrast, the Security Council debated Iraq’s failure to keep the agreements it had made at the end of the Gulf War, in particular the promise to disclose and destroy all its weapons of mass destruction . The Security Council repeatedly debated Iraq's failure to .
 A proposed U.S.-British resolution authorizing military force was withdrawn after France promised to veto it . France, Germany, Russia, and China had all strongly opposed it and the war .
 Public opinion around the world, especially in predominantly Muslim countries, also opposed the war . Public opinion was also opposed to the war.
 When the UN did not act, the United States, Britain, and Australia sent military forces and overthrew Saddam Hussein by force, comparing the UN to the toothless League of Nations . The U.S., Britain, Australia and the U.K. sent forces to overthrow Saddam Hussein
 The U.S. forces found no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, but then found itself in a prolonged counterinsurgency war . The United States found no WMD in Iraq but then faced a long-term counter-insurgent war .
 Although the world’s collective security system is creaky and not always effective, bypassing it to take military action also holds dangers . In retrospect, although the world's collective security systems are creaky, they are not always always effective .
 Failed states have very weak control of their territory, making them potential havens for drug trafficking, money laundering, and terrorist bases . Failed states could be havens for money laundering and drug trafficking .
 Domestic politics looks rather like international anarchy. Essentially, domestic politics looks like anarchy, says CNN.com's Mark Carney .
 In these cases, the international community has a duty to intervene, according to some approaches, to restore law and order . Some approaches include intervening in the fight against the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 Kant argued that lasting peace would depend on states’ becoming republics, with legislatures to check the power of monarchs to make war . The Democratic Peace Kant argues that states should become republics .
 He thought that checks and balances in government would act as a brake on the use of military force . Autocratic governments in which a single individual could make war without regard for the effect on the population .
 IR scholars have linked democracy with a kind of foreign policy fundamentally different from that of authoritarianism . IR scholars say democracy is different from authoritarianism and authoritarianism.
 15 Lepgold, Joseph, and Thomas G Weiss, eds. The theory they considered was based on a theory of the origin of the book .
 The Democratic Peace and the Territorial Conflict in the Twentieth Century . The Democratic peace and the territorial conflict in the Ninieth Century. The Peace and Territorial conflict . The Peace is Peace and Peace in Peace in the United States .
 The three most war-prone states of the past two centuries (according to political scientists who count wars) were France, Russia, and Britain . Britain. France .
 Britain was democracy throughout, France for part of the period, and Russia not at all . Britain was a democracy throughout . France was not a democracy .
 What is true about democracies is that although they fight wars against authoritarian states, democracies almost never fight each other . Democracy almost never fights each other, says Julian Zelizer .
 No major historical cases contradict this generalization, which is known as the democratic peace . The democratic peace is a generalization of the generalization .
 As there have not been many democracies for very long, the generalization could be just a coincidence . This seems unlikely, though this seems unlikely .
 Citizens of democratic societies may simply not see citizens of other democracies as enemies . Or, citizens of democracies may simply see other nations as enemies, or not as enemies of others .
 authoritarian governments of other states can be seen as enemies . By contrast, authoritarian governments in other countries are seen as allies .
 The peace among democracies gives empirical support to a long-standing liberal claim that, because it is rooted in the domestic level of analysis, contradicts realism’s claim that the most important explanations are at the interstate level .
 Because democracies rarely fight each other, worldwide democratization might lead to lasting peace . The world's most democratic nations are democracies, not dictatorships . The U.S. should be open to democracy in the world, the author says .
 Tunisia holds its first free election after leading the Arab Spring and reversing decades of authoritarian rule, 2011 . Tunisia's first free elections were held in Tunisia in 2011 . The Arab Spring led to Tunisia's overthrow of authoritarian regime .
 Military governments gave way to democratically elected civilian ones throughout most of Latin America as well as in several African and Asian countries . Military governments give way to civilian ones in Latin America and Africa .
 South Africa, the last white-ruled African country, adopted majority rule in 1994 . South Africa is the country's only white-white majority in Africa .
 In the late 1990s, democracy replaced long-standing dictatorships in Indonesia and Nigeria, both regional giants . The country's democracy was replaced by democracy in the 1990s .
 In 2004-2005, pro-democracy forces won victories in Ukraine, Afghanistan, Iraq, and Kyrgyzstan . In 2005-2006 pro-democracies won elections in Ukraine and Afghanistan .
 In 2011-2012, the Arab Spring revolutions catalyzed democratic transitions in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and Yemen . Syria potentially following suit if the government falls there .
 In 2012, Burma underwent a rapid transition toward democracy after decades of harsh military rule . Burma's transition to democracy began in 2012 after years of military rule.
 Military coups took place in Madagascar and Honduras in 2009, 2009, Niger in 2010, and Guinea-Bissau and Mali in 2012 .
 Iran rigged an election in 2009 and brutally cracked down on those protesting it . Iran rigged a 2009 election and cracked down heavily on protesters . The country has been rocked by a series of protests since then .
 We do not know where democratization will lead, but it's now conceivable that someday nearly all of the world’s states will be democratically governed . We don’t know where the future of democracy will lead .
 As Kant envisaged, an international community based on peaceful relations may emerge . The world of peace may emerge as a result of peaceful relations between nations .
 Mature democracies almost never fight each other, but transition to democracy may be more prone to war than a stable democracy or a stable authoritarian government . Therefore, the process of democratization does not necessarily bode well for peace in the short term .
 This theory gained support in early 2006, when Iraqi elections were followed by rise in sectarian violence . Then Palestinian elections brought to power the militant faction Hamas, which rejects Israel's right to exist .
 Democracy is often associated with peace and cooperation, but democratic institutions can make cooperation more difficult . Democracy can make it difficult to cooperate with the United States, the author says . Democracy is also difficult to work with in the U.S.
 Pressure for raising trade tariffs often arise from democratically elected legislatures . For example, pressure for raising tariffs often arises from democratically-elected legislatures .
 While liberal scholars often extol the virtues of democracy, these same domestic institutions can make the process of international cooperation more complex . Thus, while liberals extol democracy, they also extol domestic institutions .
 Liberal theories provide a host of alternatives to power-based realist theories . Liberal theories thus provide an alternative to power based theories, such as power theories .
 Liberal theories focus on solving the collective action problem using the reciprocity principle . Nearly all liberal theories use this principle to solve the problem of collective action using reciprocity .
 States come to expect reciprocal behavior regarding cooperation from other states . Whether because of international or domestic institutions, institutions expect reciprocity . States expect reciprocal cooperation from others .
 In this way, their calculations of interests move from short-term concerns to long-term considerations . This way, they can be seen as a good example of a good leader in the world .
 Next, we review another set of alternatives to realism that focus on the identity principle . The identity principle is a key to realism .
 IR theory may be grouped together as social theories, meaning that they rely on social interaction to explain individuals’ and states’ preferences . Social Theories are based on the interaction of individuals and states to explain preferences .
 These theories contrast with the assumption of fixed, timeless preferences in most theories . Mansfield, Edward D. Mansfield and Jack Snyder.
 Constructivism, a fast-growing approach in IR, asks how states construct their interest through their interactions with one another . Constructivism is a fast growing approach in the IR world .
 It is best described as an approach rather than a theory since, when stripped to its core, it says nothing about IR per se . When stripped to the core, the IR says nothing .
 In fact, most constructivist explanations draw heavily on the identity principle to explain international behavior . The identity principle is used to explain how international behavior occurs .
 You Are the New Prime Minister"" at MyPoliSciLab Identities and Ideas Matter Constructivism . Constructivism is interested in how actors define their national interests, threats to those interests, and their interests’ relationships to one another. Constructivism aims to examine the role of
 Realists (and neoliberals) tend to simply take state interests as given as given . Realists tend to just take state interest as given. Realists think state interests are always given .
 constructivism puts IR in the context of broader social relations . Constructivism is a constructivist theory of IR in terms of society .
 States decide what they want based not only on material needs, but also on “social interaction’s” interaction . States decide based on what they need based on ‘social’ interaction .
 Just as a shopper may decide to buy a particular mp3 player because it will be perceived as cool (that is, more socially acceptable) so states may choose policies based on what they perceive will be “popular” with other states .
 Constructivistists recognize that power is not absent from international relations . Constructivist research has many strands of research .
 Realists would quickly answer that North Korea poses a bigger threat, but from a pure military power perspective, Great Britain is a far superior military force to North Korea . Realists say North Korea is bigger threat than Great Britain .
 No one would argue that Great Britain is a threat to the U.S. no matter how many nuclear weapons it builds and no matter what deep disagreements about foreign policy become . Yet no one would say Great Britain's nuclear weapons threaten the United States even though it has nuclear weapons .
 Constructivist scholars would point out the shared history, shared alliances, and shared norms that tell Americans and the British they are not a threat to one another although they are very powerful militarily .
 The identity of the potential adversary matters, not just its military capabilities, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Identities of potential adversaries matter more than their military capabilities"
 This is a rejection of the realist assumption that states always want more rather than less power and wealth . This is the assumption that state interests exist independently of a context of interactions among states . It is also the assumption of state interests in relation to interactions between states .
 Constructivists hold that these state identities are complex and changing, and arise from interactions with other states, often through a process of socialization . Constructivism is a theory that states are complex, changing and complex, and their identities change .
 Some constructivist scholars contend that over time, states can conceptualize one another in such a way that there is no danger of a security dilemma, arms races, or the other effects of anarchy .
 Culture, Social Identity, and Institutional Rationality in International Relations are discussed in a book titled, "Culture, International Relations" The book is published by the International Institute for International Relations .
 By the end of the century, war had become unthinkable, European identities are now intertwined with the European Union, not with violent nationalism that led to two world wars . European identities now are intertwined with European Union .
 For constructivists, power politics, anarchy, and military force cannot explain this change . Constructivists say power politics and anarchy cannot explain the change .
 Institutions, regimes, norms, and changes in identity are better explanations . Institutions and norms, such as institutions, norms and norms are better explained .
 Societies as a whole also change over time in what they consider to be threatening . Societies also change what they see as threatening, say experts .
 Nonstate actors invaded ports, pillaged goods, committed murder, and flaunted all international authority . These nonstate actors invade ports and pillage goods . They flaunted international authority, flaunting all authority .
 It would not be hard to consider such behavior terrorism even though the pirates had no political goals in their violence . The pirates' violence was not political .
 Even if not terrorism, no one would doubt the costs associated with piracy . Even if it was terrorism, piracy is a big problem .
 Many states, including the United States, used their navies in attempts to eradicate pirates . The U.S. Navy is one of the oldest navies to have been used in the world .
 Today we celebrate pirates by making them sports mascots, naming amusement rides after them, and glorifying them in movies . Yet, despite the danger and harm historically caused by pirates, today we celebrate them .
 Of course, one could argue that pirates are no longer a threat—even though many acts of piracy still occur on the high seas . Of course .
 The threat from piracy has remained high for many years . Even apart from the high-profile hijackings near Somalia in 20082009, the threat has remained .
 We find it acceptable to play down piracy threat by incorporating them into popular culture . Yet, we find it unacceptable to play it down .
 No doubt someone from two centuries ago would find such acceptance odd . But it's not surprising that someone would find it odd .
 Constructivists are quick to point out that what societies or states consider dangerous is not universal or timeless . Constructivistists say that what society considers dangerous isn't universal .
 Social norms and conventions change, and these changes can have tremendous implications for foreign policy . Social norms are changing, and social norms and convention norms change, says CNN's John Sutter .
 States may also come to value and covet something like status or reputation, which are social, not material, concepts . Status or reputation is social and not materialistic concepts . States may come to covet status, reputation or reputation .
 These theories may do better than realist or liberal approaches in explaining major changes in a state's foreign policy goals and image in the world that arise from internal changes and new self-concepts rather than external constraints .
 Examples might include the breakup of the Soviet Union and the election of Barack Obama as U.S. president .
 Iran's identity as an Islamic revolutionary state affects its foreign policies . Iran is the only country in the world to have declared itself an Islamic state . The country's foreign policy has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The morals police close a barber shop in Iran for giving Western-style haircuts in 2008 .
 Switzerland's status as a neutral state gives Switzerland prestige and power, not a material power like money or guns, but a normative power to intervene diplomatically in important international affairs . Switzerland is a non-stately state, but it has influence in the world's most important nations .
 Canada’s foreign policy contains its own identity-driven imperatives, usually revolving around peacekeeping and humanitarian operations .
 Identity-based explanations can help to explain the behavior of great powers as well, says the author of the book . These identity-based explanation can help explain behavior of the world's most powerful .
 In 1993, the UN Security Council established a war crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia . The tribunal was established by the UN in 1993 .
 Its effectiveness was limited in its first years by inadequacy of funding necessary to hire investigators and translators, rent offices and phone lines, so forth .
 The contributions of the great powers to support the tribunal varied, with the United States providing the most support and Great Britain providing very little . Great Britain provided very little support .
 Liberal theorists would quickly recognize a collective goods problem in paying for the tribunal . The tribunal would be the first of its kind in the world .
 The world community benefits from the work of the tribunal (inasmuch as it deters future aggression and genocide) But each individual state gains this benefit—however beneficial it ends up being—regardless of its own contribution .
 Britain was being rational to free-ride because the U.S. and others were willing to pick up enough of the tab to make the tribunal at least minimally effective . By this logic, Britain was free-riding because the United States and others would pick up .
 British leaders may not have wanted the tribunal to succeed because Britain tacitly sided with Serbia . Serbia was not cooperating with a tribunal that had indicted the Bosnian Serb leaders as war criminals .
 The same geopolitical factors that led Britain to side with Serbia in the past were still operating . Serbia vs Croatia is the first time the two sides have met in a World Cup final .
 War crimes come and go, by this reasoning, but great power interests remain fairly constant . Great power interests are fairly constant, but war crimes come to an end .
 History provides ‘experiments’ that, even though we do not control them, help sort out competing explanations . Both theories seem to have merit, but sometimes history provides "experiments"
 In 1997, a liberal government headed by Prime Minister Tony Blair replaced the conservative government of John Major . In this case, in 1997, the liberal government was replaced by a conservative government .
 This change did not affect the explanatory ‘variables’ of either theory, the author says . Britain’s strategic and historical interests and alliances in the Balkans were not affected by the change .
 Blair’s government shifted its Bosnia policy dramatically, leading a raid to arrest two war crimes suspects and contributing substantial funds for the tribunal to construct a second courtroom . But in fact, Blair led a raid on two war crime suspects and contributed substantial funds to the tribunal .
 Blair's idea of Britain's place in the international community drove the outcome of the case . Blair’s idea of the future of Britain in the world was the result of the decision .
 Constructivist research relies heavily on international norms and their power to constrain state action . Another field of constructivist research also relies heavily upon international norms, such as international norms .
 A constructivist explanation might be possible, say Johan Olsen and James G. Olsen .
 In 2008, your predecessor had applied for NATO membership, a previous application was rejected . President Barack Obama had applied to NATO membership in 2008, but was denied .
 NATO left the door open for future membership, but Ukrainian public was angry over NATO rejection . NATO rejected the move, but the Ukrainian public is angry over the rejection .
 President Obama has continued cooperation with NATO in several political issue areas . He has continued to cooperate with NATO over several political issues, he says .
 Russia supplies much of your natural gas and several times has cut off supplies during political disputes, most recently in the winter of 2008-2009 . Russia supplies most of the world's natural gas .
 Your country has responded to these cutoffs by closing Russian oil pipelines that pass through your country en route to Western Europe . Your country's response to the cutoffs is to close these pipelines .
 Entering NATO could provide political support and military protection against any aggressive Russian diplomacy . Russia's entry into NATO would provide political and military support for Russia .
 You have been much less supportive of NATO membership than your predecessor, says Obama . You have had a very low-key role in NATO membership, he says .
 Russia has reassured Russia that Ukraine will not reapply for membership of the European Union . Ukraine has not reapplied for membership in the short-term, however .
 You have told leaders of several Western European states that you wish your country to remain neutral in international affairs . You have also told leaders that you want the UK to be neutral in world affairs .
 You authored a bill passed by the legislature that removed the phrase ""NATO membership"" from the list of official national security goals . Finally, you authored a law that removed NATO membership from the national security goal .
 Historically, a major source of opposition to Ukraine's entry into NATO comes from your own population . Historically, the opposition to your own country comes from within your own people . The U.S. has a history of opposing NATO membership .
 Opinion polls show that your public opposes Ukraine's membership in NATO by a margin of nearly two to one . Opinion polls also show that you oppose Ukraine joining NATO by two-to-one .
 Your own party's electoral base is located near the Russian border and favors better relations with Russia . Your party is located in Russia and your own party has a strong anti-Russian sentiment .
 The public also supported Ukraine's successful application to the World Trade Organization . Ukraine's application was approved by the public . The public supported the application .
 Public opposition to NATO is not anti-Western per se, but is rooted in the NATO airstrikes against Serbia in 1999 in the war over Kosovo . NATO airstrikes in Kosovo in 1999 were the result of the Kosovo war .
 Ukraine wants to reorient its foreign policy toward the West, but so far it has excluded NATO membership . There is a general desire to re-orient Ukraine's foreign policy towards the West .
 Russia again cuts off supplies of natural gas and other resources to your country . Russia is the world's most powerful state of power .
 The dispute is over your continued cooperation with NATO in political affairs . The dispute has been over cooperation with the U.S. with NATO . The U.N. has been involved in a series of disputes with Russia .
 Russia is demanding that you lessen your cooperation with the NATO alliance or face increasing political pressure and economic pressure . Russia has demanded that NATO allies lessen their cooperation with each other .
 NATO membership is not a prerequisite for EU membership . EU members would not look favorably on you abandoning an international regime to which you had committed, he says .
 European powers occasionally intervened to protect Christian subjects of the Ottoman Empire from massacres, but generally ignored non-Christian victims . In the 19th century, European powers sometimes intervened to help Christian subjects .
 Decolonization enshrined the principle of self-determination and as human rights became widely valued, the scope of humanitarian intervention expanded . Humanitarian intervention became more widespread as decolonization became more common .
 It is no longer acceptable to view only Christians as deserving of protection . The international community does not always respond effectively to humanitarian crises, it is said .
 The United States in this example tried to act in an appropriate fashion, rather than according to the dictates of cost-benefit calculations . The U.S. in this instance tried to do the right thing rather than go along with cost of living .
 Examples of this identity approach can be found in the developing world as well as in the U.S.
 Some constructivists have argued that countries in Latin America, Africa, and the Middle East have adopted or changed policies in response to international norms .
 Developed states have raced to create science bureaucracies and/or begin technological modernization of their militaries . For example, many developing states have begun to create .
 Constructivists point out that the reason developing states choose to spend their limited resources on such projects is their desire to be perceived as ‘modern” by the international system .
 Constructivists emphasize that identities and norms must be used to explain this seemingly puzzling behavior . Ironically, many states that build science bureaucracies have few scientists while many states . build advanced militaries have few enemies .
 In an age of global communication and relative ease of transportation, many possibilities exist . Many possibilities exist in the world of travel and communication .
 Some contend that individuals, labeled norm entrepreneurs, through travel, writing, and meeting with elites change ideas and encourage certain types of norms .
 Some point to broad-based social movements such as the anti-apartheid movement encouraging the development of a global norm of racial equality . Others point to nongovernmental organizations such as social movements .
 International organizations can diffuse norms of what is appropriate and inappropriate behavior . Others show how international organizations diffuse norms .
 In each case, new ideas and norms, rather than power and self-interest, drive state behavior . New ideas, norms, not power, drive states' behavior, drive it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Research in the constructivist tradition has expanded rapidly in recent years . O A Research in constructivist traditions has expanded .
 Scholars have examined the role of the European Union in socializing elites in new member states 01 as well as the United Nations in conferring legitimacy on the use of A A force .
 Martha Finnemore, Martha. 27, Martha, 27, investigated how international organizations are funded . Others have investigated how they are funded by international organizations . Martha's investigation into international organizations' funding comes to light .
 U.N. Education, Scientific, and Cultural Organizations and Science Policy . The United Nations is responsible for education, scientific, and cultural organizations and science .
 constructivist scholars have begun to investigate how notions of identity and symbolism are important for understanding terrorist movements and counterterrorism policy . They have also begun to look at the role of symbolism in terrorism .
 Liberals argue constructivist scholars pay too little attention to the formal institutions and politics within them . Liberals argue that constructivist scholarship pays too much attention to formal institutions . Liberals say that constructivism is a formative formative theory .
 Postmodernism itself is difficult to present in a simple or categorical way . For this reason, postmodernism is not easy to present as a matter of fact . The postmodernist movement is not simple or straightforward .
 Postmodernism calls into question the whole notion of states as actors . More fundamentally, postmodernism is questioning the notion of state as actors, he says .
 States have no tangible reality; they are “fictions” that we construct to make sense of the actions of large numbers of individuals . States are a "fictions" that we (as scholars and citizens) construct, they construct, construct . We (as scholar and citizens
 For postmodernists, the stories told about the actions and policies of states are just that—stories . Postmodernists say the stories of states should be told just as little as possible .
 From this perspective, an arbitrary distinction leads bookstores to put spy novels on the fiction shelf . Biographies and histories go on the nonfiction shelf . Spy novels are put on fiction shelves while biographies are on nonfiction .
 None of these is an objective reality, and all are filtered through an interpretive process that distorts the 33 Barnett, Michael, and Martha Finnemore . None of the 33 images are objective reality and all have been filtered through interpretation .
 Symbols of Strategies, Strategies, and Choices for International Relations Scholarship after September 11 . The 9/11 Memorial for the U.S. was dedicated September 11, 2001 .
 The Soviet Union was treated by realists as a single actor with a single set of objective interests . Realists treated the Soviet Union as an actor with an objective set of interests .
 It was considered the second most important actor in the world. Indeed, it was considered by the world's most powerful actor . It is now considered one of the most important actors in history .
 Realists were amazed when the Soviet Union split into 15 pieces, each containing its own fractious groups and elements . The Soviet Union was divided into 15 groups, each with its own group and elements.
 It became clear that the ‘unitary state’ called the Soviet Union had masked (and let realists ignore) the divergent experiences of constituent republics, ethnic groups, and individuals . The Soviet Union was a state of state of Soviet Union .
 Postmodernists seek to “deconstruct’ such constructions as states, the international system, and the associated stories and arguments with which realists portray the nature of international relations . Postmodernism seeks to deconstruct the constructions of states and international relations, such as
 To deconstruct a text, a term borrowed from literary criticism, means to tease apart the words in order to reveal hidden meanings . Deconstructing a text involves looking for what might be omitted or included only implicitly .
 The hidden meanings not explicitly addressed in the text are often called the subtext . Omissions are an aspect of subtext, as when realist theories of IR omit women and gender, for example .
 In its emphasis on states, realism omits the roles of individuals, domestic politics, economic classes, MNCs, and other nonstate actors . Realistic realism is not about individuals or domestic politics and domestic politics . Realism is about states, not individual actors .
 In its focus on the great powers, realism omits the experiences of poor countries . Realistic realism is not about great powers but it's about poor countries, says the author .
 In its attention to military forms of leverage, it omits the roles of various nonmilitary forms of . leverage . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 Realism focuses so narrowly because its aim is to reduce IR to a simple, coherent model . Realism aims to focus on a simple model of IR, rather than a complex, coherent IR model .
 To postmodernists, the realist model is none of these things . It is a biased model that creates a narrow and one-sided story for the purpose of promoting the interests of powerful actors . Postmodernists say realist models are biased and biased .
 Postmodernists seek to destroy this model along with any other model that tries to represent IR in simple objective categories . Postmodernistists want to destroy the model .
 Postmodernists instead want to celebrate the diversity of experiences that make up IR without needing to make sense of them by simplifying and categorizing them . Postmodernism wants to celebrate diversity without need to make any sense of the experiences .
 Realist approach to IR with its separation of domestic and international politics, argues that domestic and economic attributes of societies shape external relations with other states . This emphasis on classes contrasts with the realist approach of IR .
 We will discuss Marxist gjj at MyPoliSciLab 38 Shapiro, Michael J Textualizing Global Politics . Watch the video ""Castro's Cuba"" at My PoliScienceLab 38 . Shapiro, Shapiro, J. Textualized Global Politics.
 Marxist theories as social theories contrast with the realist paradigm . Here we will show, briefly, how Marxist theories differ from realist theories . We will show how Marxist theory as social theory contrasts with realist theory .
 Marxism is a branch of socialism, a theory that holds that the more powerful classes oppress and exploit the less powerful by denying them their fair share of the surplus they create . Marxism is the theory that the rich and powerful oppress the less fortunate .
 The oppressed classes try to gain power in order to seize more of the wealth for themselves . The oppressed class tries to gain more power to seize the wealth .
 This process, called class struggle, is one way of looking at the political relationships between richer and poorer people, and ultimately between rich and poorer world regions . This process is known as class struggle and class struggle .
 Karl Marx emphasized labor as the source of economic surplus in the mid-19th century . Karl Marx called labor a source of surplus .
 At that time, the Industrial Revolution was accompanied by particular hardship among industrial workers in Europe . The Industrial Revolution led to particular hardship for industrial workers .
 Marxists believe that the surplus created by labor should be recaptured by workers through political struggle . Marxists still believe that workers should recapture their surplus through struggle .
 Marxism is most influential in countries of the global South, where capital is scarce and labor conditions are wretched . Marxism has been influential in some of the world's most impoverished countries .
 Marx’s theories of class struggle were oriented toward domestic society in the industrializing countries of his time, not toward poor countries or international relations . Marx's theories were aimed at domestic society, not international relations, he says .
 Traditional Marxists looked to the advanced industrialized countries for revolution and socialism, which would grow out of capitalism . Marxists believed that capitalism would be replaced by socialism .
 Third world would have to develop through its own stages of accumulation from feudalism to capitalism before taking the revolutionary step to socialism, the authors say .
 Disparity of wealth is a central aspect of global North-South relations . Proletarian workers in industrialized countries enjoyed rising standards of living and did not RICH AND POLLY .
 Marxists see international relations and domestic politics as being shaped by a class struggle between the rich and the poor . Marxists say international relations are shaped by the class struggle .
 In the backward third world countries, oppressed workers and peasants staged a series of revolutions, successful and failed . Meanwhile, in the backward world, workers staged a number of revolutions . The revolutions failed and failed.
 Lenin, founder of the Soviet Union, was assassinated in October 1917 . Lenin was the founder of Russia's first republic, the first Russian Revolution .
 Lenin’s theory of imperialism argued that European capitalists were investing in colonies where they could earn big profits and then using part of these profits to buy off the working class at home . Lenin's theory was based on the idea of imperialism in Europe .
 Lenin saw that after the scramble for colonies in the 1890s, few areas of the world remained to be colonized . Lenin saw the scramble to colonize the world ended in the end of the decade .
 Lenin led the first successful communist revolution there in 1917 . Imperialist expansion could occur only at the expense of other imperialist states, leading to wars such as World War I .
 Lenin’s general idea shapes a major idea still shapes a North-South relations . The idea that industrialized states exploit poor countries is still powerful .
 World accumulation concentrates surplus toward the rich parts of the world and away from the poor ones, says the author . The world's class relations are globalization of class relations, he says .
 Third world revolutionaries sought to break loose from exploitation by European colonizers . Many third world revolutionaries wanted to break free from exploitation .
 After European colonization ended, the U.S. as the world’s richest country (with large investments in the global South and a global military presence) became the target of revolutionaries agitating against exploitation in poor countries .
 In a number of countries, imperialists were thrown out (often violently, sometimes not) and revolutionary nationalists took power . In many countries, the imperialists have been thrown out of power .
 Mao Zedong’s communists took power in China in 1949 on a Leninist platform adapted to the largely peasant-based movement they led . The revolution was one of the most important such revolutions in the world .
 Mao declared that “China has stood up’—on its own feet, throwing off foreign domination and foreign exploitation . Mao declared ‘China’s stood up,’ on the own feet. Mao declared China has stood .
 In India at the same time, Gandhi used a different means to achieve similar ends—national independence from colonialism from colonialism . In India, the movement led by Gandhi used the same means of achieving national independence from colonial domination .
 According to the revolutionaries in these countries, exploitation of third world countries by rich countries takes away the economic surplus of the global South and concentrates the accumulation of wealth toward the rich parts of the world .
 By breaking free of exploitation, third world states can retain their own surplus and begin to accumulate their own wealth . Third world states are able to break free of such exploitation and start to accumulate wealth .
 They can generate their own self-sustaining cycles of accumulation and lift themselves out of poverty . Eventually they can generate self-insistential cycles of accumulated wealth .
 Trade-offs arise between concentrating or distributing wealth in a poor country . And within a single poor country, trade-offs occur between concentrating wealth and distributing wealth . The U.S. is one of the world's poorest countries .
 For former colonies, the realities of economic development after independence have been complex . The realities of developing nations' economies are complex, says CNN.com .
 Leon Trotsky believed that after the 1917 revolution, Russia would never be able to build socialism alone and should make its top priority the spreading of revolution to other countries to build a worldwide alliance . Leon Trotsky was a Russian revolutionary .
 Marxist theories in IR entered a low-visibility phase after the collapse of the Soviet Union and China’s turn toward capitalism . Events that seemed to discredit Marxist theories were events that appeared to discredit Marxism .
 Marxists and former Marxists have taken power in a number of Latin American countries . However, in the past few years, Marxists are taking power in Latin America . Marxists, ex-Marxists have been in power in some of Latin America's most recent countries .
 Venezuela and Bolivia, as a result, have become active allies of Cuba, forming an anti-U.S. coalition . Venezuela and Bolivian have formed anti-American coalition . Bolivia and Venezuela have been active allies with Cuba .
 In Nicaragua, a former communist leader whom U.S.-organized rebels fought in the 1980s won election as president in 2006 . Former communist leader was elected president of Nicaragua in 2006 after a decade of fighting .
 Marxist theories of IR have ongoing importance in the post-Cold War era . China’s continuing formal adherence to Marxism suggests that Marxist theories have continued to be important . These events, along with China's continuing . adherence to Marxist theories, suggest that Marxism .
 Peace studies challenges fundamental concepts behind realism and neoliberalism . Peace studies seeks to shift the focus of IR away from interstate level of analysis and toward a broad conception of social relations .
 Peace studies connects war and peace with individual responsibility, economic inequality, gender relations, cross-cultural understanding, and other aspects of social relationships . Peace studies is a form of peace studies that focuses on individual responsibility and individual responsibility .
 Peace studies scholars think that a good way to gain knowledge is to participate in action . Most scholars of peace studies think that participating in action is not just to observe objectively .
 This lack of objectivity has been criticized as normative bias because scholars impose their personal norms and values on the subject . This has been called a "normality bias" by some .
 Scholars in peace studies respond, however, that realism itself has normative biases and makes policy prescriptions . Scholars say realism has a normative bias in how it makes policy decisions . Peace studies scholars say that realism is not just a matter of policy, but it is necessary to be realistic .
 Peaceful strategies for settling conflicts are known by the general term conflict resolution . The development and implementation of peaceful strategies is known as "peaceful strategies"
 These methods are at work, competing with violent methods, in virtually all international conflicts . These methods compete with violence in virtually every conflict, says the author .
 Recently, the use of conflict resolution has been increasing, becoming more sophisticated, and succeeding more often . Conflict resolution has become more sophisticated and more sophisticated .
 Most conflict resolution uses a third party whose role is mediation between two conflicting parties . Most conflict resolutions use mediation by mediation by a mediation service .
 No hard-and-fast rule states what kind of third parties mediate what kinds of conflicts are . No hard, and-or-hard rule states how much of a third party mediate conflicts .
 Regional conflicts are mediated through regional organizations, single states, or even private individuals . Some regional conflicts have been mediated by regional organizations or single states .
 Some mediation is strictly technical —a mediator may take an active but strictly neutral role in channeling communication between two states that lack other channels of communication . Some mediators may take a more neutral role, such as a mediator of state-to-state communication .
 Pakistan secretly passed messages between China and the United States before the breakthrough in U.S.-Chinese relations in 1971 . For example, Pakistan passed messages to China before the break-in in 1971, when the two countries first met .
 Such a role is sometimes referred to as offering the mediator’s good offices to a negotiating process . The role of a mediator can be described as offering a role in a negotiation process .
 In facilitating communication, a mediator listens to each side’s ideas and presents them in a way the other side can hear . A mediator can be a professional mediator who listens to both sides of the debate .
 Travel and discussion by private individuals and groups can serve as citizen diplomacy, to ease tensions . In these roles, the mediator is like a translator between the two sides, or a therapist .
 If both sides agree in advance to abide by a solution devised by a mediator, the process is called arbitration . The process is known as arbitration . If both parties agree to abide with a solution, it's called arbitration, arbitration .
 In that case, both sides present their arguments to the arbitrator, who decides on a “fair” solution . The arbitrator decides on the "fair" solution in that case .
 Serbian and Bosnian negotiators could not agree on who should get the city of Brcko . They turned the issue over to arbitration rather than hold up the entire 1995 Dayton Agreement .
 Arbitration often uses a panel of three people, one chosen by each side unilaterally and a third on whom both sides agree . Arbitrators often use a panel chosen by both sides unilaterally .
 Conflicting parties can also use confidence-building measures to gradually increase trust . Conflicts parties can use confidence building measures to slowly increase trust in each other .
 Linkage lumps together diverse issues so that compromises on one can be traded off against another in a grand deal . By contrast, linkage lumps up diverse issues to trade them off against each other . Linkage is a form of compromise, not a trade-off .
 This was the case, for instance, in the Yalta negotiations of 1945 among the United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union . This is the case in the case of negotiations between the U.S. and Britain .
 On the table simultaneously were such matters as the terms of occupation of Germany, the Soviet presence in Eastern Europe, the strategy for defeating Japan, and the creation of the United Nations . The table was also discussed on the table at the time .
 Peace studies scholars argue that war is not just a natural expression of power, but one closely tied to militarism in cultures . Peace studies scholar: War not just an expression, but an expression of militarism . War is not only a form of power but one of the most violent forms
 Militarism also refers to the structuring of society around war . The dominant role of the military-industrial complex in a national economy is in national politics . The dominance of national security issues in domestic politics is also a problem .
 Militarism may underlie the propensity of political leaders to use military force, says CNN.com's John Defterios . Militarianism underlie political leaders' propensity to use force, he says .
 Historically, militarism has had a profound influence on the evolution of societies . Historically, it has led to the development of societies that are militarised .
 Not only evil acts but also exemplary acts of humanity are brought forth by war . Sacrifice, honor, courage and altruism on behalf of loved ones, and bonding with a community larger than oneself .
 Costa Rica has had no army for 50 years (just lightly armed forces) Even during the 1980s when wars occurred in neighboring Nicaragua and Panama, wars occurred .
 Japanese culture since World War II has developed strong norms against war and violence . Japanese culture has also developed norms against violence and war .
 Anthropologists have tried to connect the domestic characteristics of hunter-gatherer societies with their external propensity to engage in warfare . Anthropologists are trying to connect domestic characteristics with the external propensity of warfare .
 Some evidence shows that war occurs more frequently in societies with internal (especially gender) inequalities, with harsh child-rearing practices, and with fathers who are absent from child rearing . War occurs more often in society with internal inequalities, such as gender inequalities .
 Peaceful societies are more likely to have open decision-making processes, relative gender equality, and permissive and affectionate child rearing . By contrast, relatively peaceful societies are less likely to be violent and more open .
 All these societal attributes could as well be effects of war as causes as causes . But all these attributes could also be linked to war, they say .
 All kinds of societies seem to have the potential for warfare under some conditions . But distinctions such as “warlike” are only relative .
 Peace can be reconceptualized as a pervasive aspect of society as a whole . Peace studies is seen in peace studies as an aspect of a society as whole . War is seen as an integral part of society, as is peace in a broader way .
 Realistic realism assumes the normalcy of military conflicts, it recognizes only a negative kind of peace . Realistic peace is the temporary absence of war, not a temporary absence .
 By contrast, positive peace refers to a peace that resolves the underlying reasons for war . Peace that is not just a cease-fire but a transformation of relationships . Positive peace is peace that transforms relationships, not just cease-fires .
 Peace studies believe social conflicts are responsible for social conflicts that lead to war . Peace studies argue that under positive peace, state armies stop fighting each other and armless armies stop arming each other, stop forming death squads against internal protest, and reverse economic exploitation and oppression .
 Militarism in a culture, or the lack thereof, can influence foreign policy, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the lack of a strong military presence in the U.S. is key to foreign policy .
 In societies at war, children's psychological trauma contributes to intergroup conflicts decades later . Children's trauma can be traced back to their parents' homes, schools and communities .
 Generations of Palestinians have grown up in a society affected by violent conflict . Generations of Palestinian children have been affected by the conflict .
 Palestinian girl has lived around violent conflict her whole life, as have her parents and grandparents . She was walking between Israeli troops and Palestinian stone-throwers in West Bank in 2010 .
 Some scholars define poverty, hunger, and oppression as forms of violence . They call it structural violence because it is caused by the structure of social relations rather than by direct actions such as shooting people .
 Structural violence in this definition kills and harms many more people each year than do war and other forms of direct political violence . Structructural violence is more structural violence than war and political violence, the author says .
 Positive peace is usually defined to include the elimination of structural violence . Positive peace can be defined as eliminating structural violence in order to achieve peace . Positive Peace is defined as a place where violence is eliminated .
 "The positive peace approach seeks to change the whole system, not just one piece of it," says D.C. Mayor of New York City says . "We need to have a positive approach to the system," he says .
 The creation of a world government has long been debated by scholars and pursued by rr 7 activists . It is hoped the world government will be created by the end of the year .
 Scholars believe progress is being made toward the eventual emergence of a world government . Some scholars believe progress has been made toward an eventual global government .
 Scholars in peace studies also study how to achieve the conditions for positive peace . Peace studies are based on the study of peace in the United States .
 Peace studies scholars share skepticism that state leaders left to themselves would ever achieve positive peace . Most peace studies scholars are skeptical of state leaders leaving themselves alone would achieve peace .
 They believe the practice of IR will change only because of pressure from individuals and groups . They say the practice will only change if pressure is put on individuals or groups . However, they say it will change if pressures are put on by individuals .
 The most commonly studied method of exerting pressure is through peace movements, people taking to the streets in protest against war and militarism . Peace movements are often used to exert pressure on people against war .
 Peace demonstrators play a role in many conflicts . As U.S. president GIVE PEACE A CHANCE . GIVE Peace demonstrators a chance .
 Protesters respond to an outbreak of violence in Belfast, Northern Ireland, 2013 . Demonstrators respond to a violent outbreak in Belfast .
 Mahatma Gandhi led India’s struggle for independence from the British Empire before 1948 . Gandhi emphasized nonviolence must be active in seeking to prevent violence, to resolve conflicts without violence, and especially to stand up against injustice .
 Gandhi organized Indians to resist the British colonial occupation without resorting to violence . British troops shot down unarmed Indian protesters, even when British troops killed unarmed protesters . Gandhi organized Indian resistance without resort to violence, even though he was unarmed .
 Nonviolence advocates emphasize practical side of nonviolence in addition to morality . Nonviolence is a formative form of non-violence in the United States . Non-violence is an important part of the American Dream .
 Nonviolence is often a tool of the powerless standing up against injustices by the powerful . Nonviolence often is often the most cost-effective approach . Nonviolent resistance would be prohibitive for the powerless to stand up against injustice .
 In the United States, the philosophy of nonviolence spread widely in the 1960s in the civil rights movement, especially through the work of Martin Luther King, Jr. In the U.S., nonviolence was a key part of the movement . The philosophy was spread widely through the civil
 King’s example as well as specific strategies recommended by an American, Gene Sharp, were taught to young Arab activists at earlier workshops in Europe . Sharp's ideas were taught by earlier Arab activists .
 These nonviolent approaches worked spectacularly in Tunisia and Egypt, but were swept aside by a violent rebellion in Libya, Yemen, and gave way to a protracted civil war in Syria that claimed 60,000 lives .
 Gandhi believed there was always a third alternative to passivity or response in kind . Gandhi believed that there is always a . third alternative, passivity, or response, to be a response .
 Nonviolence does not always succeed when faced with violence, but then neither does violent response . Nonviolence is not always successful in the face of violence, as is violent response. Nonviolence doesn't always succeed, as it does violence. Nonviolent response to violence is a violent response,
 Political leaders may believe they have done their duty if they respond violently without success . However, political leaders may not respond violently if they do not respond nonviolently without success, they say . Political leaders should respond violently but not violently, they should not respond to violence .
 Scholarship on gender has cut a broad swath across academic disciplines, from literature to psychology to history . Gender Theories have a wide-ranging impact on academic fields, including literature .
 International relations was once considered one of the fields most resistant to gendered arguments . In recent years, it has made inroads in international relations . International relations is now considered a gender-neutral field .
 Scholars traditionally claim to be universal often turns out to be true only of males . What scholars traditionally say is universal, it turns out only to males, they say .
 Some IR scholars argue that the core assumptions of realism, especially of anarchy and sovereignty, reflect the ways in which males tend to interact and to see the world . Some feminist IR scholars say that the assumptions reflect how males interact with each other and interact .
 In this view, the realist approach simply assumes male participants when discussing foreign policy decision making, state sovereignty, or the use of military force . The realist view is that male participants should not be included in discussions about foreign policy .
 The vast majority of heads of state, diplomats, and soldiers are male, it may be realistic to study them as males . It may also be possible to study heads of states, diplomats and soldiers .
 In this view, our understanding of male actors in IR can be increased by considering how their gender identity affects their views and decision processes . This view is based on the fact that gender identity can affect decision-making .
 And females also influence IR (more often through nonstate channels than males do) This is often ignored by realism . And females influence IR more often than males .
 Some feel that women scholars tend to be more interested in these roles and effects than are their male colleagues, who largely ignore gender topics . Some women scholars feel that they are more likely to be interested in gender issues than their colleagues .
 IR list of ‘fifty key thinkers’ in IR includes four women, three of whom are gender scholars . None of the 46 males are listed as gender scholars in IR's list of "key thinkers" in IR .
 Such gender roles are based in the broader construction of masculinity as suitable to public and political spaces, while femininity is associated with the sphere of the private and domestic sphere . Such roles are thought to be based on the construction of gender roles in society .
 The ancient Greek woman poet Sappho wrote love poems to women on the island of Lesbos . Not long before Thucydides, she wrote love poetry to women .
 Just before Machiavelli, Christine de Pisan praised women’s abilities to make peace .
 A century after Hobbes, Mary Wollstonecraft in Britain argued for equal rights for women . She argued for women's rights in Britain in the first century .
 The American Susan B Anthony worked tirelessly for pacifism, abolitionism, and suffragism . She fought for women's rights, pacifism and abolitionism .
 The gender makeup of international summits and national governments matters matters matters . Although they are interwoven, they are also interdependent . Feminists from . varioustheoretical traditions agree on the gender makeup . of summits .
 China's old and new ruling group mark the transition of power, 2012 . China's new and old ruling group marks the transition to power .
 One strand of difference feminism focuses on valorizing the feminine . That is, valuing the unique contributions of women as women . Another strand, difference feminism, is valuing women's contributions as women.
 Difference feminists don't think women do all things as well as men or vice versa . Difference feminists do not think women are capable of doing all things like men . They say women are not capable of all things and vice versa.
 Women are seen as potentially more effective than men in conflict resolution as well as in group decision making . Because of their greater experience with nurturing and human relations, women are seen to be more effective .
 Some difference feminists believe there is a core biological essence to being male or female . But most think women’s difference is more culturally than biologically determined .
 Liberal feminists see differences in men's and women's abilities or perspectives as trivial or nonexistent . Men and women are equal, they say, and men and women should be equal . Liberal feminists say differences in abilities or perspective are trivial or absent .
 They deplore the exclusion of women from positions of power in IR . But they do not believe that including women would change the nature of the international system .
 A third approach combines feminism with postmodernism, discussed later in this chapter . The third approach will be discussed in the next chapter .
 Postmodern feminism tends to reject the assumptions about gender made by both difference and liberal feminists . It rejects the assumptions made by the liberal feminists and postmodern feminists .
 Postmodern feminists find gender differences important but arbitrary and flexible . Difference feminists consider differences important and fixed, and liberal feminists consider those differences trivial . Postmodern feminist feminists consider gender differences more important and flexible than liberal feminists .
 Difference feminism provides a perspective from which to reexamine the core assumptions of realism . From autonomy flow the key realist concepts of sovereignty and anarchy . The Masculinity of Realism is published in The New York Times, published in New York .
 To realists, the international system consists of autonomous actors that control their own territory and have no right to infringe on another’s territory . Realists believe that the system is based on autonomous actors who control their territory .
 Some feminists have argued that realism emphasizes autonomy and separation because men find separation easier to deal with than interconnection . Some difference feminists have said realism emphasizes separation and autonomy .
 This view rests on a psychological theory that boys and girls grow up from a young age with different views of separateness and connection . The theory rests on the psychological theory of children growing up with a different view of connection .
 Girls form their gender identity around the perception of similarity with their caretaker, but boys perceive their difference from the caretaker . In this theory, a child’s primary caretaker is almost always female in the early years .
 Boys develop social relations based on individual autonomy, but girls’ relations are based on connection . From this experience, boys develop social . relations based . on individual . autonomy . Boys develop relationships based on . individual autonomy .
 Women are held to be more likely than men to fear abandonment, whereas men are more likely to fear intimacy . As a result, women are held more likely .
 In moral reasoning, boys tend to apply abstract rules and stress individual rights . But girls pay more attention to the concrete contexts of different situations, study finds .
 In social relations, boys form and dissolve friendships more readily than girls . Girls are more likely to stick loyally with friends than boys, according to social media reports .
 Such a conception of autonomy parallels the masculine psyche just described . The idea of autonomy is similar to that of a man's autonomy .
 Some feminist scholars find in realism a hidden assumption of masculinity . Realists draw between international politics and domestic politics parallels the distinction in gender roles between the public and private spheres . The distinction between the two spheres parallels gender roles in the public sphere .
 An international system based on feminine principles might give greater importance to the interdependence of states than to their autonomy . By contrast, an international system would stress the responsibility of people to care for each other with less regard for states and borders . The international system might give more importance to inter
 In the struggle between the principles of human rights and of sovereignty (noninterference in internal affairs), human rights would receive priority . Human rights would be given priority in a struggle between sovereignty and human rights .
 In the choice of forms of leverage when conflicts arise between states, violence might be less prevalent . The choice of ways of leverage might make it less likely to be used in conflicts .
 Realist preoccupation with the interstate level of analysis presumes that the logic of war itself is autonomous and can be separated from other social relationships such as economics, domestic politics, sexism, and racism .
 Difference feminism reveals the connections of these phenomena with war . Difference feminism, however, reveals the connection between these phenomena and war .
 It suggests new avenues for understanding war at domestic and individual levels of analysis . Underlying causes that realists largely ignore are the root causes of war .
 From this difference-feminist perspective, neoliberalism has gone backward from traditional liberalism . Neoliberalism accepts the realist assumption of separate unitary states as the important actors, downplaying substate and transnational actors .
 Neoliberalism’s conception of cooperation as rule-based interactions among autonomous actors also reflects masculinist assumptions . Ne neoliberalism's notion of cooperation reflects masculinity in its conception of masculinity in the U.S.
 Feminist scholars emphasize the importance of gender roles in IR, especially the traditional distinction between males in the political-military roles and females in the domestic-family roles . Furthermore, the sharp distinction ROLE REVERSAL .
 Top U.S. officials attend the UN General Assembly in New York .
 Many difference feminists see in realism a hidden assumption of masculinity . Here, too, many feminists see realism as a hidden assumptions of masculinity.
 They see war as not only a male occupation, but also the quintessentially male occupation . War is seen as a quintessential male occupation in the eyes of men .
 Anthropologists have found that in all known cultures, males are the primary combatants in warfare . This is despite the enormous diversity of those cultures in so many other ways . Anthropologists say males are primary combatants for warfare in many cultures .
 One supposed link between war and masculinity is the male sex hormone testosterone . Some biologists have connected testosterone with aggressive behavior in animals .
 testosterone is a link in a complex system of relationships between the organism and the social environment . Thus, testosterone is linked to complex relationships between organisms and their social environments .
 Complex behaviors such as aggression and war cannot be said to be biologically driven or predetermined, because humanity’s most striking biological capability is flexibility . Complex behaviors are not biologically driven, but flexibility is flexibility, says the author of the book .
 Even some feminist scholars who see gender differences 7 7 as strictly cultural, and not biological at all, view war as a masculine construction . War is a masculine construct .
 Both biologically and anthropologically, no firm evidence connects women’s caregiving functions with particular kinds of behavior such as reconciliation or nonviolence .
 Although they rarely take part in combat, women sometimes provide logistical support to male warriors . They sometimes help drive the men into a war frenzy by dancing, shaming nonparticipating males, and other activities .
 Women restrain men from war or play special roles as mediators in bringing wars to an end . Yet in other cultures, women restrain the men from fighting or restrain them from war .
 In ancient Athens, Aristophanes speculated about how women might end the unpopular Peloponnesian War with Sparta, then in progress . Women's role in ending the war was debated in ancient Athens .
 Difference feminists thought that women would vote for peace and against war, changing the nature of foreign policy, but women generally voted as their husbands did . Women voted as husbands did.
 U.S. public opinion on foreign policy issues since the 1930s partially vindicates difference feminists . Nonetheless, United States public opinion has largely vindicated feminists .
 A gender gap in polls shows that women are about ten percentage points lower than men on average in support for military actions . Women support military actions 10 percentage points more than men, according to polls .
 This gender gap shrinks when broad consensus on military action exists, such as when U.S. forces attacked terrorist supporters in Afghanistan in late 2001 .
 Feminists in recent decades have continued to organize women’s peace organizations . Meanwhile, feminists have organized women's peace organizations.
 In the 1980s, Women’s Action for Nuclear Disarmament opposed the nuclear arms buildup . Women encamped for years at Greenham Common air base in Britain .
 In 1995, the UN-sponsored Beijing conference on women brought together women activists from around the world . The conference helped deepen feminists’ engagement with global issues such as North-South inequality .
 In 2000, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1325, mandating greater inclusion of women and attention to gender in UN peacekeeping and reconstruction . The UN has been criticized for gender bias in peacekeeping operations .
 UN peacekeepers participated in local prostitution, rape, and even sex trafficking . Peacekeepers were involved in prostitution and rape in several locations . UN Peacekeepers have been involved in sex trafficking in several countries .
 In 2004, Secretary-General Annan called ‘shameful’ the reported behavior of UN troops from several countries serving in Democratic Congo .
 Investigators there found hundreds of cases of sexual crimes by UN personnel . Investigators also found dozens of other sexual crimes committed by UN staff members .
 ‘Gender advisors’ have begun to accompany international peacekeeping and relief operations . They provide practical advice on more effective operations in the context of local cultures’ gender relations .
 Difference feminists see women as inherently less warlike than men and more adept at making peace because of their potential and actual experiences as mothers . Difference feminists say women are inherently less likely to be warlike .
 In this view, women play distinct roles in wartime and also have distinct needs . This view is based on the fact that women play a distinct role in wartime . Women's roles in war are different from that of women in war .
 During the long civil war in Liberia in the 1990s, women organized mass protests for peace and insisted the male faction leaders end the war . During the war, women protested for peace .
 Feminism, Pacifism, Nationalism, and the United Nations Decade for Women are linked to the U.N. Decade .
 As a result of this gender perspective, the bridge was redesigned to include a pedestrian walkway . The bridge was designed to include pedestrians .
 Difference feminists are developing a feminist practice of international relations that could provide an alternative to the masculine practice of realism . Difference feminists began developing a practice that could be alternative to realism . The practice was developed by difference feminists in the 1970s .
 For difference feminists, war does indeed begin in the minds of men, says difference feminists . The foundations for peace would better be sought in the mind of women, they say . War does not begin in men's minds, it begins in women's minds .
 Liberal feminists are skeptical of difference-feminist critiques of realism . Women in IR is the result of a feminist critique of the status quo in the media .
 They believe that when women are allowed to participate in IR, they play the game basically the same way men do, with similar results . They say when women play IR they will be able to do the same thing as men .
 They think that women can practice realism, sovereignty, anarchy, territory, military force, and all the rest, just as well as men can . Women think that realism is based on autonomy, sovereignty and anarchy, anarchy .
 Liberal feminists reject the critique of realism as masculine . Liberal feminists therefore tend to reject the idea that realism is masculine .
 Liberal feminism focuses on integration of women into the overwhelmingly male preserves of foreign policy making and the military . Liberal feminism is a form of feminism that focuses on the role of women in foreign policy .
 In most states, these occupations are typically at least 90 percent male . The occupations in most states are typically 90 percent men .
 In 1995, the world’s diplomatic delegations to the UN General Assembly were 80 percent male overall . The heads of those delegations were 97 percent male, the UN said in 1995 .
 The United States military, with one of the highest proportions of women anywhere in the world or in history, is still 85 percent male . For liberal feminists, the main effect of this gender imbalance on the nature of IR is to waste talent . The U.S. military has one of
 Liberal feminists think that women have the same capabilities as men, so inclusion of women in traditionally male occupations would bring additional capable individuals into those areas . Liberal feminists believe that women are capable enough to fill traditionally male positions .
 Gender equality would increase national capabilities by giving the state a better overall pool of diplomats, generals, soldiers, and politicians . Gender equality will also increase the state's ability to recruit diplomats and generals, generals and politicians, says the author .
 Liberal feminists argue that women handle power just as men do . They point to examples of women who have served in such positions . In support of their argument, liberal feminists point to the many examples of female leaders .
 "No distinctly feminine feature of their behavior in office distinguishes these leaders from their male counterparts," says Hillary Clinton . Clinton: "There are no distinctly feminine features in office that distinguish them from men"
 Individuals cannot be judged using group characteristics alone . Still, they do show that individuals can be judged based on group characteristics, they say .
 Some have suggested that women in power tend to be more warlike to compensate for being females in traditionally male roles . Some have even suggested that .
 Other states, such as Finland, Norway, New Zealand, Denmark, Brazil, Thailand, and Iceland, have had women leaders when war and peace were not major political issues in those countries .
 In the U.S. Congress, it is hard to compare men's and women’s voting records on foreign policy issues because there have been so few women in Congress . In the United States Congress, women have been in the minority .
 Women never chaired the key foreign policy committees in the Senate or House until 2011 . Women never chaired the foreign policy committee in the House or Senate .
 Nancy Pelosi was the first woman Speaker of the House, third in line to the presidency, in 2007-2010 . Pelosi was Speaker of House from 2007-2011 . Pelosi is a third-line presidential candidate in the House of Representatives .
 A 2008 UN report found that women comprised over 18 percent of members of parliaments across the world, up from 7 percent in 1995 . UN report: Women are now 18 percent members of the world's parliament .
 Some nations set aside a certain number of seats for females in parliament . Some countries set aside certain seats for women in parliament. Others set aside seats for men and women .
 In Rwanda, women make up over 50 percent of the lower house of parliament, even though the law requires only 30 percent female representation . Rwanda's parliament is made up of just 30 percent of women, according to the law .
 Liberal feminists believe that women soldiers, like women politicians, have a range of skills and abilities comparable to men’s . Liberal feminists also believe that . women soldiers have range of . skills and . abilities like those of women politicians .
 About 200,000 women soldiers serve in the U.S. military (15 percent of the total) About 2 million women are veterans .
 Women perform well in a variety of military roles, including logistical and medical support, training, and command, military officials say . Women are best suited for logistical and military support, medical support and training .
 Although women have served with distinction in military forces, they have been excluded from combat roles in most of those forces . Women have served in the armed forces with distinction .
 Military women are limited to traditional female roles such as nurses and typists . In some countries, military women are only limited to roles like nurses, typists and nurses .
 Even when women may hold nontraditional positions such as mechanics and pilots (as in the United States), most women remain in the traditional roles .
 Certain jobs still remain off-limits to women in the United States . Women cannot serve in United States combat infantry units . The U.S. government says women cannot be in combat units .
 Joan of Arc rallied French soldiers to defeat England, turning the tide of the Hundred Years’ War . In the 15th century, she rallied French troops to defeat the English . Joan of the Arc turned the tide in France's Hundred Years' War, ending the English Civil War .
 Women have often participated in combat in rebel forces fighting guerrilla wars in Vietnam, Nicaragua, and elsewhere . Women have also participated in terrorist or paramilitary units in countries such as Peru and Germany .
 Women in Eritrea's guerrilla forces became part of the regular army after independence . They served in frontline combat units during Eritrea and Ethiopia’s trench warfare in the late 1990s .
 During the 1991 Gulf War, tens of thousands of U.S. women served, 13 were killed, and 2 were captured as prisoners of war . During the war, 13 of the women were killed .
 In the late 1990s, women began serving on some U.S. soldiers . Women soldiers have performed as well as men in military tasks, as predicted by liberal feminists .
 Women barred from virtually all infantry combat units worldwide . But in state armies, women are barred from almost all combat units . State armies, however, are not .
 Guerrilla forces more often include women in Iraq . Female U.S. military police in Iraq often participate in fighting .
 A sergeant from the Kentucky National Guard received a silver star for heroism in combat in Iraq in 2005 . He fought off an ambush in Iraq .
 In the 2003 Iraq War, women flew all types of airplanes and helicopters . One woman was in the first group of United States POWs captured early in the war .
 U.S. women military police have acquitted themselves well in numerous firefights in Iraq . During the subsequent years of war in Iraq, the women police have performed well in firefights .
 All these cases suggest that women are able to hold their own in combat . Women's military career has been a success story for decades .
 The main reason that military forces exclude women from combat seems to be fear about what effect their presence might have on the male soldiers . Female soldiers' discipline and loyalty have traditionally been thought to depend on male bonding and focus .
 Liberal feminists say group bonding in military units does not depend on gender segregation . Liberal feminists reject such arguments and argue that group bonding is not based on gender differences .
 Attacks on women in Algeria, Rwanda, Bosnia, Afghanistan, Democratic Congo, and Sudan pointed to a possible new trend toward women as military targets . The attacks on women were carried out in Rwanda, Rwanda and Bosnia .
 In sum, liberal feminists reject the argument that women bring uniquely feminine assets or liabilities to foreign affairs .
 They criticize state practices that exclude women from participation in international politics and war . They do not critique realism as essentially masculine in nature but do criticize state practice .
 The arguments of difference feminists and liberal feminists may seem totally at odds . Difference feminists and difference feminists may be at odds with each other .
 Difference feminists argue that realism reflects a masculine perception of social relations . Liberal feminists think that women can be just as realist as men . Difference feminists say realism reflects masculine perceptions of relations .
 Liberal feminists believe that female participation in foreign policy and the military will enhance state capabilities . But difference feminists think women’s unique abilities can be put to better use in transforming (feminizing) international relations .
 The character and ability of an individual are not the same as that of his or her group . The evidence in favor of both positions can be reconciled to some extent by bearing in mind that .
 The qualities of individuals follow a bell curve distribution, with many people clustered in the middle and fewer people very high or low on a given capability . Rather than being high or very high, individuals are more likely to be very low or very low .
 To take a simple example, a few women are physically larger than almost all men, and a few men are smaller than most women . A few men also have a physical advantage over almost all women, the author says .
 On various dimensions of capability, the women's curve is above or below the men’s on average, but there is still much overlap . The curve is higher or lower than the average on various dimensions, but it's not always the same .
 Liberal feminist arguments emphasize the overlap of the two bell curves . Liberal feminists argue that the bell curves are not mutually exclusive .
 Individual women —most women on most relevant dimensions — are well within the male curve and thus can perform equally with the men . They say that individual women — most women on . most relevant . dimensions, they say . Individuals . say . individual women .
 Women in nontraditional gender roles may well perform better than their male counterparts . Women who self-select into such roles are near the high end of the gender roles .
 Bell curves show that individuals differ in capabilities such as physical strength or peacemaking ability . Overlapping Bell Curves average average man and woman . Average average man woman and average man have Bell curves on some dimension .
 Although the genders differ on average, for most individuals such differences do not come into play . For most people, gender differences are not significant enough to be considered a factor .
 Political processes tend to select women at the high end of the curve in terms of their affinity for realism . Similarly, women who become state leaders are presumably more adept at foreign policy making .
 Difference feminists are more interested in the shift in the two bell curves, not their overlap . Difference feminists want to focus on the difference in the bell curves and not overlap .
 Women tend to see international relations in a somewhat different way than men do . On average, in this perspective, women tend to think about international relations differently .
 Although individuals selected to participate in foreign policy and the military may not differ from their male counterparts, women as a group differ . So although individuals selected for foreign policy . may differ from male counterparts .
 By this logic, then, profound differences in IR would occur only if many women participated in key foreign policy positions . This logic, it says, would be true if women were in key policy positions in the United States .
 A world in which most politicians or soldiers were female might be a different story . But a world of female politicians and soldiers might be different, it might not be a case .
 The rules of the game might themselves change to reflect the fact that “average” women would be the main actors in the traditionally important roles . Then, instead of the selection of women for their ability to fit into men’s games, the rules would themselves change .
 Of course, these theories of difference feminists have never been tested, because women have never attained predominance in foreign policy making in any country .
 In addition to the liberal and difference strands of feminism, postmodern feminism is connected with the rise of postmodernism in the social sciences . Postmodernism is connected to the rise in postmodernistism in social sciences, according to the author .
 One line of criticism directed at realism combines feminism and postmodernism . Postmodernism is a form of feminism that combines realism with postmodernistism .
 Feminist postmodernists agree with difference feminists that realism carries hidden meanings about gender roles . But they deny that there is any fixed inherent meaning in either male or female genders .
 Feminist postmodernists look at the interplay of gender and power in a more open-ended way . Rather, they look at gender interplay in the way of power and gender in a different way . Postmodernists are more likely to look at power interplay rather than gender inter
 Postmodern feminists criticize liberal feminists for trying merely to integrate women into traditional structures of war and foreign policy . Postmodern feminism is a form of postmodern feminism .
 Difference feminists criticize difference feminists as well, for glorifying traditional feminine virtues . They criticize difference feminism as well as difference feminists . Difference feminists are critical of the idea of difference feminism .
 They argue that women are not just passive bystanders or victims in war, but active participants in a system of warfare tied to both genders . Women are not passive bystanders, they are active participants, they say .
 Postmodern feminists reject realism but also some of the alternative approaches that emphasize the protection of women and other noncombatants . Postmodern feminism rejects realism and other approaches .
 Just-war doctrine is considered too abstract . It does not do justice to the richness of each historical context and the varied roles of individual men and women within it .
 The plane that dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima had female gender . It was named after the pilot’s mother . The plane dropped the bomb was named by the pilot's mother .
 The French atom-bomb test sites in the South Pacific were all given women’s names . Likewise the French atom bomb test sites were given women's names .
 Pilots have pasted pinup photos of nude women onto bombs before dropping them . Pinup photos have been pasted onto bombs .
 Postmodern feminists would note that the feminine gender of vehicles, targets, or decorations amplifies the masculinity of the weapon itself . In all these cases, postmodern feminists note that .
 The terms power and potency refer to both state capability and male virility . For example, the terms potency and state capability are used in terms of virility and state power .
 Military force depends on phallic objects: weapons designed to shoot projectiles, penetrate targets, and explode . Phallic objects are weapons that can shoot projectiles and penetrate targets . The U.S. military uses phallic weapons to protect itself and others .
 Female models are hired to market tanks, helicopter missiles, and other “potent” weapons to male procurement officers at international military trade shows . Female models have been hired by the U.S. military to market ‘potent weapons’
 The phallic character of weapons has seemingly persisted even as technology has evolved from spears to guns to missiles . Phallic weapons continue to be phallic weapons, even though they have evolved into missiles .
 Gendered Violence, Political Order, and the European Conquest of the Americas. Gendered violence, political order, is a key part of the history of the American Revolution .
 Whether states’ interests reflect fixed assumptions about power and well-being or are constructed by states and substate actors based on ideas and social interactions, those interests do sometimes conflict with those of other states .
 The central claims of realism, state actors, rationality, and the utility of military force, have been challenged on a variety of grounds . R. R .
 Shared norms and rules are important in getting members to pay for collective goods . Shared norms are important to getting members of the public to share their collective goods, experts say .
 The participation of large numbers of women would make the international system more peaceful, the authors say . They believe that although individual women participants may not reflect this difference .
 Liberal feminists point to historical and presentday women leaders and soldiers . As evidence, liberal feminists point out that women have been successful in the military .
 U.S.-Canadian relations seem better explained by liberal institutionalism than by realism . The two countries have been at odds for more than a century .
 Show how the contrasting tenets of realism and liberal institutionalism each applies to the relationship . Show how realism and liberalism are compatible with each other's ideals .
 Many countries now use gender quotas when electing legislatures . Many countries are now using gender quotas to elect legislatures . The study argues that gender quotas should be used in elections .
 As of 2008,59 countries legally require women to hold some number of seats in atleastone house of the national legislature . 33 countries require women's representation at the regional governmental level .
 The requirements range from a low of 2 percent seats in Bangladesh to nearly 50 percent of seats in Rwanda . Rwanda also elected a woman to be prime minister in 2009 . The requirements for women to be a member of the lower house in Rwanda are low .
 These quotas vary not only by the number of seats reserved for women, but also by their implementation . The quotas vary by how many seats are reserved, and how they are implemented .
 Some countries have amended their constitutions to require more equal representation . Some nations have amended constitutions in order to ensure equal representation in parliament .
 Other countries pass laws to carve out a minimum number of legislative seats for women . Other countries place the burden on political parties, such as parties .
 In these cases, parties must nominate a certain percentage of women to run in elections . Parties must also nominate a number of female candidates to run for office .
 This method does not guarantee seats to women, but does guarantee an opportunity to hold a seat . This method doesn't guarantee a seat, but it does guarantee a chance to hold it .
 This growing phenomenon of gender quotas has often been encouraged by Western states . Western states (especially Europe) and human rights organizations have encouraged it .
 Legislative Quotas Are Important for Equality and Development . Equal representation is important for democratic government. Equal representation was important for democracy .
 A healthy democracy demands that all citizens feel invested in the political process, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says a healthy democracy requires citizens to be involved in political process .
 Women will face discrimination and slower political acceptance without quotas without quotas . Women will also face slower acceptance and slower acceptance of political acceptance .
 In the United States and Europe, despite having the vote, it took years for women to be represented in significant numbers in legislatures . In the U.S. and European countries, women had to wait years for representation .
 Quotas will speed the acceptance of women in the political world, giving them more of a say on matters of public policy . Quots will speed up acceptance of female politicians in political circles, says Ms Smith .
 The costs of economic reform often fall disproportionately on women, says the author of the book . Women's rights have been increased in the U.S. since the 1980s .
 Giving women more of a say in how that reform takes places is important, says Ms. Smith .
 Quotas could create animosity toward women, according to the U.S. State of the State of Washington . Quotats will not help equality and are Undemocratic, says Sen. Tammy Baldwin . The state of Washington, D.C., has a history of anti-
 Reserving seats for women in legislatures risks a backlash against women's rights . Reserves seats in state legislatures risks backlash from women's right to vote . Reserving women's seats in legislatures is a risk of backlash from a backlash .
 Other groups may push for quotas as well, creating a hostile political environment . Other groups are pushing for quotas, creating an environment hostile for minorities .
 The result could be political instability as various groups press their case for legally protected seats in the legislature . Political instability could be seen as a result of groups pressing for seats in legislature .
 The ideal of democracy is to allow anyone to serve as a representative regardless of race, gender, ethnicity, or any other personal quality, the author says . The ideal is to let anyone serve as an assembly member regardless of any personal quality .
 By their very nature, gender-based quotas violate this idea, reserving certain seats for one group based on a personal quality irrespective of that person's qualifications . This is the idea of reserving seats for certain groups based on personal quality .
 The idea of individual rights is a Western-oriented concept of human rights . Individual rights are Western-orientated human rights, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Rather than encouraging gender quotas, other policies should be promoted that are more compatible with local political culture . Instead of encouraging quotas, they should be promoting policies that are compatible with political culture, experts say .
 Women's Political Effectiveness in Contexts of Democratization and Governance Reform . Women's political effectiveness in context of Democraticization and governance reform .
 States take actions because people in governments —decision makers —choose those actions . States take action because they choose to do so by making decisions . States are responsible for their actions, but not necessarily for the actions .
 Decisions carried out by actions taken to change the world, and then information from the world is monitored to evaluate the effects of these actions . Decisions are carried out with the help of the world's scientists .
 The choice may be complicated by uncertainty about the costs and benefits of various actions . The decision may be made by the president of the United States .
 In such cases, decision makers must attach probabilities to each possible outcome of an action . Decision makers have to make sure they are prepared for the best possible outcome .
 Some decision makers are relatively accepting of risk, whereas others are averse to risk . Some decision-makers are more wary of risk than others are accepting risk .
 These factors affect the importance that decision makers place on various alternative outcomes that could result from an action . Decision makers place the importance of these alternative outcomes in making decisions .
 Of course, one may believe decision makers are rational, but not accept the realist assumption that states may be treated as unitary actors . States should not be treated like unitaries, the author says . The author says.
 Governments are made up of individuals, who may rationally pursue their goals . Governments must be rational, they say, but not rational . Governments need to be rational about their goals, says David Cameron .
 Different individuals involved in making a decision may diverge, as may the goals of different state agencies . Yet, the goals may be divergent, and may be different from state agencies' .
 Study and Review the Pre-Test & Flashcards at MyPoliSciLab . Making Foreign Policy: Models of Decision Makers, Models of decision Making, Group Psychology, Interest Groups and Interest Groups .
 The United States secretary of state may have a different goal than the secretary of defense . Central Intelligence Agency may view a situation differently than the National Security Council does .
 The rational model of decision making is somewhat complicated by uncertainty and the multiple goals of decision makers . Decision makers need to be able to make decisions with multiple goals, the author says .
 The rational model may imply that decision making is simpler than is actually the case . Thus, decision making may be simpler than it actually is, says the author .
 An alternative to the rational model of decision making is the organizational process model . The organization process model is based on the organization's organizational process .
 Foreign policy decision makers skip the labor-intensive process of identifying goals and alternative actions . They rely instead for most decisions on standardized responses or standard operating procedures .
 The U.S. State Department receives more than a thousand reports or inquiries from its embassies around the world every day . The State Department sends out more than thousand instructions or responses to those embassies .
 Most of those cables are never seen by the top decision makers . Instead, they are handled by low-level decision makers who apply general principles .
 These low-level decisions may not even reflect the high-level policies adopted by top leaders, but rather have a life of their own . These decisions may even have a 'life of own'
 Another alternative to the rational model is the government bargaining (or bureaucratic politics) model . Foreign policy decisions result from the bargaining process among various government agencies with somewhat divergent interests .
 The Japanese Agriculture Ministry, with an interest in the well-being of Japanese farmers, opposed the imports . Japan's Agriculture Ministry opposed the move .
 The Foreign Ministry, with an interest in smooth relations with the U.S., wanted to allow the imports . The foreign ministry wanted the imports, but the imports were banned .
 The final decision to allow imported sushi resulted from a tug-of-war between the ministries . The decision was the result of a tug of-a-war .
 An Experimental Analysis of the Bureaucratic Politics Model and Poliheuristic Theory . An experimental analysis of the bureaucratic politics model. An experimental Analysis of an experimental model of the model and theory .
 International events are the result, intended or unintended, of decisions made by individuals . Individual Decision Makers are responsible for the outcome of international events .
 As leader of the world’s greatest power, he had nobody to pass the buck to . He had no choice but to pass it to the next generation .
 If he chose not to, the war might drag on for months with tens of thousands of U.S. casualties . If he did not, it might have been a long-term war that could drag on .
 Truman as an individual had to decide, and to take responsibility for the consequences . But for better or worse, Truman as a person had to choose his own fate .
 The decisions of individual citizens, although they may not seem important when taken one by one, create the great forces of world history . Similarly, individual citizens' decisions create the greatest forces of history, say experts .
 The study of individual decision making revolves around the question of rationality .
 Realists assume that both states and individuals are rational and that the goals or interests of states correlate with those of leaders . But realists tend to assume that states and people are rational, and that they are rational .
 The most simplified rational-actor models assume that interests are the same from one actor to another . The model is based on the fact that interest interests are different from each actor's interests .
 Individuals could be substituted for each other in various roles without changing history very much . If this were so, individuals could be replaced with each other .
 This assumption is at best a great oversimplification; 5 individual decisions reflect the values and beliefs of the decision maker . This assumption at best is at a great .
 Individual decision makers not only have differing values and beliefs, but also have unique personalities . Individuals have unique experiences, intellectual capabilities, and personal styles of making decisions . Decision makers have different values and personalities, says the author .
 IR scholars study individual psychology to understand how personality affects decision making . Some IR scholars say individual psychology affects decision-making decisions . IR scholars are studying individual psychology .
 Psychoanalytic approaches hold that personalities reflect the subconscious influences of childhood experiences . People's personalities reflect their subconscious influences, according to psychologists .
 Bill Clinton drew much criticism in his early years as president for a foreign policy that seemed to zigzag . For instance, Bill Clinton's foreign policy was criticized for being too ziggy .
 Decision-making processes must reduce and filter the incoming information on which a decision is based . The problem is that such filtration often is biased, and that filtering often is bias .
 Information screens are subconscious filters through which people put the information coming in about the world . Farnham, Barbara Farnham: Information screens can be subconscious filters for people .
 Often they simply ignore any information that does not fit their expectations, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Information is screened out as it passes from one person to another in the decisionmaking process . Information is also screened out .
 Prior to the September 2001 terrorist attacks, U.S. intelligence agencies failed to adequately interpret available evidence because too few analysts were fluent in Arabic . For example, prior to the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the United States, the U.K. failed to properly interpret evidence because of
 Soviet leaders in 1941 and Israeli leaders in 1973 ignored evidence of pending invasions of their countries . Similarly, Soviet leaders ignored evidence that they were at risk of invasion .
 Misperceptions can affect implementation of policy by lowlevel officials as well as its formulation by high-level officials . Misperception can affect the implementation of policies by low level officials and by high level officials, officials .
 Officers on a U.S. warship in the Persian Gulf shot down a civilian Iranian jet that they believed to be a military jet attacking them . In 1988, officers on a United States warship shot down an Iranian jet they thought was a military plane .
 The officers were trying to carry out policies established by national leaders, but because of misperceptions, their actions instead damaged their state’s interests . The officers’ actions were not intended to harm the interests of their state .
 Second, the rationality of individual cost-benefit calculations is undermined by emotions that decision makers feel while thinking about the consequences of their actions . This is an effect referred to as affective bias .
 As hard as a decision maker tries to be rational in making a decision, the process is bound to be influenced by strong feelings held about the person or state toward which a decision is directed . The decision-making process will always be affected by feelings .
 Third, cognitive biases are systematic distortions of rational calculations based on the limitations of the human brain in making choices . Fourth, cognitive bias is based on rational calculations, not emotional feelings .
 The most important of these distortions seems to be the attempt to produce cognitive balance —or to reduce cognitive dissonance . This is the most important distortion of cognitive balance in the American mind .
 North Korea's new dictator Kim Jong-Un rides a roller coaster that could symbolize the West's efforts to curtail his country's nuclear weapons program . In 2012, the new dictator rode a rollercoaster that symbolizes the West .
 These weapons will pose a much greater threat if Kim, who took over in 2011, is an irrational madman than if he turns out to be a shrewdly rational actor . Kim took over North Korea in 2011 .
 Politicians must face their citizens’ judgment at the polls and so do not want to admit failures . This is especially true in a democracy, in which politicians must face voters’ judgement at polls .
 After sending half a million troops halfway around the world, U.S. leaders found it difficult to admit to themselves that the costs of the war were greater than the benefits . Vietnam War trapped United States decision makers in the 1960s .
 Decision makers achieve cognitive balance through wishful thinking . Wishful thinking is an overestimate of the probability of a desired outcome . Decision makers often overestimate the likelihood of a desirable outcome .
 A variation of wishful thinking is to assume that an event with a low probability of occurring will not occur . Wishful thinking may be to assume an event that has a low chance of occurring .
 This could be a dangerous way to think about catastrophic events such as accidental nuclear war or a terrorist attack . It could be dangerous to think of catastrophic events like an accidental nuke war or an attack .
 A decision maker may also experience psychological projection of his or her own feelings onto another actor . Decision makers may also project their feelings onto other actors .
 Another form of cognitive bias, related to cognitive balance, is the use of historical analogies to structure one’s thinking about a decision . History analogies can be used to structure the thinking of a decision, say experts .
 This can be quite useful or quite misleading, depending on whether the analogy is appropriate . The analogy is often useful or misleading depending on the analogy being used .
 When a decision maker latches onto an analogy and uses it as a shortcut to a decision, the rational calculation of costs and benefits may be cut short . Because each historical situation is unique in some way, when a decision-maker latches on to an analogy, it may be a
 Decision makers often assume that a solution that worked in the past will work again . They often don't fully examine how similar the situations really are . In particular, decision makers should consider how similar situations are .
 U.S. leaders used the analogy of Munich in 1938 to convince themselves that appeasement in Vietnam War would lead to increased communist aggression in Asia . For example, United States leaders used this analogy to convince them that the war would be a success .
 Vietnam itself became a potent analogy that helped persuade U.S. leaders to avoid involvement in certain overseas conflicts, such as Bosnia . This was called the “Vietnam syndrome” in United States foreign policy . Vietnam itself then became the potent analogy .
 All of these psychological processes—misperception, affective biases, and cognitive biases—interfere with the rational assessment of costs and benefits in making a decision .
 Two modifications to the rational model of decision making have been proposed to accommodate psychological realities . Two specific modifications have been made to the model of rational decision making .
 First, the model of bounded rationality takes into account the costs of seeking and processing information . The model of rationality is based on the cost of seeking information and processing it .
 Richard K. Herrmann, Richard K., and Michael P Fischerkeller. 9 Herrmanmann . Richard K.-Fischerkeller . Richard A. Fischerkellers . Michael Fischerkel . Fischerkel: Nobody thinks about every single possible course of action .
 The Use of the “Rogue State” Concept by U.S. Foreign Policy Elites. The use of the "Rogue State" Concept by United States foreign policy Elites .
 The Rise, Fall, and Reprise of Soviet-Russian Military Interventionism, 1973-1996 . The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union-Russia military interventionism is described as 'reactionism'
 Instead of optimizing, or picking the very best option, people usually work on the problem until they come up with a “good enough” option . This is called satisficing, or finding a satisfactory solution .
 IR decision makers are constantly besieged with crises requiring their attention . Time constraints prevent them from finding the very best response to a situation . The time constraints faced by IR decision-makers often prevent them finding the best response .
 Prospect theory provides an alternative explanation (rather than simple rational optimization) of decisions made under risk or uncertainty . Second, prospect theory suggests that prospect theory is an alternative to rational optimization of decisions .
 In the editing phase, they frame the options available and the probabilities of various outcomes associated with each option . The editing phase is the first phase of the editing process .
 Prospect theory holds that evaluations take place by comparison with a reference point . The reference point is often the status quo but might be some past or expected situation . Prospect theory is based on the past and expected situation in the past .
 Decision maker asks whether he or she can do better than that reference point . Value placed on outcomes depends on how far from the reference point they are . Decision makers ask whether they can improve their outcomes .
 Individual decision making follows an imperfect and partial kind of rationality at best . Individual decision-making follows a flawed and imperfect kind of rational thinking, says David Frum .
 Decision makers face a series of obstacles in receiving accurate information, constructing accurate models of the world, and reaching decisions that further their own goals . Decision makers are faced with obstacles in getting accurate information and building accurate models .
 The rational model is only a simplification at best and must be supplemented by an understanding of individual psychological processes that affect decision making . The rational models are only a 'simulation' at best .
 In one respect, groups promote rationality by balancing out the blind spots and biases of any individual . Groups balance out blind spots, biases of individuals, says author .
 Advisors or legislative committees may force a state leader to reconsider a rash decision . State leaders may be forced to rethink a rash move .
 The interactions of different individuals in a group may result in the formulation of goals that more closely reflect state interests rather than individual idiosyncrasies . And the interactions of a group can result in an outcome that reflects state interests, the study says .
 Group dynamics introduce new sources of irrationality into the decision-making process . However, group dynamics also introduce new forms of 'irrationality' into the process .
 Groupthink refers to the tendency for groups to reach decisions without accurately assessing their consequences . Individual members tend to go along with ideas they think the others support . Groupthink is a form of groupthink .
 A group of six people is asked to compare the lengths of two lines projected onto a screen . The lengths of the lines are then compared to the length of the two lines .
 When five of the people are secretly instructed to say that line A is longer, even though anyone can see that line B is actually longer, the sixth person is likely to agree with the group rather than believe it .
 Group diffuses responsibility from individuals, so nobody feels accountable for actions . Also, because of the group, people don't feel responsible for actions, they don't have to be held accountable for their actions .
 President Reagan’s close friend and director of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency bypassed his own agency and ran covert operations in the White House basement . The operation was carried out in three continents using National Security Council staff .
 The NSC sold weapons to Iran in exchange for the freedom of U.S. hostages held in Lebanon . NSC then used the Iranian payments to illegally fund Nicaraguan Contra rebels .
 The Iran-Contra scandal resulted when these operations, managed by an obscure NSC aide named Oliver North, became public . Oliver North was an aide at the National Security Council .
 The U.S. war in Iraq may provide cautionary examples to future generations about the risks of misinformation, misperception, wishful thinking, and groupthink in managing a major foreign policy initiative .
 The structure of a decision-making process can affect the outcome, especially when no single alternative appeals to a majority of participants . Rules for who is involved in making the decision, how voting is conducted, and so forth, can affect outcome .
 Experienced participants in foreign policy formation are familiar with the techniques for manipulating decisionmaking processes to favor outcomes they prefer . Foreign policy is a form of manipulation that can influence the outcome of the outcome .
 "Probably most important is the ability to control the agenda and thereby structure the terms of debate," he says . "Probably the most important thing is the control of the agenda"
 State leaders often rely on an inner circle of advisors in making foreign policy decisions . State leaders rely heavily on advisors to make decisions about foreign policy in the United States .
 The composition and operation of the inner circle vary across governments . The composition of the circle varies across governments across the world .
 President Lyndon Johnson had “Tuesday lunches” to discuss national security policy with top national security officials . For instance, Lyndon Johnson held ‘Tuesday lunch’ with top officials .
 Both individual misperception and group psychology encourage overconfidence and excessive optimism among decision makers . Some groups depend heavily on informal informal meetings .
 This general tendency in every government especially marked the period of the U.S. invasion of Iraq . This tendency was especially marked during the United States .
 President Bush declares victory on an aircraft carrier in May 2003 .
 Conflictland could be Vietnam in 1968, Bosnia in 1994, or Iraq in 2006. consultations in addition to formal meetings. consultations, or meetings, could be a form of conflictland .
 Some leaders create a ‘kitchen cabinet’ -- a trusted group of friends who discuss policy issues with the leader even though they have no formal positions in government . Some leaders have created a “kitchen Cabinet’s” group of trusted friends .
 Israel’s Golda Meir held many such discussions at her home, sometimes literally in the kitchen . For instance, Meir had many discussions in her kitchen .
 Russian president Boris Yeltsin relied on the advice of his bodyguard, who was a trusted friend . The bodyguard was a close friend of Yeltsins and a trusted confidante .
 The difficulties in reaching rational decisions, both for individuals and for groups, are heightened during a crisis . Crisis Management is a form of crisis management that can be described as 'realistic'
 Crisis decision making is harder to understand and predict than is normal foreign policy making . Crisis decisions are harder to predict than normal policy making, experts say .
 In a crisis, decision makers operate under tremendous time constraints . Decision makers in the U.S. face enormous challenges in dealing with a crisis .
 Communications become shorter and more stereotyped, and information that does not fit a decision maker’s expectations is more likely to be discarded, simply because there is no time to consider it . Information that doesn’t fit the expectations of the decision maker will be discarded .
 In framing options decision makers tend to restrict the choices, again to save time . They tend to overlook creative options while focusing on the most obvious ones . Decision makers often tend to focus on the obvious ones, so they can save time and time .
 Even the president’s communication with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was rerouted through Kennedy's brother Robert and the Soviet ambassador, cutting out the State Department .
 Kennedy left the room from time to time to encourage free discussion . Recognizing the danger of groupthink, Kennedy removed the authority figure from the group .
 The group managed 17 Brecher, Michael, and Jonathan Wilkenfeld . Through this and other means, the group managed to raise funds for the group .
 Leaders purposefully designate someone in the group to object to ideas . Sometimes leaders purposefully designate an object to an idea .
 Decision makers tend to overestimate the hostility of adversaries and to underestimate their own hostility toward those adversaries . Decision makers often overestimate their enemies' hostility, the authors say .
 More and more information is screened out in order to come to terms with decisions being made and to restore cognitive balance . More information screened out to help people understand decisions and understand them .
 Sleep deprivation sets in within days as decision makers use every hour to stay on top of the crisis . Sleep deprivation becomes a problem within days of crisis .
 Unless decision makers get enough sleep, they may make vital foreign policy decisions under shifting perceptual and mood changes .
 Voters pay great attention to the psychological stability of their leaders . The importance of sound decision making during crises is important to voters, experts say .
 Before Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin won election in 1992, he faced charges that he had suffered a one-day nervous breakdown when he headed the armed forces before the 1967 war .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says he was just smart enough to realize that the crisis had caused both exhaustion and acute nicotine poisoning, and he needed to rest up for a day in order to go on and make good decisions .
 Crisis management takes a high toll psychologically and physiologically . Crisis management can take a long time to cope with, say experts .
 President Eduard Shevardnadze of Georgia seems to show this strain in 1992 . It was just the beginning of years of civil war and perpetual crisis in that country .
 Shevardnadze returned to lead his native Georgia when the Soviet Union dissolved . The former Soviet foreign minister had returned to his native country to lead .
 Their decisions are shaped by the government and society in which they work . Their decisions should be shaped by society, they say .
 Foreign policy is constrained and shaped by substate actors such as government agencies, political interest groups, and industries . Foreign policy will be shaped by sub-entertainment actors, such as the government, interest groups and industries, it says .
 The remainder of this chapter considers other liberal theoretical approaches that operate at the domestic level of analysis . Watch the video ""David Cameron on Corporate Social Responsibility"" at MyPoliSciLab .
 Realistic approaches see international outcomes as the result of processes within states rather than just those among states . These approaches, in contrast to realism, are seen to be more realistic than realism .
 The actions of a state in the international arena result from individual human choices . State’s internal structures are the result of individual human decisions . State's actions in international arenas result from individuals, political leaders, diplomats, and bureaucrats, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The rest of this chapter looks at the state from the inside out, trying to understand the processes and structures within states that make them behave as they do .
 Those closest to the action are the bureaucratic agencies that states maintain for developing and carrying out foreign policy . Bureaucracies influence states’ actions in the international arena, say experts .
 Different states maintain different foreign policy bureaucracies but share some common elements . Different countries have different ways of dealing with foreign policy in foreign policy .
 Virtually all states maintain a foreign service of diplomats working in embassies in foreign capitals . Diplomats who remain at home to help coordinate foreign policy can also work in foreign embassies .
 States appoint ambassadors as their official representatives to other states and to international organizations . State ambassadors are ambassadors to other countries and international groups .
 Others are career diplomats who come up through the ranks of the foreign service . Career diplomats tend to outlast changes in administration .
 Diplomats provide much of the information that goes into making foreign policies, but their main role is to carry out rather than create policies . Diplomats are responsible for making foreign policy decisions, rather than creating them, say experts .
 Foreign ministry bureaucrats often make foreign relations so routine that top leaders and political appointees can come and go without greatly altering the country’s relations . Nonetheless, foreign ministry bureaucrats have made foreign relations routine .
 The national interest is served, the bureaucrats believe, by the stability of overall national goals and positions in international affairs, they say .
 Tension is common between state leaders and foreign policy bureaucrats . Tensions are common between the two countries' governments .
 Politicians struggle to exercise power over the formal bureaucratic agencies because the latter can be too “bureaucratic” (cumbersome, routinized, conservative) to easily control . Politicians are struggling to exercise their power over bureaucratic agencies, says Julian Zelizer .
 These agencies are often staffed (at lower levels) mostly by career officials who may not owe loyalty to political leaders . Also, these agencies often are staffed (lower levels) by career staff members .
 The NSC chief traditionally briefs the president every morning on international security issues . The president traditionally briefs him on international issues .
 State leaders appoint a close friend or key advisor to manage the foreign policy bureaucracy . Sometimes state leaders appoint close friends or key advisors to manage foreign policy .
 President George W Bush did this in his second term with his former NSC chief and confidante Condoleezza Rice . Rice was the NSC's former chief of staff .
 Chinese leader Mao Zedong put his loyal ally Zhou Enlai in charge of foreign policy . Zhou was Zhou's loyal ally . Zhou's first foreign policy post-Mao Zedong government was in charge . Zhou died at age of 65 .
 At other times, state leaders may appoint rivals with differing views of foreign policy . President Barack Obama did with Hillary Clinton with his former political rival .
 At times, frustration with the bureaucracy leads politicians to bypass normal channels of diplomacy . Politicians bypassed normal channels by bypassing diplomatic channels .
 Interagency tension also affects the formulation of foreign policy . Interagency tensions also affect foreign policy decisions . The U.S. government has a history of tension between agencies .
 Certain agencies traditionally clash, and an endless tug-of-war shapes the foreign policies that emerge . The U.S. has a long history of trying to shape foreign policy in the world .
 The U.S. State Department and the CIA backed opposite sides in a civil war in Laos in 1960 . In an extreme example of interagency rivalry, the CIA and State Department backed opposing sides in the Laos civil war .
 In the Cold War, the defense ministry was usually more hawkish and the foreign ministry or State Department more dovish . In the U.S. and the Soviet Union, the foreign and defense ministries were hawkish . The president or premier holds the balance between them .
 "In general, bureaucracies promote policies under which their own capabilities will be effective and their power will increase," he says . He says .
 One can often predict just from the job titles of participants how they will argue on a policy issue . One of the top jobs in the White House is a former secretary of state .
 Government bargaining model pays special attention to interagency negotiations that result from conflicts of interest between agencies of the same government . The government bargaining model is designed to avoid conflict of interest .
 Military and CIA officials pushed President Carter to attempt a military rescue in Iran in 1979 . The State Department vehemently opposed such a mission .
 After days of debate, the president decided to go ahead with the rescue mission . He did not invite the secretary of state to the meeting where the final decisions were made . The president decided the mission would go ahead .
 Heads of agencies try to appear loyal to the state leader by forgoing the interests of their own agencies . Representatives of bureaucratic agencies usually promote their own .
 The preferences of leaders of bureaucratic agencies cannot always be predicted given the goal of their institution . Also, the preferences of . leaders of . bureaucratic agencies can't always predict given the goals of their . institution, experts say .
 In many countries, the different military services pull in somewhat different directions, even if they ultimately unite to battle the foreign ministry . The foreign ministry is the focus of many countries' military services, including Russia .
 Bureaucrats working in particular units or projects become attached to them . Bureaucratats are attached to particular units, projects or projects, and become attached .
 Officials responsible for a new weapon system lose bureaucratic turf, and perhaps their jobs, if the weapon’s development is canceled . The weapon's development will be canceled .
 Of special concern in many poor states is the institutional interest that military officers have in maintaining a strong military . The country's poor states are particularly vulnerable to the threat posed by poor people .
 These issues were factors in attempted military coups in the Philippines, Venezuela, and Paraguay in the 1990s .
 Such rivalries suggest that a state does not have any single set of goals, but that its actions may result from the bargaining of subunits, each with its own goals . State may not have a single national interest, but it may have its actions result from a state's bargaining of
 Such a perspective extends far beyond bureaucratic agencies because other substate actors have their own goals, which they seek to advance by influencing foreign policy . Furthermore, such a view extends far from bureaucratic agencies, it says .
 Foreign policy makers operate not in a political vacuum, but in the context of the political debates in their society . Interest Groups are key to foreign policy makers' success in foreign policy decisions .
 In all states, societal pressures influence foreign policy, say experts . These are aggregated and made effective through different channels in different societies, they say . In all countries, societal pressure influences foreign policy .
 In pluralistic democracies, interested parties influence foreign policy through interest groups, political parties . In democracies, interest groups and political parties influence policy through interests groups, parties . The U.S. should not rely on political parties to influence its foreign policy, it says .
 Foreign policies adopted by states generally reflect some kind of process of domestic coalition formation . Foreign policy often reflects the formation of domestic coalitions, such as those formed by domestic coalition .
 Of course, international factors also have strong effects on domestic politics . International factors also play a big role in domestic politics, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Interest groups are coalitions of people who share a common interest in the outcome of some political issue . Interest groups organize themselves to try to influence the outcome .
 The farmers exert political pressure on the French government through longestablished and politically sophisticated associations, organizations . Farmers exert pressure on government through long-established associations and organizations . French farmers exert power through associations and associations .
 They lobby for desired legislation and contribute to politicians’ campaigns . They also contribute to their own campaigns .
 French farmers have turned out in large numbers across the country to block roads, stage violent street demonstrations, and threaten to grind the national economy to a halt . More dramatically, when their interests have been threatened—as during a U.S.-European trade dispute in 1992— they have turned
 Interest groups form around businesses, labor unions, churches, veterans, senior citizens, members of an occupation, or citizens concerned about an issue such as the environment .
 Lobbying is the process of talking with legislators or officials to influence their decisions on some set of issues . The process of lobbying is the same as lobbying in Washington, DC .
 The ability to gain a hearing with busy officials and present cogent arguments for one’s case is key to successful lobbying . Three important elements that go into successful lobbying are the ability to present a cogent case, and to trade favors .
 These favors -- legal and illegal -- range from campaign contributions to dinners at nice restaurants, trips to golf resorts, illicit sexual liaisons, and paying bribes . These favors include campaign contributions, dinners, trips, and illicit liaisons .
 In many states, corruption is a major problem in governmental decision making . Interest groups may induce government officials by illegal means to take certain actions .
 Ethnic groups within one state often become interest groups concerned about their ancestral nation outside that state . Ethnic groups in one state become concerned about its ancestral nation . Ethnic ethnic groups within a state often turn into interest groups interested in their ancestral nations .
 Many members of ethnic groups feel strong emotional ties to their relatives in other countries . The rest of the population does not care about such issues one way or the other .
 Ethnic ties are emerging as a powerful foreign policy influence in various ethnic conflicts in poor regions . Such ethnic ties are becoming a powerful influence in the foreign policy of foreign policy .
 Cuban Americans organize to influence U.S. policy toward Cuba . Greek Americans on Greece, Jewish Americans on Israel, and African Americans on Africa .
 In a 1996 U.S. Senate election in South Dakota, one candidate raised large contributions from the Pakistani-American community . The other candidate from the rival Indian-Americans raised large amounts of money .
 The view of the state as a unitary actor can be questioned . As with bureaucratic agencies, the view of state as unitary actors is questioned . The state is a state of nature, not a state, it is not a single actor .
 Defenders of interestgroup politics argue that various interest groups push and pull in different directions . The ultimate decisions generally reflect the interests of society as a whole, they say .
 Marxist theory says key domestic influences on foreign policy in capitalist countries are rich owners of big businesses . But according to Marxist theories of international relations, the key domestic influence is the power of the rich .
 For instance, European imperialism benefited banks and big business, which made huge profits from exploiting cheap labor and resources in overseas colonies . European imperialism has also benefited banks, big business and big businesses .
 This is the official view (if not always the operative one) of the Chinese government toward Western industrialized states . China's relationship with the West has been strained in recent years .
 Marxists argued that Western foreign policies were driven by the profit motive of arms manufacturers . During the Cold War, Marxists said Western foreign policy was driven by arms makers .
 Foreign policies are affected by the pulling and tugging of various domestic interest groups . Foreign policy is affected by pulling, tugging, and pulling of interest groups, experts say .
 Legislators respond to groups, constituencies, lobbyists, and media . Legislatures respond to these groups and media requests for information .
 U.S. Senate confirms John Kerry as secretary of state in 2013 . John Kerry's confirmation hearing was held in Washington, D.C. last week .
 The Military-Industrial Complex refers to a huge interlocking network of governmental agencies, industrial corporations, and research institutes, working together to supply a nation’s military forces . A military-industrial complex is a network of government agencies and industrial corporations .
 The military-industrial complex was a response to the growing importance of technology and of logistics in Cold War military planning . The military industrial complex was created in the 1950s and 1960s .
 "Because of the domestic political clout of these actors, the 22-year-olds will be able to play in the movie . Because of the political clout, these actors have been able to do so much more . Tony Smith, Tony.
 States at war have long harnessed their economic and technological might for the war effort . U.S. states at war harnessed economic, technological might to aid the effort . The war effort has been the focus of American efforts since World War II .
 During the Cold War, military procurement occurred on a massive scale in “peacetime,” as the superpowers raced to develop new high-tech weapons .
 This race created a special role for scientists and engineers in addition to the more traditional role of industries that produce war materials .
 In response to the Soviet satellite Sputnik in 1957, the U.S. increased spending on research and development . The United States increased spending and created new science education programs .
 President Dwight Eisenhower warned in his farewell speech that the military-industrial complex was gaining “unwarranted influence” in U.S. society . By 1961, President Eisenhower warned that militarization could erode democracy in the United States .
 The size of the complex gave it more political clout than ordinary citizens could muster . The complex was the subject of much of the country's most recent election .
 Its interest in the arms race conflicted with the interest of ordinary citizens in peace . Yet its interest in an arms race clashed with the interests of ordinary people in peace.
 The complex encompasses a variety of constituencies, each of which has an interest in military spending . The complex is home to a wide range of lawmakers and lawmakers .
 Corporations that produce goods for the military profit from government contracts . Corporations producing goods for government contracts profit from the military .
 Military careers advance by building bureaucratic empires around new weapons systems . So do military officers whose careers advance around new arms systems . Their careers also advance by creating bureaucratic empires .
 Military research contracts are a major source of funding for scientists in Russia and the U.S. Both countries receive military research contracts .
 Subcontractors and parts suppliers for big U.S. weapons projects are spread around many states and congressional districts . Local citizens and politicians join the list of constituents benefiting from military spending . Subcontractor and parts supplier companies spread around the country .
 Early funding for the Strategic Defense Initiative was given to each military service branch, the Department of Energy, NASA, NASA and hundreds of private contractors .
 Since the founding of Israel in 1948, Jews and Arab Palestinians have been fighting over the land . An End to 60+ Years of Violent Conflict will end 60+ years of violent conflict between Jews and Palestinians .
 After several destructive wars, Israel and its main neighbors, Egypt and Jordan, arrived at a durable peace . Israel and Egypt have been at odds for years over the years .
 The Israelis and Palestinians have yet to reach a peace agreement based on a Palestinian state based on lands occupied by Israel in the 1967 war . The West Bank and the Gaza Strip are still occupied . Israel and Palestinians are yet to agree a peace deal based on Palestinian recognition of Israel's right to
 In many rounds of negotiations over the years, the two sides have gotten closer . The two sides got closer to each other in recent years .
 At the end of 2000, negotiators nearly reached agreement on the parameters for a Palestinian state side by side with Israel . Negotiators nearly reached an agreement in 2000, but it was not until now .
 New governments took power in both Israel and America, and a new wave of violence ensued . The effort fell short, however, and new governments took over .
 Israeli-Palestinian peace is a collective good that would benefit each side regardless of whether it or the other side made concessions that led to an agreement . Peace would benefit both sides regardless of who made the concessions leading to agreement .
 In 2010, the U.S. administration launched a new round of Israeli-Palestinian talks to try to reach a comprehensive agreement within a year .
 These talks faced great challenges as a result of the domestic politics on each side . The talks were held in a bid to secure a deal between the two countries .
 In Israel, the ruling coalition included parties opposed to concessions toward Palestine . Israeli government lacked maneuvering room to make concessions even if it wanted to .
 Executives in military industries are often appointed as government officials responsible for military procurement decisions . They then return to their companies again, a practice called the revolving door .
 Military industries also influence public opinion through advertising that ties their products to patriotic themes . In democracies, military industries influence public opinions through advertising .
 U.S. military industries give generous campaign contributions to national politicians who vote on military budgets . Military industries also give campaign contributions, sometimes bribes to Pentagon officials .
 Public opinion has greater influence on foreign policy in democracies than in authoritarian governments . Public opinion is greater influence in foreign policy decisions in authoritarian countries than in democracies .
 It must persuade people to accept its policies, because in the end, policies are carried out by ordinary people . The U.S. needs to persuade ordinary people, says President Obama .
 Even authoritarian governments spend great effort on propaganda — the public promotion of their official line — to win support for their policies . Because of the need for public support, even authoritarian governments . Even authoritarian countries spend great efforts on propaganda .
 Jones, Christopher M. Roles, Politics, and the Survival of the V-22 Osprey . Jones: Politics, politics and the survival of the plane are key to its survival .
 Foreign policy processes even in democracies can constrain each side's ability to make peace . In these ways, foreign policy processes also constrain the ability of each side to peace, say experts .
 Reciprocity, a strong norm in IsraeliPalestinian relations over the decades, is basic to the negotiation of peace agreements . Israel has a strong tradition of reciprocity in Palestinian relations .
 Domestic constraints make it harder for governments to have cooperation based on reciprocity . Yet it has not sufficed, in part because of domestic constraints, says U.S. diplomat .
 To get around these domestic constraints, the dominance principle helps . The dominance principle is used to get around domestic constraints .
 Most analysts agree that peace talks can succeed only if the U.S. applies strong leadership to get the two parties to make concessions . The United States should apply strong leadership (including pressure and inducements)
 Opponents on each side can then blame the United States rather than their own leaders, who thus gain maneuvering room to compromise . U.S. leaders can blame each other for their actions, but then gain room for compromise .
 If an IsraeliPalestinian peace agreement is ever to occur, U.S. leadership of the process will likely play a key role in reaching it .
 Journalists serve as gatekeepers of information passing from foreign policy elites to the public . Journalists are gatekeepers to the information passing through the world's elite .
 Media and government often conflict because of the traditional role of the press as a watchdog and critic of government actions and powers .
 The media try to uncover and publicize what the government wants to hide . The media tries to uncover the government's secrets .
 Foreign policy decision makers also rely on the media for information about foreign affairs . Foreign policy makers rely heavily on media to make decisions .
 The size and resources of foreign policy bureaucracies dwarf those of the press . Yet the media also depend on government for information .
 The government has great power to manipulate journalists by feeding them information to shape the news, influence public opinion . These advantages give the government great power over journalists .
 Government decision makers can create dramatic stories in foreign relations, authors say . Government leaders can create stories through summit meetings, crises, actions, and so forth .
 Bureaucrats can also leak secret information to the press in order to support their own point of view and win bureaucratic battles . Bureaucrat can also leak secret information from the press to support themselves and win political battles .
 Both sides gained from the open access given to journalists embedded with U.S. forces in Iraq in 2003 . The military and the press have a running battle about journalists’ access to military operations .
 In democracies, where governments must stand for election, unpopular war can force a leader or party from office . Unpopular wars can force an unpopular leader from office, as happened to U.S. President Lyndon Johnson in 1968 during the Vietnam War .
 A popular war can help secure a government’s mandate to continue in power, as happened to Margaret Thatcher in Britain after the 1982 Falkland Islands War . Or a popular war will help secure the mandate to keep in power .
 U.S. soldiers were sent to Somalia to assist in relief efforts in 1992 after TV news showed the heartrending results of civil war and famine .
 Public opinion shifted quickly against the Somalia operation . TV news showed an American soldier’s body being dragged through the streets by members of a Somali faction .
 Even in the most open democracies, states do not merely respond to public opinion . Even in open democracies they must respond to the public's opinion, says John Defterios .
 Decision makers enjoy autonomy to make their own choices . They are pulled in various directions by bureaucracies and interest groups . Their views often conflict with public opinion at large .
 Public opinion is seldom unified on any policy, and sophisticated polling can show that particular segments of the population often differ in their perceptions of foreign policy issues . Furthermore, public opinion tends to be very different on foreign policy matters .
 A politician may respond to the opinion of one constituency rather than the whole population . So a politician may . respond to one constituency's opinion, rather than that of the whole .
 Public opinion varies considerably over time over time on many foreign policy issues . Public opinion on foreign policy has fluctuated considerably over the years .
 States use propaganda or try to manipulate the media to keep public opinion from diverging too much from state policies . States often use propaganda to try to stop public opinion diverging from state policy .
 In democracies, public opinion generally has less effect on foreign policy than on domestic policy . Public opinion has less impact on foreign and domestic policy than domestic policy, experts say .
 Rourke, John T., Richard P Hiskes, and Cyrus Ernesto Zirakzadeh. National leaders traditionally have additional latitude to make decisions .
 Since the end of the Korean War in 1953, relations with your neighbor to the west have been strained . North Korea's relations with the U.S. since 1953 have improved dramatically .
 North Korea has made and then broken several agreements regarding its nuclear program . Military tensions have persisted as North Korea makes and then breaks several agreements with the North .
 North Korea tested nuclear weapons in 2006 and 2009, and it has also test fired short-range ballistic missiles directly over Japan . North Korea has also fired short range ballistic missiles into Japan in an effort to intimidate your country .
 In late 2012, it also tested a new long-range rocket in defiance of international warnings . The South Korean space agency tested the rocket in a similar way in 2012 .
 You won election in 2012 on a hawkish platform, calling for large increases in defense spending and the deployment of anti-missile weapons to protect your country from a North Korean launch . You won't be allowed to speak to the media .
 Japan has refused such reparations in the past, but has provided limited aid in an attempt to encourage North Korea to denuclearize . Japan has offered limited aid to North Korea in a bid to encourage denuclearization .
 The U.S. removed North Korea from its list of states that sponsor terrorism in the summer of 2008 . North Korea is no longer listed as a sponsor of terrorism, but is now listed as one of the world's most isolated countries .
 This angered many in your country, who see this as giving in to North Korean demands for more aid in exchange for giving up its nuclear program . Many in North Korea are angered by the move, which they see as giving North Korea more aid .
 Public opinion in Japan is very sensitive to relations with North Korea . North Korea is a major source of tension between the two Koreas .
 In 2002, North Korea admitted to secretly abducting Japanese citizens in the 1970s and 1980s . They were transported to North Korea and used to train North Korean spies .
 North Korea claims that all 13 abductees have either returned to Japan or died . Many in Japan are skeptical of this claim . North Korea says the abductees are either returned or have either died .
 Many in Japan suspect more than 13 were abducted and have demanded that North Korea return the bodies of the deceased . North Korea has been accused of abducting 13 people since 2008 .
 Past Japanese governments have demanded resolution to the abduction issue before opening diplomatic relations with North Korea . These abductions are an extremely sensitive issue in Japanese public opinion .
 U.S. negotiating a new nuclear weapons agreement with North Korea . Now imagine that the United States is negotiating a deal with the North Korea.
 The United States asks that Japan contribute extensive foreign aid to North Korea . The U.S. asks for Japan to help ensure that a deal is reached . North Korea is a key ally of the North Korea regime .
 "The United States is placing extensive pressure on your government to provide what it feels is critical aid," says President Obama .
 IR has been banned from the realm of ordinary domestic politics . This derives from the special need of states to act in a unified way in the international system, as well as the traditions of secrecy and diplomacy .
 Strong public opinion against the military has slowed or rebuffed efforts by the military . Repeatedly, these efforts have been slowed by strong public opinion, against military efforts .
 In Japan, people remember the consequences of militarism in the 1930s and World War II, culminating in the nuclear bombings of 1945 . People remember the horrible consequences of the bombings, including the nuclear bombing .
 They are suspicious of any increase in the size or role of military forces . They are set against Japan’s having nuclear weapons .
 Public opinion constrains the state’s conduct of foreign policy and has slowed the pace of change . In this case, public opinion has constrained the state, writes David Gergen .
 The attentive public in a democracy is the minority of the population that stays informed about international issues, says David Gergen . Gergen says .
 There are also a core of people who care about foreign affairs and follow them closely . This segment varies somewhat from one issue to another .
 The most active members of the attentive public on foreign affairs constitute a foreign policy elite . People with power and influence who affect foreign policy are people with power, influence .
 This elite includes people within governments as well as outsiders such as businesspeople, journalists, lobbyists, and professors of political science .
 Public opinion polls show that elite opinions sometimes differ considerably from those of the gen9 A eral population . Governments sometimes adopt foreign policies for the purpose of generating public approval and hence gaining domestic legitimacy .
 Citizens who would readily criticize their government’s policies on education or health care often refrain from criticizing when the government is at war . The lives of the nation's soldiers are on the line, the author says .
 It is difficult to tell whether a state adopts a foreign policy to distract the public, writes Andrew Hammond . Leaders would never admit to trying to divert public attention, he says .
 Wars that go on too long or not successful can turn public opinion against the government . War can even lead to a popular uprising to overthrow the government, experts say .
 Argentina led the country into war with Britain over the Falkland Islands in 1982 . Argentina's military government led the military government in 1982 to war with the UK over the islands .
 Argentineans rallied around the flag, but after losing the war they rallied around getting rid of the military government . They replaced it with a new civilian government that prosecuted former leaders .
 In 2006, President Bush’s popularity, which had soared early in the Iraq War, deflated as the war dragged on . President Bush's popularity deflated in 2006 .
 The Impact of Public Opinion on U.S. Foreign Policy Since Vietnam has been on the rise since Vietnam . The impact of public opinion on foreign policy since Vietnam is seen as a factor in foreign policy .
 President Bush's approval rating demonstrates the ""rally 'round the flag" syndrome, in which war triggers a short-term boost in public approval . War in Afghanistan is the result of the "Rally 'Round the Flag" syndrome .
 By the 2008 elections, his party had lost control of the Senate, House, and presidency . The Republicans had held all the seats they held at the beginning of the Iraq War in 2003 .
 One conduit through which interest groups and public opinion may wield influence is legislatures . Legislatures are a conduit for interest groups to influence public opinion . Legislators are a key part of the process of shaping public policy .
 In these systems, legislatures play a direct role in making foreign policy by passing budgets, regulating bureaucratic rules, creating trade law, even controlling immigration policy . Legislators also play a role in regulating budgets and regulating bureaucracy .
 Any agreement they sign must be approved by their domestic legislature . Executives may attend summits and talks, but can't attend any meetings .
 Different rules may apply to the use of military force in the U.S. State of State of the State of Afghanistan .
 Some contend that legislatures rally around the flag during times of international crises . Some say legislatures, like public opinion, rally around public opinion .
 Three days after the September 11, 2001, attacks, Congress voted to give President Bush full authority to prosecute a war in Afghanistan . Three days later, the U.S. Congress voted for President Bush to give him full authority in the war .
 Congress passed a resolution authorizing the use of force in Iraq in October 2002 . Congress passed the resolution in 2002 . Iraq has been a major source of controversy since then .
 Legislators rarely challenge the executive on important military matters . Thus, legislatures rarely if ever challenge an executive on matters such as defense .
 Others point to a different dynamic in which legislatures do stand up to executive power regarding military force . Others say legislatures stand up against executive power .
 State legislatures hold the ‘purse strings’ - they have the ability to stop a war in its 28th century . For example, because legislatures hold . the “purse . strings” , they can also stop a . war in their own country .
 War Powers Act requires the president to notify Congress when U.S. troops are deployed for combat . Act was enacted during the close of the Vietnam War, enacted during that war .
 After this notification, the president has 60 days (plus a possible 30-day extension) to recall the troops . Congress must approve military action before it can be recalled .
 During the 2011 Libya air campaign, the Obama administration claimed that the War Powers Act did not apply because the action was not a war . The Obama administration argued that the act was not war-related .
 In parliamentary systems, executives (for example, prime ministers) are chosen by the political parties that hold a dominant position in the legislative bodies . Prime ministers are elected by political parties, such as Britain's Labour Party .
 Parliamentary executives do not need to submit treaties or policies for formal approval by the legislature . Often parliamentary executives submit treaties and policies without formal approval .
 Legislators in parliamentary systems still hold power regarding foreign policy . Yet legislatures in parliamentary countries still hold the power to make foreign policy decisions . The U.S. has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 Parliament is not required to vote on international agreements negotiated by the prime minister, but it must approve any change to British laws that such agreements entail . In Great Britain, for example, Parliament must approve changes to British law that involve international agreements .
 Parliament exercises a right of ratification over international agreements . Most international agreements do involve these types of changes, Parliament says . Parliament exercises right to ratify international agreements, which can be ratified .
 In many parliamentary systems, if a policy is particularly controversial, parties that do not have a majority in the legislature can attempt to call elections . Parties must then vote again on which parties will hold seats in the state legislature .
 If a different group of parties wins a majority of seats, a new executive is appointed . A new executive will be appointed if a different party wins majority of the seats .
 In parliamentary systems, legislatures play a key role in designing and implementing foreign policy . Parliament is a key part of foreign policy in the country's foreign policy system .
 Foreign policy is the strategies governments use to guide their actions in the international arena . Foreign policies are the strategies government uses to guide its actions in international affairs .
 Foreign policies spell out the objectives state leaders have decided to pursue in a given relationship or situation . Foreign policies are defined by the objectives of state leaders in a relationship .
 IR scholars are less interested in specific policies than in the foreign policy process . States establish various organizational structures and functional relationships to create and carry out foreign policies .
 IR scholars are especially interested in exploring whether certain kinds of policy processes lead to better outcomes . IR scholars want to know if certain processes produce better outcomes than do others .
 States vary greatly among each other and even within a single state over time over time . States vary much more than each other, even within one state .
 Political scientists have tried to interpret particular states’ foreign policies in terms of each one’s political culture and history . Some political scientists have been trying to interpret each state's foreign policies .
 The Soviet Union experienced repeated, devastating land invasions over the centuries (culminating in World War II) while the United States experienced two centuries of safety behind great oceans .
 The military might of the Soviet Union, and its control of buffer states in Eastern Europe, seemed defensive in nature to Soviet leaders but appeared aggressive to U.S. leaders .
 Foreign policy outcomes result from multiple forces at various levels of analysis . The outcomes depend on individual decision makers, on the type of society and government they are working within, and on the international and global context .
 The study of foreign policy processes runs counter to realism’s assumption of a unitary state actor . The study runs against the assumption that a state actor is responsible for foreign policy decisions .
 The study of foreign policy concentrates on forces within the state, rather than individual and domestic levels of analysis . The main emphasis is on the individual level of analysis of the state .
 The differences in the foreign policy process from one state to another are also influenced by a state’s type of government, such as military dictatorship, communist party rule, one-party rule, and multiparty democracy .
 In practice, most states lie along a spectrum with some mix of democratic and authoritarian elements . Most states lie in a spectrum of democratic, authoritarian elements, with some democratic elements .
 The attempt to explain foreign policy in a general and theoretical way has met only limited success . The attempts at explaining foreign policy have met limited success in the U.S.
 Realists continue to find simple unitary-actor models of the state useful . Domestic and individual elements of the foreign policy process add much complexity and unpredictability .
 One area of foreign policy in which knowledge stands on a somewhat firmer basis is the descriptive effort to understand how particular mechanisms of foreign . policy formation operate in various states, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Foreign policy is a complex outcome of a complex process, says David Cameron .
 It results from the struggle of competing themes and competing themes, competing domestic interests, and competing government agencies, it's said .
 No single individual, agency, or guiding principle determines the outcome of the outcome, says CNN.com .
 States form foreign policy on an issue or toward a region; it is not just an incoherent collection of decisions and actions taken from time to time . U.S. foreign policy not just incoherent, it's not just a collection of decision and actions, says Obama .
 Out of the turbulent internal processes of foreign policy formation come relatively coherent interests and policies that states pursue . The U.S. is one of the world's most powerful states .
 Foreign policy outcomes result from processes at several levels of analysis, including the roles of individuals, say experts . Foreign Policy outcomes are often complex, complex and complex .
 All these levels were in play in 2011-2013 as Syria went from protest to civil war . Syria's civil war is now a civil war that began in March 2013 .
 In 2012, this father chose, like many others, to take up arms and join rebel fighters . The father chose to join the rebel fighters in 2012 .
 The country's future will be decided in no small part by the aggregation of many individual decisions . The future of the U.S. will depend heavily on individual decisions, says President Obama .
 The foreign policy process is the set of procedures and structures that states use to arrive at foreign policy decisions and to implement them . The process is set up in a state where foreign policy is made up of procedures, structures .
 In the government bargaining model, decisions result from negotiations among agencies with different interests in the outcome . By contrast, in the organizational process model, the decisions come from routine administrative procedures .
 During crises, potentials for misperception and error are amplified . The potential for error and error can be amplified during crises, experts say .
 Executives and legislators may differ on how to best achieve a state’s national interest . The U.S. should be able to achieve its national interest, experts say . The nation's national interest is at stake in national security .
 Uncertainty about costs and benefits of an action can complicate foreign policy decision making . The U.S. has been criticized for its lack of transparency in foreign policy .
 Sometimes aggressive international actions are attributed to a ‘madman’ such as Iraq’s Saddam Hussein or Nazi Germany's Adolf Hitler . Sometimes aggression is attributed to the actions of a madman such as Hussein or Hitler .
 Traditionally, foreign policy elites have faced only sporadic pressure from mass public opinion . But public opinion has changed dramatically in recent years .
 In nearly all democracies, there are debates about the best way to conduct foreign policy . In the U.S. there are many debates about how foreign policy should be conducted in the world .
 One particularly controversial issue involves using military force in the U.S. State Department of Justice .
 Executives usually claim the right to initiate the use of force as commanders of their militaries . Executive usually claim to initiate force as commander of their military .
 Lawmakers may object that they should have a say in whether a country goes to war . Yet legislatures (Congress or parliaments) may object to this .
 In the United States, the president is the Commander in Chief of the military and thus has the power to order the deployment of American military forces . In the U.S. President Barack Obama is the commander in chief of the armed forces .
 This has led to extensive debates in the U.S. about who has the ultimate authority to undertake military action . The debate over who has authority to take part in military action has been raging for years .
 Congress must authorize funds to pay for military action . While the president has extensive advantages in terms of military intelligence and analysis, Congress needs to authorize funds .
 Legislatures are slow to act in times of crisis . Legislatures should not play a role in deciding whether to use military force . Legislators should not be playing a part in making decisions about military action .
 Because legislatures are made up of hundreds of members, it is difficult to get agreement among all members on what constitutes a threat to national security . Because legislatures make up hundreds of lawmakers, it's difficult to agree on national security threats .
 Discussions over whether to use military force can be long, drawn-out affairs, which can limit the ability of a country to respond to dangers . Discussions about using military force are often lengthy and difficult to begin .
 Debates over the appropriateness of military force show open divisions in the U.S. Debates are open divisions within a country that can encourage adversaries to remain stubborn in bargaining .
 If an adversary feels a country is too divided to use military force against it, it will not treat threats to use force as credible . If a country feels too divided, the threat will not be treated as credible, the US says .
 Most legislators are elected to serve local constituent interests rather than invest their time and energy in foreign affairs . Most legislators serve their constituents rather than spend their time on foreign affairs.
 Legislators have little incentive to become highly knowledgeable about foreign affairs, thus making their decisions about whether to engage in military force less informed . Legislators should be more aware of foreign affairs in their decisions .
 Legislatures should play a role in Deciding whether to use military force, says John McCain . More input regarding military force leads to more careful policy, he says .
 Having an effective legislative debate over the potential use of military force can lead to better policy . It avoids some of the psychological pitfalls associated with small-group decision making such as groupthink .
 A state's citizens will bear the brunt of the costs of war, it is appropriate that their representative bodies have a say in whether the country's men and women should fight .
 Open debates in a legislature better allow the public's voice to be heard . Open debates should be open to the public, says Sen. Rob Atkinson .
 Executives need checks and balances, especially with regard to decisions about war . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his handling of foreign policy . The White House says the president's actions should be taken with caution .
 Because of the weight of a decision to initiate military conflict, it is important to have a checks and balances system to stop hasty wars . The weight of the decision to start military conflict is too much to be decided .
 In the United States, the Constitution grants Congress the power to declare war for this reason . In the U.S. Congress has the power of declaring war, and the Constitution does this .
 All but Colombia are in a zone of active fighting spanning parts of Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia . The zone includes parts of South Asia and Africa .
 Some of the countries in these zones still face difficult postwar years with the possibility of sliding back into violence, as Yemen did in 2009 after a 1999 ceasefire .
 Many different activities are covered by the general term war . Conflicts of Ideas, Nationalism, Ethnic Conflict, Genocide, Ideological Conflict, Territorial Disputes and Economic Conflict are all covered .
 It is not easy to say how many wars are going on in the world at the moment . Consequently, it is not clear how many are still being fought .
 Most lists of wars set some minimum criteria to distinguish war from lower-level violence such as violent strikes or riots . But most lists include minimum of a thousand battle deaths, a minimum of 1,000 .
 Wars arise from different situations, play different roles in bargaining over conflicts . Wars arise in different situations and play different ways of bargaining over conflict .
 Starting from the largest wars, we may distinguish from the following main categories . The largest wars in the world have been fought in four decades .
 This class of wars is also known as world war, global war, general war, or systemic war . World War I is also called systemic war or world war or global war .
 "This kind of war probably cannot occur any longer without destroying civilization," he says . Largely because of the power of modern weaponry, modern weaponry can no longer be used in war .
 Total war began with the massively destructive Napoleonic Wars, which introduced large-scale conscription and geared the entire French national economy toward the war effort . Total war started with the introduction of conscription .
 The practice of total war evolved with industrialization, which further integrated all of society and economy into the practice of war . Industrialization further integrated society and the economy into war .
 In total war, with the entire society mobilized for the struggle, the enemy is considered a legitimate target . The entire society of the enemy, including the entire enemy, is considered legitimate targets in total war .
 In World War II Germany attacked British civilians with V-2 rockets . British and U.S. strategic bombing killed 600,000 German civilians and hundreds of thousands of Japanese .
 Limited war includes military actions carried out to gain some objective short of surrender and occupation of the enemy . Limited war is a military action carried out short of the surrender or occupation of enemy .
 The U.S.-led war against Iraq in 1991 retook the territory of Kuwait but did not go on to Baghdad to topple Saddam Hussein’s government . For instance, the U.K. led the war in 1991 took over Kuwait but didn't topple Hussein's government .
 Raids are limited wars that consist of a single action, a bombing run or a quick incursion by land . Raids were limited wars which consist of one action, one bombing run, one land incursion or one invasion by land. Raids can be limited wars with limited wars
 In 2007, Israeli warplanes bombed a facility in Syria that Israel believed to be a nuclear research facility in order to stop Syria from making progress on nuclear weapons . Israel bombed the facility in 2007, Israel believed it was a research facility . Israel believed the facility was being used to make progress
 Raids fall into the gray area between wars and non-war because their destruction is limited and they are over quickly . Raids are more of a war than a war, but they are often over quickly and destroyed quickly. Raids often fall into a gray zone between war and non
 Raiding that is repeated or fuels a cycle of retaliation usually becomes a limited war or what is sometimes called low'intensity conflict . Raids that are repeated or . fuels a . cycle of . retaliation usually become a . limited war, sometimes called a low' intensity conflict .
 The U.S. Civil War of the 1860s is a good example of a secessionist civil war . The war of Eritrea province in Ethiopia (now Eritrea) in the 1980s was the war of the 80s in Eritrea .
 People fighting their fellow citizens act no less cruelly than those fighting people from another state . People fighting each other act no more cruely than fighting people in another state. People fighting in a state of their own state act as cruellous .
 The 50,000 or more deaths in the civil war in El Salvador, including many from massacres and death squads, were not based on ethnic differences . El Salvador's civil war ended in 1992 after a decade of civil war between Salvador Salvador's government and the US government .
 Many of today’s civil wars emerge from ethnic or clan conflicts as well . Of course, many of today's civil wars emerged from ethnic and clan conflicts .
 In Chad, a rebel group composed of rival clans to the president’s nearly overthrew the government in 2007 . The government was overthrown by a rival group in 2007.
 Sustaining a civil war usually requires a source of support for rebels, from neighboring states, diaspora ethnic communities, or revenue from natural resources or illegal drugs . Sustained a war requires support from neighbors, neighboring states or diasporporporations .
 Guerrilla war, which includes certain kinds of civil wars, is warfare without front lines . Guerrilla warfare includes certain types of civil war, including guerrilla warfare .
 Irregular forces operate in the midst of, and often hidden or protected, by, civilian populations . Irregular force operations are often protected by, or hidden, by civilians .
 The purpose is not to directly confront an enemy army but rather to harass and punish it so as to gradually limit its operation and effectively liberate territory from its control . The purpose of the army is to harass, punish and punish the enemy so as as to limit its operations .
 U.S. military forces in South Vietnam fought against Vietcong guerrillas in the 1960s and 1970s, with rising frustration .
 Efforts to combat a guerrilla army, counterinsurgency, are discussed in Chapter 6 . The U.S. has been in contact with the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 In guerrilla war, without a fixed front line, there is much territory that neither side controls . Both sides exert military leverage over the same places at the same time . The U.S. government says it is not interested in the situation .
 Often the government controls a town by day and the guerrillas by night . The government controls most of the country's towns by day .
 Civilians suffer most when no military force firmly controls a location, opening the door to banditry, personal vendettas, sexual violence, and other such lawless behavior . Thus, guerrilla wars are extremely painful for civilians, who suffer most .
 Warfare increasingly is irregular and guerrilla-style; it is less and less often an open, conventional clash of large state armies . The latter still occurs occasionally . Warfare increasingly becomes irregular, guerrilla style .
 In all types of war, the abstractions and theories of IR scholars hardly capture the horrors experienced by those on the scene, both soldiers and civilians . IR scholars say IR scholars should be careful not to rely on their theories to understand the horrors of war .
 War suspends basic norms of behavior and, especially over time, traumatizes participants and bystanders . War suspended basic norms and traumatized participants are traumatized by war .
 Collier, Paul, and Nicholas Sambanis, eds. You Are a Strategic Analyst"" at MyPoliSciLab 3 Collier . Collier: "You are a strategic Analyst"
 Civilians experience terror, violence, and rape; they lose loved ones and homes . They too often live with trauma afterward . Civilians have to deal with trauma after they are raped and killed .
 "The violence of war does not resemble war movies, but instead creates a nearly psychotic experience of overwhelming confusion, noise, terror, and adrenaline," says author . "War movies are not war movies. They create an almost psychotic experience, and create overwhelming confusion."
 Soldiers in professional armies train to keep functioning in these conditions—but still have an incredibly difficult job . Those in irregular forces and civilian populations caught in civil wars have little hope of coping .
 The horrors of all wars are magnified in cases of genocide and massacre, of child soldiers and of brutal warfare that continues over years .
 Scholars and policy makers are paying more attention in recent years to the difficult transitions from war to peace around the world . Transitioning governments represent opposing factions, economic reconstruction, and so forth .
 Somali clan elders in 2007 agreed that all would be better off by giving up their guns to the new central government but none wanted to go first . These efforts often address collective goods problems among parties .
 International peacekeepers and NGOs focus on Security Sector Reform to create professional military and police forces instead of warlord militias .
 The process of Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration deals with the common problem of what to do with irregular forces after civil wars end . The process is known as the process of disarmament .
 In several countries where internal wars in the 1990s had led to dehumanization and atrocities, new governments used truth commissions to help the society heal and move forward . In South Africa, truth commissions were used to help heal the society .
 The commission’s role was to hear honest testimony from the period, to bring to light what really happened during these wars, and in exchange to offer most of the participants asylum from punishment .
 Human rights groups objected to a settlement in Sierra Leone in 1999 that brought into the government a faction that had routinely cut off civilians’ fingers as a terror tactic . The settlement brought in the government of a group that had cut off civilian fingers .
 After brutal ethnic conflicts give way to complex political settlements, most governments try to balance the need for justice and truth with the need to keep all groups on board .
 Experts debate how much truth and reconciliation is necessary after long conflicts . Experts have debated how much reconciliation and truth is necessary for long conflict .
 Some argue that tribunals and government-sponsored panels could lead to political instability in transitional states . Some now argue that in some circumstances, tribunions and panels may lead to instability .
 Other experts disagree, noting that the work of such panels can be essential to building trust that is important for democracy . Other experts say that such panels are essential to build trust in democracy .
 Once armed groups stop shooting, a long process of postwar transition ensues . GIVING up the guns is a long and difficult process of transition .
 Disarming and demobilizing militias is the most critical aspect of this transition, but also the most difficult because it leaves disarmed groups vulnerable . Disarmed militias are the most vulnerable because they leave them vulnerable, experts say . The U.S. government is trying to disarm and dem
 A major armed group turns in weapons under amnesty in the Niger Delta region of Nigeria, 2009 .
 Conflict itself is ever present in the international system, the condition against which bargaining takes place . The international system is a form of conflict itself, the author says .
 In conflict bargaining, states develop capabilities that give them leverage to obtain more favorable outcomes than they otherwise would achieve . States develop capabilities in conflict bargaining to obtain better outcomes than otherwise .
 Whether fair or unfair, the ultimate outcome of the bargaining process is a settlement of the particular conflict . The ultimate outcome is the settlement of a particular conflict, whether fair or fair .
 The question of when conflict becomes violent can be approached in different ways, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the question is when conflict begins violent .
 Descriptive approaches, favored by historians, tend to focus narrowly on specific direct causes of the outbreak of war, which vary from one war to another . Historians tend to use a more descriptive approach to understand the causes of war .
 Political scientists tend to focus on the search for general explanations, applicable to a variety of contexts, about why wars break out . For example, one could say that the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in 1914 “caused” World War I .
 World War I was caused by shifts in the balance of power among European states, with the assassination being only a catalyst . For example, one can see how the assassination was only the catalyst for the outbreak of World War II .
 Political scientists use the levels of analysis concept from Chapter 1 to explain why wars begin . One way to organize the many theories offered by political scientists is to use the Levels of Analysis concept .
 Most important events in IR have multiple causes at different levels of analysis . Using this framework reminds us that most important events have multiple ways of analysis to be analyzed .
 One theory, consistent with realism, holds that the use of war and other violent means of leverage in international conflicts is normal and reflects rational decisions of national leaders . One theory of realism holds that use of violence in international conflict is normal .
 Information screens, cognitive biases, groupthink, and so forth. These potentials were discussed in Chapter 4 .
 A related theory holds that the education and mentality of whole populations of individuals determine whether conflicts become violent .
 In this view, public nationalism or ethnic hatred may pressure leaders to solve conflicts violently . Public nationalism or even an innate tendency toward violence in human nature may lead to violence, author says .
 Some wars clearly reflect rational calculations of national leaders, but others clearly were mistakes . Some wars were mistakes and cannot be considered rational. Others were mistakes. Some wars may have been rational calculations, but some were mistakes, say experts .
 Seneca, Hercules Furens and Seneca Seneca are some of the world's most famous leaders .
 A maker of war can become a maker of peace, as did Egypt’s Anwar Sadat, for example . Sadat was a warmaker, but also a peacemaker, writes CNN's John Sutter . He says Sadat made peace in Egypt, but not war
 Individuals of many cultural backgrounds and religions lead their states into war, as do both male and female leaders . Individuals of all ages and backgrounds lead their state into war .
 The domestic level of analysis draws attention to the characteristics of states or societies that may make them more or less prone to use violence in resolving conflicts . The Domestic Level analysis looks at the characteristics that make countries more prone to violence .
 Marxists often said that capitalist states were prone to use violence in international conflicts . Western leaders claimed that communist states were especially prone to using violence . Communist states were particularly prone to violence, Western leaders said .
 Rich industrialized states and poor agrarian ones both use war at times . Likewise, rich industrialized states use war against each other .
 Anthropologists have found that preagricultural hunter-gatherer societies were more prone to warfare than today’s societies . Anthropologists found that a wide range of hunter-gathering societies were much more likely to engage in warfare .
 Potential for warfare seems to be universal across cultures, types of society, and time periods . However, the importance and frequency of war vary greatly from case to case .
 Domestic political factors shape a state’s outlook on war and peace, some argue . Some argue that domestic political factors play a state's role in peace .
 For example, the democratic peace suggests that democracies almost never fight other democracies . Both democracies and authoritarian states fight wars, but both authoritarian states do .
 Few useful generalizations can tell us which societies are more prone or less prone to war . Others claim that domestic political parties, interest groups, and legislatures play an important role in international conflicts .
 Japan was prone to using violence in international conflicts before World War II, but is now averse to such violence since then . For example, Japan has been reluctant to use violence in the past .
 Political scientists do not agree on a theory of why great wars like World War II occur and cannot predict whether they could happen again . Political scientists say they can't predict whether it will happen again.
 The city of Stalingrad was decimated during Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union, 1943 . The city was destroyed by the Germans during the invasion of Russia in 1943 .
 Domestic Political Audiences and the Escalation of International Disputes. Domestic political Audiences . Escalating of international disputes. The Escalated of International Disparades.
 Anthropologists in the 1920s had observed them engaging in murderous intergroup violence . Yet anthropologists had observed that they had engaged in violent intergroup warfare .
 Political scientists have not yet identified the general principles to explain why some societies are more peaceful than others and why they change . Political scientists say they have no idea why some countries are peaceful .
 Interstate Level Theories at the interstate level explain wars in terms of power relations among major actors in the international system . Theories include the theory of state power relations in the world .
 Power transition theory holds that conflicts generate large wars at times when power is relatively equally distributed . A rising power is threatening to overtake a declining hegemon in overall position, the theory says .
 Deterrence, as we have seen, is supposed to stop wars by building up power and threatening its use . Deterrence stops wars by threatening the use of power and building it up, not by threatening it .
 Theory of arms races holds that wars are caused, not prevented, by such actions . But theory of arms race holds that such actions are not prevented by arms race .
 No general formula has been discovered to tell us what circumstances each of these principles holds true . The principles are not known to explain why they are true .
 Political scientists study war from a statistical perspective, analyzing data on types of wars and circumstances under which they occurred . Some political scientists have studied war from statistical perspective .
 One approach links large wars with long economic waves (also called Kondratieff cycles) in the world economy, of about 50 years’ duration . Of the several variations on the idea that major warfare in the international system is cyclical, one approach links wars with economic waves
 These cycle theories at best can explain only general tendencies toward war in the international system over time . War cycle theories can only explain general tendencies to war in international system .
 War as an outcome of conflict is becoming less likely over time due to the worldwide development of both technology and international norms . An opposite approach in some ways is the theory of linear long-term change, which is based on the theory that war as a result of conflict will become less likely
 Some IR scholars argue that war and military force are becoming obsolete as leverage in international conflicts . They argue that these means of influence are not very effective in today’s highly complex, interdependent world .
 A parallel line of argument holds that today’s military technology is too powerful to use in most conflicts . This is especially applicable to nuclear weapons, especially nuclear weapons . The U.S. has not been able to use nuclear weapons in most wars .
 Advocates of these theories make historical analogies to the decline of the practices of slavery, dueling, and cannibalism . They say they are once considered normal but now obsolete . Advocates say cannibalism and dueling are now considered obsolete .
 No consensus has emerged regarding the best explanation for this trend . These approaches have a strong empirical basis, but no consensus on best explanation .
 Political scientists cannot yet predict with any confidence which of the world’s many international conflicts will lead to war . For these reasons, political scientists can’t predict with no confidence that the world will be at war .
 We can gain insight, however, by studying various types of conflicts to understand better what states are fighting about . We can also gain insight by studying conflicts in order to understand what state is fighting about.
 The first three are conflicts over ideas, the last three conflicts over interests . The first four conflicts are over ideas . The last three are over interests. The last four conflicts involve conflict over ideas and interests .
 These six types of conflict are not mutually exclusive, and they overlap considerably in practice . These six conflicts involve conflict between people and people, not necessarily exclusive .
 The conflicts between Russia and Ukraine after the 1991 Soviet breakup were complex . For example, the conflicts between the two countries involved were complex, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ethnic Russians living in Ukraine, and ethnic Ukrainians in Russia, experienced conflict . Ethnic Russians in Ukraine and Russians in Russia experienced conflict. Ethnic Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine experienced conflict in Ukraine .
 There are also religious differences between Ukrainian and Russian forms of Christianity . Ukraine and Russia have different religious beliefs .
 The two new states had a territorial dispute over the Crimean peninsula . Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had transferred the peninsula to Ukraine in the 1950s . The Crimean peninsula was transferred to Ukraine from the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The two states also had economic conflicts over trade and money after the Soviet breakup, which created new borders and currencies . The two countries had economic disputes over trade, money and borders .
 These multiple conflicts did not lead to the use of military force, however . These conflicts were not the first to lead to military force .
 Then-Russian president Vladimir Putin, who had campaigned for the incumbent party in Ukraine, protested vigorously but did not seriously consider military force . Putin did not consider military action, but did consider using force .
 The types of conflict discussed here come into play in combination rather than separately . So the conflict discussed in this article comes to play together rather than separate .
 We will look at the most difficult types of conflict, in which intangible elements such as ethnic hatred, religious fervor, or ideology come into play . Conflicts of ideas are the focus of this article .
 Identity-based sources of international conflict today have been shaped historically by nationalism as the link between identity and internationally recognized statehood . These identity-based  conflict today has been shaped by nationalism .
 We will briefly review the development of nationalism before examining the three types of conflicts of ideas . Therefore, we will briefly discuss the three kinds of conflict of ideas: nationalism .
 Nationalism may be the most important force in world politics in the past two centuries . Nationalism is devotion to the interests of one’s own nation over those of other states .
 A nation is a population that shares an identity, usually including a language and culture . A nation's identity is a nation that includes a language, culture and culture, and a nation is the name of a nation .
 The extension of political control over large territories such as France created the commonality necessary for nationhood . States created nations, states created nations .
 The perceived existence of a nation has often led to the creation of a corresponding state . At the same time, however, the perceived existence has often resulted in the formation of a state .
 Aroundd.00, countries such as France and Austria began to bring entire nations together into single states . Around d.00: France, Austria and Austria joined together in single states.
 These new nation-states were very large and powerful and overran smaller neighbors . These new nations were very powerful and powerful, overran small neighbors .
 Over time, they conquered and incorporated many small territorial units . Over time they conquered many small territories, they incorporated them .
 Ernest. Gellner, Ernest. Ernest. 20 Gellners . Ernest. The idea of nationalism itself itself became a powerful force and . Eventually the idea of . nationalism itself became an idea .
 The principle of self-determination implies that people who identify as a nation should have the right to form a state and exercise sovereignty over their affairs .
 It is generally secondary to the principles of sovereignty (noninterference in other states’ internal affairs) and territorial integrity, with which it frequently conflicts .
 Self-determination does not give groups the right to change international borders, even those imposed arbitrarily by colonialism, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "Self-determination is not a matter of national identity"
 Generally, though not always, self-determination has been achieved by violence . Self-determination can be achieved through violence, but not necessarily by peaceful means .
 When borders of nations do not match those of states, conflicts almost inevitably arise . The borders of countries should not match that of nations, states must have borders .
 The Netherlands helped establish the principle of self-determination when it broke free of Spanish ownership around 1600 and set up a self-governing Dutch republic . Today such conflicts are widespread—in Northern Ireland, Quebec, Israel-Palestine, India-Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tibet, Tibet
 The struggle over control of the Netherlands was a leading cause of the Thirty Years’ War . In that war states mobilized their populations for war in new ways, they mobilized their population for new ways .
 Sweden drafted one man out of ten for long-term military service, while the Netherlands used the wealth derived from global trade to finance a standing professional army .
 This process of popular mobilization intensified greatly in the French Revolution and the subsequent Napoleonic Wars, when France instituted a universal draft and a centrally run “command” economy . The French Revolution was a model of the French revolution .
 Citizen armies were composed for the first time of Frenchmen rather than mercenaries . Citizen armies marched longer and faster than those of the first Frenchmen .
 Their nation-state embodied their aspirations and brought them together in a common national identity . They were united in the struggle for a common identity .
 The United States had followed the example of the Netherlands by declaring independence from Britain in 1776 . The U.S. followed the Dutch example of independence from the UK by declaring its own independence .
 Latin American states gained independence early in the 19th century . Germany and Italy unified their nations out of multiple political units later in that century .
 Socialist workers from different European countries had banded together as workers to fight for workers’ rights . Before World War I, socialist workers from various European countries banded up as workers .
 In that war, however, most abandoned such solidarity and instead fought for their own nation . nationalism thus proved a stronger force than socialism, he says .
 Before World War II, nationalism helped Germany, Italy, and Japan build political orders based on fascism . Fascism was an extreme authoritarianism girded by national chauvinism .
 It was nationalism and patriotism (not communism) that rallied the Soviet people to turn back Germany’s invasion . And in World War II, it was patriotic patriotism that rallied Soviet people in order to fight back the invasion .
 In the past 50 years, nations by the dozens have gained independence and statehood . Nations by the dozen have gained statehood and independence .
 Jews worked persistently in the first half of the 20th century to create the state of Israel . Palestinians aspired in the second half to create a Palestinian state . Jews and Palestinians have been involved in the creation of Israel in the last century .
 Ethnic and territorial units such as Ukraine, Slovenia, and East Timor have established themselves as independent nation-states . The Soviet Union and Yugoslavia have fragmented in recent years .
 Others, such as Montenegro and Kurdistan, seek to do so and already run their own affairs . Montenegro, Kurdistan and Montenegro are among the countries seeking to become independent .
 It affects several of the main types of conflict that occupy the rest of this chapter . The next chapter is the first chapter of the book .
 Territorial control is closely tied to the aspirations of ethnic groups for statehood . In most such cases they aspire to have their own state with its formal international status and territorial boundaries/ Territorial controls .
 Any state’s borders deviate to some extent from the actual location of ethnic communities . Any state's borders deviates from some of the actual locations of ethnic groups .
 Members of the ethnic group are left outside its state’s borders, and members of other ethnic groups are located within the state's borders . Members of an ethnic group left outside the state”s borders .
 The resulting situation can be dangerous, with part of an ethnic group controlling a state and another part living as a minority within another state controlled by a rival ethnic group . The resulting state is often controlled by one ethnic group but controlled by the other .
 The minority group suffers discrimination in the other state, and the ‘home’ state tries to rescue or avenge them . Frequently the minority group is discriminated against by the other states .
 Kurds share a culture, and many of them aspire to create a state of Kurdistan . Many of the Kurds aspire to become a state, but not a Kurdish state .
 22 Gurr, Ted Robert. In the 1990s, rival Kurdish guerrilla armies fought each other . In the 90s, the Kurdish Kurdish guerillas fought both 22 and 23 Gurr .
 Ethnic conflict is quite possibly the most important source of conflict in the numerous wars now occurring throughout the world . Ethnic conflict could be the source of many of the world's wars, says the author .
 Ethnic conflict stems from a dislike or hatred that members of one ethnic group systematically feel toward another ethnic group . Ethnic conflicts often have material aspects, notably over territory and government control .
 Not all ethnic groups identify as nations; within the U.S. various ethnic groups coexist with a common national identity as Americans .
 Ethnic conflicts play a role in many international conflicts . But in locations where millions of members of the out-group are driving them out .
 Ethnocentrism based on in-group bias can promote intolerance and dehumanization of an out-group, as in genocides in Darfur, Rwanda, Bosnia, and Bosnia .
 Kenya erupted in bloody ethnic violence in 2008 after a disputed presidential election . In 2008, after decades of peace and tolerance, violence erupted in a series of ethnic violence .
 A mob from one ethnic group attacks and drives away all members of a rival ethnic group from a formerly mixed town . The mob drives away members of the rival ethnic groups from the town .
 In the late 1990s, Turkey sent large military forces into northern Iraq to attack Kurdish guerrilla bases, and smaller clashes continue into 2013 . Repeatedly in the late 90s, Turkish military forces have attacked Kurdish guerrillas in Iraq .
 Kurds enjoyed autonomy in part of northern Iraq under U.S. protection in the 1990s . Kurds have maintained quasi-autonomous status in post-Saddam Iraq . Kurds enjoy autonomy in some areas under United States protection .
 The Kurds’ success in the 2010 Iraqi elections gave them a strong position to retain this status . The Kurds' success in Iraq's 2010 elections was the result of the 2010 elections .
 In the Syrian civil war in 2011-2013, Kurdish areas gained considerable autonomy . They straddled the fence politically between the government and the rebels .
 Ethnic minorities are minorities in territories controlled by rival ethnic groups . They may even be driven from their land or systematically exterminated .
 Ethnic Serbs tried to do this through ethnic cleansing after the breakup of Yugoslavia in the 1990s . By driving out the minority ethnic group, a majority group can assemble a more unified, more contiguous, and larger territory for its nation-state .
 Ethnic conflict between majority Kyrgyz and minority Uzbeks displaced hundreds of thousands of people in 2010 . Similarly, ethnic conflict between the majority of the Uzbek and minority Uzbeks in 2010 in Kyrgygyzstan (Central Asia) displaced thousands . Ethnic conflict is
 Outside states often worry about the fate of ‘their people’ living as minorities in neighboring states . Outside states sometimes worry about "their people" living as minority .
 Serbia worried about the minority of ethnic Serbs living in Kosovo . Kosovo is now independent from Serbia, but has a minority of Serbs in the country .
 Similar problems have fueled wars between Armenia and Azerbaijan and India and Pakistan . Similar problems fueled wars in Azerbaijan, Pakistan and India .
 The dangerous combination of ethnic conflict and territorial disputes could lead to more wars in the future, experts say . Ethnic conflict could be the reason for more wars, they say .
 Often there are long-standing historical conflicts over specific territories or natural resources, or over one ethnic group’s economic exploitation or political domination of another .
 Ethnic group is a kind of extended kinship group, a group of related individuals sharing some ancestors . The ethnic group is kind of an extended family group .
 A group identity makes a person act as though the other members of the ethnic group were family . Even when kinship relations are not very close, a person acts as though they are related to the other .
 African American men who call each other “brother” express group identity as kinship . For instance, African American . men who called each other . ‘brother’ express kinship. For example, African . American men in the U.S. call themselves ‘
 Jews around the world treat each other as family even though each community has intermarried over time . Each community shares more ancestors with local non-Jews than with distant Jews .
 Perhaps as technology allows far-flung groups to congregate in cyberspace, there will be less psychological pressure to collect ethnic groups physically in a nation-state .
 Ethnocentrism, or in-group bias, is the tendency to see one’s own group in favorable terms and an out-group in unfavorable terms . It is also a tendency to be biased toward the out of group in favor .
 Some scholars believe that ethnocentrism has roots in a biological propensity to protect closely related individuals, though this idea is controversial . More often, in-group bias is understood in terms of social psychology .
 Just as the reciprocity principle has its negative side, so does the identity principle . The identity principle is a negative side of reciprocity reciprocity .
 The same forces that allow sacrifice for a group identity, as in the European Union, also allow the formation of in-group bias . The European Union allows sacrifice for an identity, but also allows in-groups bias .
 No minimum criterion of similarity or kin relationship is needed to evoke the group identity process, including in-group bias . No minimum criteria of similarity, kin relationship, is needed .
 In psychological experiments, even trivial differentiations can evoke these processes . Even trivial differences can evoke similar processes in psychological experiments .
 If people are assigned to groups based on a known but unimportant characteristic, before long the people in each group show in-group bias and find they don’t much care for the other group’s members .
 All too easily, an out-group can be dehumanized and stripped of all human rights, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "All too easily," he says, "an out-of-group" can be stripped of rights .
 This dehumanization includes the common use of animal names— pigs, dogs, and so forth— for members of the out-group . The dehumanization of animals includes the use of animals names .
 U.S. propaganda in World War II depicted Japanese people as apes . Japanese people were depicted as apes during the war .
 The restraints on war that have evolved in regular interstate warfare, such as not massacring civilians, are easily discarded in interethnic warfare . Not massacring civilian civilians is a key issue in the conflict .
 Experience in Western Europe shows that over time, education can overcome ethnic animosities between traditionally hostile nations, such as France .
 After World War II, these states’ governments rewrote the textbooks that a new generation would use to learn its people’s histories . The textbooks were re-written by the governments of these states' governments .
 Each state's textbooks had glorified its own past deeds, played down its misdeeds, and portrayed its traditional enemies in unflattering terms . Previously, each state’s textbooks had portrayed its past deeds .
 In a continent-wide project, new textbooks that gave a more objective and fair rendition were created . New textbooks were created to give a better view of the world .
 Present-day Japanese textbooks that gloss over Japan’s crimes in World War II continue to inflame relations with both China and Korea .
 The existence of a threat from an out-group promotes the cohesion of an in-group, thereby creating a somewhat self-reinforcing process of ethnic division, says author .
 ethnocentrism also often causes members of a group to view themselves as disunited . Glad, Betty, ed. Betty Glad, ed., ed. Glad says that ethnocentism also causes people to see themselves disunited (because they are not disunited) Glad says ethnocent
 Your election in the spring of 2006 as the first woman president in Africa was hailed as a breakthrough for Liberia . Liberia's first female president was elected in April 2006 .
 The election ended decades of political violence that devastated your own country as well as your neighbors Ivory Coast and Sierra Leone . Sierra Leone's election ends decades of violent violence .
 Most recently, the violence ended when former Liberian president Charles Taylor went into exile in Nigeria . Charles Taylor is now in exile in the country .
 Tens of thousands of people lost their lives or were subject to human rights abuses, including torture and mutilation, in the wars begun under Taylor .
 Recently, there is optimism within your country and from the international community. Recently, however, there has been optimism in your country, says CNN.com correspondent .
 Charles Taylor was arrested in 2006 and faces trial in a war crimes tribunal . The tribunal was established by the UN for the brutal war in Sierra Leone . Rebel groups have remained quiet, and Charles Taylor has been arrested .
 Economic aid has begun to stream into your country to assist in development . Economic aid is being sent to your country for economic development .
 Your country has the potential to become a middle-income country owing to its vast natural agricultural and mineral resources . Your country is resource rich and has potential to be a middle income country .
 Your country is underdeveloped, with years of civil war leading to increases in corruption and economic stagnation . Economically, your country has been underdeveloped for years .
 Many of the powerful economic actors in your country benefit from corruption and graft, which you have pledged to end, says President Obama . "Many of the . powerful economic . actors in the . economy benefit from the corruption and . graft," he says .
 Unemployment is very high, with hundreds of thousands of young men unemployed . Hundreds of thousands are unemployed in the United States .
 Until until recently, roving bands of fighters controlled pockets of territory . Until recently, the Taliban had control of most of the country's territory .
 Imagine a group that was involved in the civil war begins to reopen the war . Now imagine that a group of people involved in it begins re-opening the war.
 The group has taken refuge in Sierra Leone and now begins to make cross-border raids against your country . The group is known for its brutality in the region .
 You also suspect they are sending weapons and funds to rebels within Liberia . The government is believed to be sending weapons to rebels in Liberia .
 Sierra Leone does not support the group, but its government has limited resources to devote to the issue . Sierra Leone is experiencing political instability and its government is experiencing its own political instability .
 Negotiations could lead to peace, but might require power sharing in your government that could derail your attempts to lessen corruption . Negotiating may lead to power sharing, but could derail efforts to reduce corruption .
 International donors would discourage you from endangering the fragile peace in Liberia . The implicit threat of an aid cutoff if you are perceived to be too hardline is also a problem .
 A military offensive against the rebels would have financial risks . Thus, it would be financial risks for the country's government .
 In addition, the reemergence of a civil war would make your proposed democratic and economic reforms more difficult to implement . In addition to the re-emerging civil war, your proposed reforms would be difficult to carry out, he says .
 "Your military is not well trained and you are very uncertain about the possibility of success against the rebels," says President Obama . "You are not very well trained," says Obama .
 A strong military response to the rebels could discourage future aggression and establish that you are a tough leader who is serious about enforcing the peace . A strong response to rebels, however, could discourage any aggression .
 In the ArabIsraeli conflict, Israelis tend to see themselves as fragmented into dozens of political parties and diverse immigrant communities pulling in different directions . Israelis see ‘the Arabs’ as a monolithic bloc united against them, while they see the Arabs as a united bloc .
 Arab Palestinians see themselves as fragmented into factions and weakened by divisions among the Arab states, while ‘the Israelis’ appear monolithic to them . Meanwhile, Arab Palestinians feel themselves as fractured into factions . “The Israelis” appear monolith to them, according to Arab Palestinians
 Ethnic groups are only one point along a spectrum of kinship relations . From nuclear families through extended families, villages, provinces, and nations, up to the entire human race .
 Experts said Somalia was surely immune from ethnic conflicts because Somalis were all from the same ethnic group, spoke the same language, and shared the same religion . Experts said that of all the African countries, Somalia would surely be immune to ethnic conflicts .
 In 1991-1992, a ruinous civil war erupted between members of different clans (based on extended families) leading to mass starvation, the intervention of foreign military forces, and the intervention . Two decades of near-anarchy and nonstop violence ended in 1992 .
 People identify most strongly at one level of group identity . It is unclear why people identify strongly at a certain level of identity .
 In Somalia, loyalties are to clans; in Serbia, they are to the ethnic group . In the United States and elsewhere, multiethnic nations command people’s primary loyalty .
 States reinforce their citizens’ identification with the state through flags, anthems, pledges of allegiance, patriotic speeches, and so forth . States reinforce citizens' identification with their state through flagging up and down, an themms, pledge of allegiance .
 Perhaps someday people will shift loyalties even further, developing a global identity as humans first and members of states and ethnic groups second . Perhaps someday, people will develop global identity .
 In extreme cases, governments use genocide to try to destroy scapegoated groups or political rivals . Genocide is systematic extermination of ethnic or religious groups in whole or in part .
 Under its fanatical policies of racial purity, Nazi Germany exterminated 6 million Jews and millions of others . Millions of others, including homosexuals, Roma, and communists, were exterminated .
 The mass murders, now known as the Holocaust, are considered among the greatest crimes against humanity in history . The Holocaust, along with the sheer scale of war unleashed by Nazi aggression, is considered one of the world's greatest crimes .
 The pledges of world leaders after genocide have been found wanting as genocide recurred in the 1990s in Bosnia and Rwanda, and most recently in Darfur, Sudan . World leaders pledge to “never again” allow genocide have found wanting .
 Hutu-nationalist government carried out the most deadly genocide of recent decades in Rwanda in 1994 . In 1994, in Rwanda, the Hutu group is the majority and the Tutsi group is a minority .
 The minority Tutsis had earlier held power over the Hutus, and Belgian colonialism had exploited local rivalries .
 Ethnic Hutu extremists in the government gave orders throughout the country to kill ethnic Tutsis and those Hutus who had opposed the government . In 1994, ethnic Hutus were killed in Rwanda . Hutus are Hutus and Tutsi were Hutus opposed to the government, Hut
 In short order, an estimated 800,000 men, women, and children were massacred, mostly by machete, and their bodies dumped into rivers . Thousands at a time washed up on lakeshores in neighboring Uganda .
 Hutu-Tutsi hatred is part of a pattern of age-old ethnic hatreds that cropped up in the post-Cold War era, especially in ‘backward” areas such as Africa . It might be tempting to view it as part of an old pattern of
 If killings based on age-old hatreds are inevitable, then inaction by the rest of the world might not be enough .
 Germany exterminated its Jews even more efficiently than Rwanda did its Tutsis . The difference is that the “advanced” society could kill with industrial chemicals instead of at knifepoint .
 Social psychology theories treat the Rwandan genocide as pathological . Social psychology theory treats the genocide as a deviation from both rationality and social norms .
 Such feelings can be whipped up by politicians pursuing their own power, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A key threshold is crossed when the out-group is dehumanized, the author says . Norms of social interaction, such as not slitting children’s throats, can then be disregarded .
 As the genocide in Rwanda unfolded, the international community stood by . Rwanda was the scene of the Rwandan genocide . The international community was there to stand by .
 A weak UN force there had to withdraw, but its commander later estimated that with 5,000 more troops he could have changed the outcome . The UN had to pull out of the situation, but estimates that with more troops more would have changed it .
 The weak international response to this atrocity reveals how frail international norms of human rights are compared to norms of noninterference in other states’ internal affairs . No strategic interests are at stake when no strategic interests at stake .
 Hutu ultranationalists quickly lost power when Tutsi rebels defeated the government militarily . But the war spread into Democratic Congo, where the Hutu took refuge and where sporadic fighting continues 18 years later .
 Top U.S. officials, including President Clinton, later apologized for their inadequate response . The damage was done. President Clinton later apologized, but the damage had been done .
 Renewed vows of ‘never again’ proved wanting once more in the next case, Darfur .
 In Sudan, the warring sides in a decades-long civil war signed a peace agreement in 2003, ending a war that had killed more than a million people . Sudan's civil war ended in 2003 after more than one million people died .
 The agreement called for withdrawing government forces from the south of the country, establishing a power-sharing transitional government and army, and holding a referendum in rebel areas in six years .
 These processes led to the successful independence of South Sudan in 2011 . South Sudan is now one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 rebels in the western Darfur region began to protest their exclusion from the peace agreement . But following this peace agreement, rebels in Darfur have begun to protest .
 Darfur militias raided black African Darfur villages, wantonly killing, raping, and burning . In response, the government helped Arab militias raid black African villages . Arab militias killed, raped, and burned villages in response .
 In late 2004, the government and some of the Darfur rebels reached a tentative peace agreement . In 2007, the African Union and United Nations sent in a joint peacekeeping mission in Darfur . Darfur has been a source of tension between government and rebels .
 Sudanese forces had 23,000 uniformed personnel on the ground by 2011 . Sudanese government delays and other frustrations led to delays in Sudanese response to Sudanese unrest .
 In cases of both genocide and less extreme scapegoating, ethnic hatreds do not merely bubble up naturally . The international community’s ineffective response to the mass murders in Darfur, like that in Rwanda in 1994, shows the limited r\ reach of international norms in today’
 Politicians provoke and channel hatred to strengthen their own power . Politicians provoked and channeled hatred, rather than channeling hatred, they do so .
 Political parties form along ethnic lines in ethnically divided countries . Party leaders consolidate their positions in their own populations by exaggerating the dangers from the other side .
 The Cold War, with its tight system of alliances and authoritarian communist governments, seems to have helped keep ethnic conflicts in check . Cold War helped keep tensions in check in the United States .
 In the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, the existence of a single strong state (willing to 29 Power, Samantha) was not a problem . In the former Yugoslavia, Yugoslavia—multinational states—were multinational states .
 After the fall of communism, most of the numerous ethnic rivalries in the former Soviet Union did not lead to warfare . Czechoslovakia and elsewhere, ethnic relations were relatively peaceful after the fall .
 Ethnic conflicts often transcend material grievances, find expression as religious conflicts . One reason ethnic conflicts are often religious conflicts is that they find expression in religious conflicts, author says .
 Religion is the core of a community’s value system in much of the world . People whose religious practices differ are easily disdained and treated as unworthy or even inhuman .
 Religion often surfaces as the central and most visible division between groups . When overlaid on ethnic and territorial conflicts, religion often surfaces in the most visible divisions .
 Azerbaijan's population is mostly Muslims; Armenians are Christians . Most Armenians in Azerbaijan are Muslims; most people are Muslims . Azerbaijan is a Muslim nation .
 Nothing inherent in religion mandates conflicts, but religious groups coexist peacefully in many places . Nothing inherent to religion mandates conflict, says CNN.com .
 Religious differences hold the potential to make existing conflicts more intractable . But religions involve core values, which are held as absolute truth, says CNN's John Sutter .
 fundamentalist movements have gained strength in recent decades . This is increasingly true as fundamentalist movements gain strength . The UK has seen a rise in fundamentalist movements in recent years .
 Members of these movements organize their lives and communities around their religious beliefs . Many are willing to sacrifice, kill, and die for those beliefs .
 Fundamentalist movements have become larger and more powerful in recent decades in Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Hinduism, and other religions . Fundamentalist groups have become more powerful and larger in recent years .
 In India, Hindu fundamentalists have provoked violent clashes and massacres that have reverberated internationally . The violence in India has reverberated around the world .
 In 2002, a frenzy of burning, torturing, and raping by Hindu nationalist extremists killed nearly a thousand Muslims in India’s Gujarat state . The Hindu nationalist party controls the state government in the state .
 In Israel, Jewish fundamentalists have used violence to derail Palestinian-Israeli peace negotiations . In Israel the assassination of Israel's own prime minister in 1995, killed Israel's prime minister . The assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yossi Obeidallah was also used to derail peace talks .
 Fundamentalist movements challenge the values and practices of secular political organizations . Secular political organizations are those created apart from religious establishments . Fundamentalist groups challenge secular political groups .
 As transnational belief systems, religions often are taken as a higher law than state laws and international treaties . Religion is often taken as law by people in the world, rather than by governments .
 Iranian Islamist fundamentalists train and support militias in other states such as Iraq and Lebanon . Iran has been accused of supporting militias in Iraq, Lebanon and Syria .
 Jewish fundamentalists build settlements in Israeli-occupied territories . They vow to cling to the land even if their government evacuates it . Israel's government has evacuated some of the land in the occupied territories .
 Christian fundamentalists in the United States persuade their government to withdraw from the UN Population Fund because of that organization’s views on family planning and abortion . The U.S. government withdraws from the fund because of the organization's views on abortion .
 Some have suggested that international conflicts in the coming years may be generated by a ‘clash of civilizations’—based on differences among the world’s major powers . Scott Appleby, R Scott. Scott.
 The idea has been criticized for being overly general, and for assuming that cultural differences naturally create conflict . The idea is currently being criticized by some for being too general .
 Most ethnic and religious groups living together in states do not fight . In fact, religious and ethnic conflicts receive tremendous attention in the media .
 Violent conflicts are being prosecuted in the name of all the world’s major religions . Violence is being prosecuted against all major religions, including Islam .
 Special attention is due to conflicts involving Islamic groups and states . But special attention is also due to those involving Islamic states .
 The U.S. “war on terror’’ is directed against a network of Islamic terror groups . In addition, the United States “War on terror'’s’ ‘war on terrorism’' is also directed against Islamic terror organizations .
 Sunni Muslims include Sunni Muslims (the majority), Shi’ite Muslims (concentrated in Iran, southern Iraq, southern Lebanon, and Bahrain), and many smaller branches and sects . Sunni Muslims are the majority, Shi'ite Muslims are concentrated in Iran and Iraq .
 Many international conflicts around this zone involve Muslims on one side and non-Muslims on the other, as a result of geographical and historical circumstances including colonialism and oil .
 These groups vary greatly in the means they employ to pursue this goal . These groups use various methods to achieve their goal .
 In the 1990s, Islamic parties gained ground in Turkey, a secular state in which the military has intervened repeatedly to prevent religious politics . Turkey is an important model of moderate Islam in the region . Some are violent—militias and terrorist networks/
 Islamist parties have also played leading roles in Iraq’s government since 2003 . Islamist parties played central roles in the Arab Spring countries, winning elections in Tunisia and Egypt .
 Islamist politics may lead to different foreign policies, but the more important answer is that some Islamist movements have become a transnational force shaping world order and global North-South relations in important ways . Islamist movements are shaping the world order, North-south relations, writes Peter Bergen .
 Religious intolerance can exacerbate tensions between groups, sometimes increasing violence, with international implications . Religious intolerance has international implications, including international tensions . The U.S. has a history of religious intolerance .
 The most salient religious conflict today is between Shi'ite and Sunni branches of Islam . The conflict is centered in Iran and Saudi Arabia, centered in Saudi Arabia .
 Islamists reject Western-oriented secular states in favor of governments more explicitly oriented to Islamic values . In several countries, Islamists reject the idea of secular states .
 These movements reflect long-standing anti-Western sentiment in these countries . They are nationalist movements expressed through religious channels . These movements are expressed in religious channels.
 In some countries with authoritarian governments, religious institutions have been the only available avenue for political opposition . Religious institutions are often the only option for political dissent in some countries .
 Religion has become a means to express opposition to the status quo in politics and culture . Religion has therefore become a way of expressing opposition to politics, culture, politics and religion .
 Anti-Western feelings in Islamic countries came to a boil in 2006 after a Danish newspaper published offensive cartoons depicting 36 Binder, Leonard. The cartoons were published in 2006 .
 In 2012, an anti-Muslim YouTube video produced by an Egyptian in the U.S. led to further rioting and triggered an armed attack on a United States consulate in Libya . The United States ambassador was killed in the attack in Libya in 2012 .
 In five Western industrialized countries, about 40 to 80 percent thought Muslims were “fanatical,” and 60 to 80 per cent thought they did not respect women . In Western countries, 40-80 per cent of Muslims thought they were "fanatical"
 In three of five Muslim countries, more than 60 percent thought non-Muslims were “fanatical’s” But in four of those five countries, a majority of Muslims think non-muslims respect women more .
 Fanatical Spain Germany Germany France Great Britain United States 43% *No irrelevant text/pic Islamic pic/videos *No Smiley No Pm otherwise Removed + Blocked + Consider harassment Consider harassment .
 Jordan Turkey Turkey Egypt Indonesia Pakistan Pakistan not respectful of women . Jordan Turkey Egypt, Jordan Turkey, Egypt and Pakistan are fanatical .
 They reject Western political conceptions of the state (based on individual autonomy) in favor of a more traditional Islamic orientation based on community . They reject the state based on individual individual autonomy and reject the idea of individual autonomy .
 Some aspire to create a single political state encompassing most of the Middle East, as existed in the caliphate ofd.0-1200.0 .
 Such a development would create a profound challenge to the present international system, particularly to its current status quo powers . The development would therefore be opposed at every turn by the world’s most powerful states, he says .
 Islamists in Middle Eastern countries, like revolutionaries elsewhere, derive their main base of strength from championing the cause of the poor masses against rich elites .
 Islamist movements in countries such as Turkey, Egypt, and Lebanon draw their base of support from poor slums . The Islamists sometimes provide basic services unmet by the government .
 In 2006 in Egypt, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan, a plurality of respondents identified primarily as Muslims, more than identified as Arab citizens .
 In Lebanon and the UAE, large majorities identify as citizens of their states . But in Lebanon and UAE, the pattern was reversed, with large majorities identifying as citizens .
 Islamist movements tap into the public’s identification with issues that may not materially affect them but affect their identities as Muslims, across national borders . The Arab-Israeli conflict is one example .
 The public in Muslim countries cared about wars in the 1990s in Bosnia, Azerbaijan, and Chechnya, where Christian armed forces attacked Muslim civilians .
 Islamists see all these conflicts as part of a broad regional struggle of Islam against Western, Christian imperialism . The struggle dates back to the Crusades almost a thousand years ago . Islamists see this as a struggle dating back to Crusades .
 From the perspective of some outsiders, the religious conflicts boiling and simmering at the edges of the Islamic world look like an expansionist threat to be contained . From the outside, some outsiders think it is a threat to contain, but not to contain .
 The view from within looks more like being surrounded and repressed from several directions . "The view from inside looks more than being surrounded by several directions," says the author .
 The Iraq War since 2003 greatly inflamed anti-American feeling and helped radicalize politics across the Muslim world, especially in Arab countries . Many saw the U.S. invasion as a humiliation to Arab dignity .
 Barack Hussein Obama's middle name reflects Muslim family roots in Kenya and grew up partly in Muslim Indonesia . Obama's presidency began to alter this anti-American dynamic when he became president .
 Favorability ratings of America climbed in Bahrain, Jordan, and Egypt, in part due to President Obama’s speech on relations with Muslim states in Cairo in June 2009 .
 By 2010, numbers had begun to fall again as the Arab world began to express frustration in the Middle East peace process and the United States decision to stay in Afghanistan .
 Anti-American and anti-Western sentiments in predominantly Islamic countries have accelerated the growth of violent Islamist groups as well . Anti-U.S. sentiment in predominantly Muslim countries has also accelerated the rise of violent Islamists .
 Although they are in the minority, they have disproportionate effects on IR and receive the most public attention . They are in a minority of IR workers .
 Sunni and Shi’ite wings of Islam have led to violence in recent years . Sunni-Shi'ite factions have been involved in sectarian violence in Iraq and Syria .
 Saddam Hussein was a Sunni ruling over a Shi’ite majority in Iraq . The split played out prominently in Iraq, where Saddam Hussein fought a long deadly war against Iran .
 After the overthrow of Saddam Hussein in 2003, Shi'ite parties took power and Shi’ite militias exacted revenge . Some Sunnis waged a deadly insurgency that turned into deadly waves of sectarian violence .
 The Sunni-Shi’ite relationship in Iraq remains unsettled . The violence in Iraq has since diminished, but the Sunni-shi'ite relationship there remains .
 Only Islamic revolution to successfully control a state ; held off secular Iraq in 1980s war; now attempting to build nuclear weapons . Iran's only Shi'ite only Islamic revolution . Only successful Islamic revolution in Iran .
 Mahdi Army Iraq Shi'ite militia is a major faction in Iraqi government . Mahdi army is a Shiite faction in Iraq's government . Iraq's Shiite government has been overthrown by U.S. forces .
 Ansar Dine Mali Sunni controlled north of country in 2012; took hostages in Algeria in 2013 . Ansar dine Mali is a Sunni Islamist group that has been active in Mali's northern region since 2012 .
 Iraq Sunni Insurgent forces inflicted many casualties on U.S. forces in Iraq . Various Iraq Sunni insurgents inflicted many of the casualties on United States forces .
 Hamas has killed hundreds of Israeli civilians and fought a war against Israel in 2008 . Hamas Palestine Sunni Forces have fought hundreds of Israel civilians and killed hundreds .
 al Shabab Somalia Sunni Controlled most of country in 2007-2012 . Control most of Somalia's most populated areas . Control Gaza Strip . Control of Gaza Strip. Control of most populated area in Somalia .
 Moro Islamic Liberation Front Philippines Sunni Forces have fought for independence of certain regions in the Muslim-populated southern Philippine Islands . al Qaeda World Sunni 9/11 attacks and European bombings were al Qaeda's World Sunni .
 Taliban Afghanistan Sunni Major insurgent group fighting foreign forces . controlled country in 1996-2001; controlled country from 1996 to 2001 .
 Islamist guerrilla fighters/terrorists are also active in Chechnya, Kashmir, Central Asia, Indonesia, and Europe . Islamist guerillas are also . active in . Kashmir, Afghanistan and Indonesia .
 Since 2011, the Sunni-Shi’ite divide has centered on Syria, where the ruling family is Alawite and the majority of the population is Sunni .
 Civil war in Syria has also taken on sectarian overtones, reinforced by outside backers . Iran, Hezbollah, Turkey and Arab Gulf states have backed the rebels .
 Regionally, Iran and Saudi Arabia represent the split, facing each other over the Persian Gulf and engaged in a major arms race . The Saudis stocking in jets and missiles while the Iranians race to build a nuclear weapon .
 Russia tends to support the Iranian-Shi’ite side while the U.S. and its allies support the SaudiSunni side . The United States tends to back the Saudi-Iranian side .
 Neither side gets along with Israel, lending a triangular aspect to the conflict . Israel and Israel have been at odds with each other for years .
 In Iran, the top religious leaders can overturn the laws passed by the parliament . In 1979, a popular uprising in Iran overthrew the U.S.-backed shah and installed an Islamic government .
 The rejection of international norms by some Islamists was dramatically illustrated when Iran refused to protect U.S. diplomats in 1979 . Iran's refusal to protect United States diplomats from Iran in 1979 was illustrated by the incident .
 Iran is developing nuclear technology that could produce nuclear weapons within a few years . Defying the UN Security Council, Iran is currently developing nuclear weapons technology . Iran is expected to produce a nuclear weapon within a decade .
 In 2009, a disputed presidential election led to the harsh repression of protesters . A disputed election in 2009 led to a harsh crackdown on protesters .
 Iran strongly supports—with money, arms, and training—the Hezbollah militia in Lebanon and the government in Syria . Iran also supports the Hezbollah militia and the Syrian government .
 Hezbollah runs hundreds of schools, hospitals, and other charities, but is also included on the U.S. list of terrorist organizations . Hezbollah is considered a terrorist organization by the United States .
 Hezbollah fought Israel for years, winning popular support throughout the Arab world, even among Sunnis . Hezbollah won popular support in Arab countries, including Sunnis, in the past .
 Hezbollah took a leading role in Lebanon’s government in 2011, despite a UN tribunal indictment of its members for the 2005 assassination of the Lebanese prime minister . Hezbollah has been accused of killing the prime minister of Lebanon in 2005, but has denied involvement .
 On the Sunni side, the major militant Islamist groups, as well as some less violent ones, are Salafis . The Sunni side of the debate is split between Sunni and Sunni Muslims .
 They adhere to some version of Wahhabism, a fundamentalist interpretation of Islamic law with roots in Saudi Arabia . The group adhere to an interpretation of Islam's strict interpretation of the law .
 The most important center of this fundamentalist movement currently is in Afghanistan and the next-door tribal areas of western Pakistan .
 Militants following the same philosophy are also active across Northern Africa in 2013, notably in Nigeria, Mali, Libya, Libya and Somalia .
 In Egypt, a nonviolent Salafi party did well in 2012 elections, although they lost the presidential election to an Islamist who follows a less stringent interpretation of Islam . The party lost the election in Egypt, although it was a nonviolent party that did well .
 Rival Islamic factions then continued the war with even greater intensity for several years . Rival groups then continued to fight for control of the country .
 By 1997, a faction called the Taliban had taken control of most of Afghanistan and imposed an extreme interpretation of Islamic law . The Taliban was overthrown by the Taliban in 1997 and imposed a strict interpretation of law .
 With beatings and executions, the regime forced women to wear head-to-toe coverings, girls to stay out of school, and men to grow beards, among other repressive policies . The regime was known for its repressive policies, including beatings, executions .
 War, grinding poverty, Islamic fundamentalism, and an ideologically driven government allowed Afghanistan to become a base for worldwide terrorist operations . The September 11, 2001, attacks were the result of a combination of war and poverty in the country .
 U.S. exerted its power to remove the Taliban from power in Afghanistan and disrupt the al Qaeda terrorist network headquartered there . In response, the United States has removed the Taliban and disrupted al Qaeda in Afghanistan .
 Despite U.S. and NATO successes, the Taliban continues to attack NATO forces . Despite United States and NATO success, NATO forces continue to fight the Taliban .
 The Taliban’s defeat in Afghanistan in 2001 led its members, with like-minded Pakistani militants, to establish bases in the lawless ‘tribal areas” of western Pakistan . Pakistan is a much larger neighbor with nuclear weapons .
 Pakistan’s intelligence service is widely believed to use Islamist militants to exert influence in both Afghanistan and Kashmir . Pakistan and India dispute Kashmir, a territory they dispute . Pakistan's intelligence services are believed to be using Islamist militants in Afghanistan .
 Pro-democracy forces ousted Pakistan’s military ruler and installed an elected government in 2008 . Benazir Bhutto was assassinated by the military in 2008, but not until after his movement leader was assassinated .
 The war in Afghanistan has strained relations between Pakistan and the U.S. and its NATO allies . The Afghan conflict has strained Pakistan's relations with the United States .
 U.S. forces found and killed Osama bin Laden in Pakistan in 2011 . The strains worsened in 2011 when bin Laden was found in a Pakistani city .
 Pakistanis objected to the intrusion that violated their sovereignty, while Americans wondered whether the Pakistani military had colluded in hiding bin Laden .
 In 2004, bombings of trains in Madrid killed hundreds and apparently tipped an election against the pro-U.S. government . Spain pulled its troops out of Iraq after the attacks .
 In Saudi Arabia, al Qaeda has long hoped to overthrow the monarchy . The country is home to the world’s largest oil reserves, Islam's holiest sites and the roots of Wahhabism .
 In 1979, Islamist militants briefly seized control of the Grand Mosque in Mecca . The Grand Mosque was briefly seized by Islamist militants .
 Yemen is the poorest country in the Middle East and has suffered from decades of civil conflict . Yemen is one of the poorest countries in the region and is suffering from civil war .
 The United States operates a vigorous campaign of drone attacks to combat the Yemeni militants . The U.S. operates a drone attack campaign in Yemen .
 Somalia’s al Shabab fighters, affiliated with al Qaeda, were ousted from most cities and towns in 2012 by an African Union force . Ethiopia and Uganda had contributed troops to support the Somali government in Somalia .
 Al Shabab carried out deadly bombings in Uganda during the 2010 World Cup finals in Uganda . The group carried out the bombings during the World Cup in Uganda in 2010 .
 In 2011, the African Union force in Somalia pushed al Shabab out of the capital . A terrible famine caused by drought and war gripped areas of the country and forced refugees into Kenya .
 Kenya also sent military forces into Somalia to attack al Shabab . In response to the attack, Kenya has sent troops into Somalia .
 In Libya, the overthrow of dictator Muammar Quadaffi in 2011 (with NATO assistance) empowered armed Islamist groups that had formerly been repressed . The overthrow of the dictator in Libya, with NATO assistance, empowered Islamist groups .
 Quadaffi killed the U.S. ambassador in 2012, joined up with ethnic rebels from Mali to seize northern Mali . They killed the United States ambassador and joined ethnic rebels in Mali .
 Islamists swept aside ethnic rebels and took power for themselves . By 2013 were ousted by a military intervention by France and neighboring African countries to return control to Mali .
 In Palestine, the radical Islamist faction Hamas is another important Sunni Islamist militia . Hamas is not connected with al Qaeda or the Taliban or al Qaeda .
 In some Muslim-populated countries, Islam is a political rallying point . In authoritarian countries in which the mosque is a rare permitted gathering point . Hamas sent suicide bombers who killed hundreds of Israelis after 2000 .
 Islamist politicians are developing new models of government, mixing democracy and Islamic tradition . The Arab Spring protests frequently peaked after Friday prayers in countries affected by protests .
 Egyptians pray during a Friday protest against Egypt's authoritarian president early in 2011 . Egyptians were protesting against the authoritarian president at the time .
 Palestine remains divided, with the Palestinian Authority controlling the West Bank and Hamas controlling Gaza . The Palestinian Authority is in charge of Gaza, with Hamas controlling the Gaza Strip .
 The two great powers to face Islamist violence within their borders are Russia and China . Russia in its south and China in its far west are at risk of Islamist violence . The two countries have been hit by Islamist violence in recent years .
 The predominantly Sunni Muslim republic of Chechnya tried to split away from Russia in the early 1990s after the Soviet Union collapsed . The predominantly Muslim republic is a Russian province . It is predominantly Sunni Muslims and is predominantly a Sunni Muslim .
 After destructive wars in 1994-1995 and 1999-2000, the threat abated . Chechen guerrillas then turned to airline hijackings, hostage taking, and suicide bombings .
 In 2004, hundreds of children died after Chechen terrorists took over a school and held them hostage . Hundreds of Chechen children died in 2004 after a school was taken over by terrorists in Chechen .
 In 2005, Russian forces killed a Chechen separatist leader they held responsible, and political violence in Chechnya is now sporadic .
 Conflicts involving Islamist movements are more complex than simply religious conflicts . They concern power, economic relations, ethnic chauvinism, and historical empires as well as historical empires .
 Ideologies have a somewhat weaker hold on core values and absolute truth than religions do, so they pose fewer problems for the international system . Ideologies pose less problems for international system than religions . Ideology has less of a role in international politics than religion .
 For realists, ideological differences among states do not matter much, writes Julian Zelizer . All members of the international system pursue their national interests in the context of relatively fluid alliances, he says .
 The Cold War was a global ideological struggle between capitalist democracy and communism . For example, the Cold War fought between capitalism and communism in the world .
 The alliances and military competitions in that struggle were fairly detached from ideological factors . But the alliances and . alliances in that . struggle in . that struggle are fairly detached . from ideological . factors .
 The two communist giants, the Soviet Union and China, did not stay together very long . They were both communist giants . The Soviet Union was one of the world's most successful communist states .
 India, a democracy and capitalist country, chose not to ally with the U.S. It is a capitalist country that has a history of anti-American sentiment .
 Even countries that experience revolutions based on strong ideologies tend to lose ideological fervor . Iran’s Islamic fundamentalism in 1979, China's Maoist communism in 1949, Russia's Leninist Communism in 1917, or U.S. democracy in 1776 .
 Ideology plays only a limited role in most international conflicts, writes Peter Bergen . In each case, revolutionaries expected that their assumption of power would dramatically alter their state’s foreign policy, he says .
 After revolutions, ideologies such as Marxism may affect foreign policy . China or Soviet Union typically revert to a foreign policy based more on national interests than ideology .
 Ideological clashes still occur between the U.S. and authoritarian North Korea . The U.N. and North Korea have ideological differences . North Korea is one of the world's most repressive countries .
 Each of these revolutionary governments turned to the pursuit of national interests above ideological ones . Yet within a few decades, each of them turned to national interests .
 Sometimes even self-proclaimed ideological struggles are not really ideological, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Sometimes even ideological struggles aren't really ideological .
 In Angola in the 1980s, the United States backed a rebel army called UNITA against a Soviet-aligned government . In Angola, the U.S. backed a government that was supposed to be a struggle of democracy against Marxism .
 The rebels used democratic rhetoric to get U.S. support . They had earlier received Chinese support and mouthed Maoist rhetoric .
 When the government won UN-sponsored elections, UNITA refused to accept the results and resumed fighting . The government won the elections, but the "democratic" vote did not accept the result .
 This conflict, which finally ended in 2002, really had nothing to do with ideology . This conflict was not ideology, but it was a matter of politics, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It was a power struggle between two armed, ethnically based factions fighting to control Angola’s oil, diamonds, and other wealth . The Angolan government was overthrown in the 1990s .
 In the short term, revolutions do change international relations, but not because of ideology . revolutions make wars more likely, not because they make it more likely . In the long-term, revolutions make international relations more difficult to deal with .
 The sudden change of governments can alter alliances and change the balance of power . Rather than change governments, it can change alliances and power balance, the change of power is more important .
 With calculations of power being revised by all parties, it is easy to miscalculate or to exaggerate threats on both sides . With calculations being revised, it's easy to overestimate threats on either side .
 If conflicts of ideas can be intractable because of psychological and emotional factors, conflicts about material interests are somewhat easier to settle based on the reciprocity principle . Conflicts of ideas are more difficult to settle because of emotional and psychological factors .
 In theory, given enough positive leverage, a state should agree to another state’s terms on a disputed issue . The U.S. should have enough leverage to agree to a payment in some form, the law says .
 Consider differences over where borders between two states should be drawn . Consider first differences over who controls a disputed piece of land .
 States seldom yield territory in exchange for money or any other positive reward . States rarely yield territory or other positive rewards . States are rarely rewarded for territory in return for money .
 In 2002, Bolivian public opinion opposed a gas export pipeline through Chile to the sea because Chile had seized the coastline from Bolivia in 1879 . Bolivians oppose a pipeline because Chile seized the coast of Bolivia from Bolivia .
 The goal of regaining territory lost to another state is called irredentism . The goal is to regain territory lost from another state .
 "This form of nationalism often leads directly to serious interstate conflicts," he says . "It is a form of nationalism that often leads to interstate conflict," he adds .
 The territories are valued far beyond any inherent economic or strategic value they hold . Because of their association with the integrity of states, they are valued beyond their economic value . The territories' association with states is valued far more than their economic and strategic value .
 The two states submitted the issue for binding arbitration, and Egypt ended up in possession . Egypt is now in possession of the world's most valuable oil reserves .
 For Egypt, regaining every inch of territory was a matter of national honor and a symbol of the sovereignty and territorial integrity that defined Egyptian statehood . Egypt's sovereignty is a symbol that defined statehood.
 The value states place on home territory seems undiminished despite the apparent reduction in the inherent value of territory as technology has developed . The value of home territory in the U.S. seems undamaged .
 Historically, territory was the basis of economic production—agriculture and the extraction of raw materials . Today, territory is the basis for economic production .
 Winning and losing wars meant gaining or losing territory, which meant increasing or decreasing wealth . Winning or losing a war meant gaining, losing territory or increasing wealth, was a key factor in winning and losing .
 Much more wealth derives from trade and technology than from agriculture . Today, however, much more wealth derived from trade rather than agriculture .
 The costs of most territorial disputes appear to outweigh any economic benefits that the territory in question could provide . The cost of most disputes appears to outweigh economic benefits .
 Exceptions exist, however, such as the capture of diamond-mining areas in several African countries by rebels .
 Efforts by a province or region to secede from an existing state are a special type of conflict over borders . It's not the borders of two existing states but the efforts to draw international borders around a new state .
 Dozens of secession movements exist around the world, but they rarely succeed in seceding only rarely . Dozens of countries have secession movements around the globe .
 The existing state almost always tries to hold on to the area in question . The state is always trying to keep control of the area .
 In the 1990s, the predominantly Albanian population of the Serbian province of Kosovo fought a war to secede from Serbia . For example, in the 90s, in Kosovo, the majority Albanians fought for independence .
 Of all the world regions, Latin America is one of the most peaceful regions . Peaceful relations among Latin American States is key to Latin America's peaceful existence .
 This is despite civil wars and numerous border disagreements between states in the region . The region has been plagued by civil war and border disputes .
 The stable peace is a collective good enjoyed by all countries in the region, even though countries that violate it might gain territory or wealth by using military force . Countries that violate the peace are not harmed by military force, but by economic gain .
 Despite years of relatively peaceful interstate relations in the region, persistent conflicts still exist between some states . The region has been relatively peaceful in recent years .
 Colombia and Venezuela trade accusations over Venezuela’s support of rebels fighting in Colombia . Venezuela and Colombia accuse each other of supporting rebels in Colombia's war with rebels .
 Rival countries have linguistic differences, ideological differences, territorial disputes, economic competition, and a range of other conflicts . Rival nations are involved in linguistic differences .
 With the countries having sizable armies and navies at the ready, the potential for war is always present . The potential for conflict in the U.S. is still present .
 The solution can be found in both the reciprocity and identity principles . The solution to the problem is found in reciprocity, identity principles.
 Most of the Kosovo population wants to secede and become an internationally recognized state . Serbians argue that Kosovo is historically and presently under Serbian sovereignty .
 Kosovars took matters into their own hands in Kosovo . UN and great powers negotiated over the future of Kosovo . Russia insisted there be no promise of independence from Kosovo .
 Several countries, including the United States and the largest EU states, recognized Kosovo’s independence, angering Serbia, Russia, and China . Several countries including the U.S. recognized Kosovo's independence . The U.K. recognized its independence from Serbia, Serbia and Russia,
 South Sudan gained independence in 2011 with UN membership and the support of Sudan . In 2011, South Sudan successfully gained independence .
 Wars of secession can be large and deadly, and they can easily spill over international borders or draw in other countries . Secessionists can be deadly, but secessionists have a long history of winning and losing .
 Members of an ethnic or religious group span two sides of a border, constituting the majority group in one state and a majority in a nearby region of another state, but a minority in the other state as a whole . This spillover is particularly likely if members of a minority group in
 Albanian Muslims are the majority in Albania and in Kosovo but the minority in Serbia . In the Kosovo case, Albanian Muslim Muslims are a majority in both Albania and Kosovo . In Serbia, they are a minority in the country .
 The same pattern occurs in Bosnia-Serbia, MoldovaRussia, and India-Pakistan .
 In some cases, secessionists want to merge their territories with the neighboring state . The move amounts to redrawing the international border .
 The strong international norms of sovereignty and territorial integrity treat secession movements as domestic problems of little concern to other states . Secession movements are treated as domestic issues by international standards, the author says .
 Russia and China opposed the secession of Kosovo from Serbia because of its implications for Chechnya and Taiwan, respectively . The two countries opposed Kosovo's secession of Serbia from Serbia .
 In August 2008, after fighting broke out between the Georgian military and the Georgian province of South Ossetia, Russia intervened militarily on behalf of the two regions . The two states are members of the Organization of American States, which promotes reciprocity when political disputes arise .
 In this way, even when some fighting occurs, conflicts do not escalate and become long, large, large-scale military conflicts . In this case, the conflict does not escalate, and it does not become a large, long-scale conflict .
 This negotiation process has succeeded in settling many of the existing disputes, even the Peru-Ecuador dispute, three years after their border war . Peru and Ecuador have been at odds for years over the past .
 A dispute between any two states is perceived as a threat to all states in the region . A dispute is seen as a potential threat to the region's sovereignty .
 Each state thinks broadly about its own interests to include the continuation of peace in the region . Each state's own interests are important to include its own interest in peace, says the president .
 Messy border problems can result when multinational states break up into pieces, experts say . Messy borders are often caused by multinational states breaking up pieces .
 In such cases, borders that had been internal become international become international . Because these borders are new, they may be more vulnerable to challenge, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: In such situations, the borders may be vulnerable to challenges .
 In the former Yugoslavia, ethnic groups had intermingled and intermarried, leaving mixed populations in most of the Yugoslav republics . The former Yugoslavia was one of the most turbulent countries in the world .
 When Yugoslavia broke up in 1991-1992, several republics declared their independence as separate states . Yugoslavia was one of many republics that declared independence from Yugoslavia in 1992 .
 Croatia and Bosnia contained minority populations of ethnic Serbs . Bosnia and Croatia were the only two countries to have Serbs in their history . Croatia was the only country to have a Serb population in its history .
 Serbia seized effective control of significant areas of Croatia and Bosnia that contained Serbian communities or linked such populations geographically . Serbia seized control of parts of Croatia, Bosnia and Croatia that contained Serbans or linked them to each other .
 NonSerbian populations in these areas were driven out or massacred— euphemistically called ethnic cleansing . The non-Serbian population was driven out of these areas or driven out .
 Croatia reconquered most of its territory in 1995, and Serbian populations fled . Serbian populations in turn fled Croatia in the 1990s . Croatia is now the only country in the world to have declared independence from Serbia .
 Ethnic nationalism proved stronger than multiethnic tolerance in Serbia and Croatia . Ethnic nationalism was whipped up by opportunistic politicians, says Croatian politician .
 Czechoslovakia split into Czech Republic and Slovakia in a cooperative manner . Czechs split from Czech Republic into Czech republic and Slovak Republic . Czech Republic is now Czech Republic Republic and Czech Republic . Slovakia is Czech Republic, Czech Republic in Czech Republic; Czech Republic formed Czech Republic later Czech
 The norm against forceful redrawing of borders does not apply to cases of decolonization . The norm is not to redraw borders, but it does to decolonize the continent .
 Only the territorial integrity of existing, recognized states is protected by international norms . Only the territories of existing states are protected by such norms .
 Colonies and other territorial possessions historically had value only as property to be won, lost, sold, sold or traded in political deals and wars . Colonies had value as property won or lost in political battles and wars, but as property only as a result of political deals .
 From neither perspective do the views of the inhabitants carry much weight . From neither view does the view of the residents of the town carry any weight . It is not the first time people have seen the city in recent years .
 Autonomy for a region has become a realistic compromise between secession and full control by a central government . Increasingly, autonomy is a compromise between a region's autonomy and full power by the government .
 Aceh separatists in Aceh province, Indonesia, disbanded in 2005, giving up on independence . In 2005, spurred partly by the devastating tsunami, they disbanded and instead participated in regional elections in 2006 . Aceh is one of Indonesia's poorest provinces .
 The Indonesian government withdrew its 24,000 troops from Aceh and offered the province limited self-rule along with 70 percent of the oil, gas, and mineral wealth earned there . Aceh was offered limited self rule along with the province’s oil and gas, mineral wealth .
 Efforts by a region to secede from a state are a frequent source of international conflict . International norms generally treat such conflicts as internal matters unless they spill over borders .
 Catalonia's 1.1 million citizens in Barcelona demand independence from recession-wracked Spain for the region of Catalonia, 2012 . Catalonia has been in recession-stricken Spain since 2008 .
 Few important border conflicts remain among longest-established states . Because of the norm of territorial integrity, few important border disputes remain among most .
 This kind of wholesale redrawing of borders has not occurred among established states for 50 years . However, this kind of redraws have not occurred in established states since 1968 .
 Iraq attacked Iran in 1980, one objective was to control the Shatt-al-Arab waterway because of its commercial and strategic value . For instance, when Iraq's attack on Iran, one of its objectives was to take control of the waterway in 1980 .
 Ten years and a million deaths later, the Iran-Iraq border was back where it started . But ten years later, it was back in place where it began .
 When territorial disputes do occur between established states, they can be settled peacefully, especially when the disputed territory is small compared with the states disputing it . Furthermore, when territorial disputes are settled peacefully it can be resolved peacefully .
 In 1994, a panel of Latin American judges settled a century-long border dispute between Argentina and Chile over some mountainous terrain that both claimed . The border dispute was settled in 1994 by judges in Chile .
 The 3-to-2 ruling, after the countries submitted the dispute for judicial arbitration, awarded the territory to Argentina . The ruling provoked howls of protest from Chile and even a hair-pulling fight between the Chilean and Argentine contestants in Miss World beauty contest two months later .
 Argentina and Chile settled 22 of 24 remaining border disputes peacefully after nearly going to war in 1978 over disputed islands . Despite the loss of territory, the two countries settled a number of disputes peacefully . Chile and Argentina nearly went to war over disputed territory in 1978 .
 The possibility of peaceful resolution of territorial disputes was highlighted in 2006 with the withdrawal of Nigerian troops from the potentially oil-rich Bakassi Peninsula, which Nigeria ceded to Cameroon’s sovereignty .
 The resolution of the dispute, dating from colonial times, followed more than a decade of painstaking progress through the World Court and the UN secretary-general .
 Doing so would seem to run counter to the predictions of realism in particular and the dominance principle in general .
 Nigeria acted in its own self-interest, because turning the dispute over to the World Court and bringing in the UN to assist with implementation brought the kind of stability needed for foreign investment to develop Nigeria's own resources .
 The few remaining interstate border disputes generate important international conflicts . Today, the few remaining statesmen and women are still at risk of being involved in conflicts .
 The 1948 cease-fire lines resulting from Israel’s war of independence expanded in the 1967 war . The 1967 Israeli-Israeli conflict was the first Israeli-Arab conflict since Israel's independence .
 The West Bank near Jordan, the Gaza Strip near Egypt, and the Golan Heights of Syria are central to the Arab-Israeli conflict . Israel returned the Sinai Peninsula to Egypt, but the remaining territories occupied in 1967 are central .
 Israel’s ongoing construction of Jewish settlements in the West Bank remains a contentious sticking point . The West Bank is bitterly opposed by Palestinians and considered illegal by most international actors .
 The CIA’s World Factbook provides a comprehensive list of minor border disputes . Israeli-Palestinian agreements since 1993 tried to move toward Palestinian autonomy in Israel .
 The 2012 upgrading of Palestine’s UN status to nonmember “state,” was a symbolic gesture . However, that effort completely stalled in the 21st century, despite the 2012 upgrading .
 Another serious border dispute is in the Kashmir area where India, Pakistan, and China intersect . The Kashmir area is where India and Pakistan, China, Pakistan and China border .
 The Indian-held part of Kashmir is predominantly inhabited by Muslims, a group that is the majority in Pakistan but a minority in India . Muslims are majority in Kashmir, but majority in India's Kashmir region is Muslim .
 Pakistan accuses India of oppressing Kashmiris and thwarting an international agreement to decide Kashmir’s future by a popular referendum . Pakistan says Kashmiris are being oppressed by India . Kashmiris say they want a referendum on Kashmir's future .
 India accuses Pakistan of aiding and infiltrating Islamic radicals who carry out attacks in Indianoccupied Kashmir . Pakistan has been accused of aiding the terrorists in Kashmir . India accuses the Pakistani government of infiltrating and aiding terrorists .
 The two countries went to war twice over the issue, and nearly did so again in 2002, armed with nuclear-armed missiles .
 A cease-fire took hold in 2003 and stopped most low-level fighting along the Line of Control . sporadic skirmishes continue, such as those that killed several soldiers on each side in early 2013 .
 Many of the world’s other remaining interstate territorial disputes—and often the most serious ones—concerns the control of small islands . Small islands often provide strategic advantages, natural resources, or fishing rights .
 The Spratly Islands exemplify contemporary conflicts over territory and natural resources around islands . They exemplify modern conflicts over territories and resources .
 All or part of the Spratlys are claimed by China, Vietnam, Malaysia, Brunei, the Philippines, and Taiwan . The region is also claimed by the Philippines and Vietnam .
 Recently, multiple encounters between various navies have raised tensions over the contested sea .
 About half of the world’s trade tonnage passes through the Persian Gulf . Persian Gulf oil and other key resources headed for Japan, China, South Korea, and Taiwan .
 In 2012, China and the Philippines had a monthsdong standoff at a tiny shoal, but ended it peacefully . The standoff ended peacefully in 2012 .
 Japan and China also dispute tiny islands elsewhere, as do Japan and South Korea . Japan, China, South Korea and Japan also dispute islands elsewhere .
 These disputes involve low economic stakes, but have become a focus of nationalist sentiments on both sides . They are fueled partly by memories of World War II, when Japan occupied China and Korea .
 The most serious is over small islands in the East China Sea that Japan controls but China claims them . The islands would give Chinese submarines a clear route to the Pacific .
 The two navies and air forces confronted each other there repeatedly in 2012, though without violence . The United States (bound by treaty to defend Japan in a war) called on ‘cooler heads” to prevail .
 In the Middle East, Iran and the United Arab Emirates dispute ownership of small islands near the mouth of the Persian Gulf . The islands are located in the Gulf of Iran .
 In 2002, Spain sent soldiers to oust a handful of Moroccan troops from islands off Morocco’s coast . Spain sent troops to oust Moroccan troops in 2002, but Morocco has not had troops since .
 Argentina and Britain still dispute control of the Falkland Islands over which they fought a war in 1982 . Argentina and the UK fought over the Falklands Islands in South America . In South America, Argentina and Argentina still dispute their control .
 Major bone of contention in Russian-Japanese relations is ownership of the strategically located Kuril Islands . The islands were occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945, occupied by Japan .
 With islands now bringing control of surrounding economic zones, international conflicts over islands will undoubtedly continue to continue .
 States treat territorial waters near their shores as part of their national territory . Territorial waters are considered to be part of the nation's territory .
 Waters within three miles of shore have traditionally been recognized as territorial . Beyond that there are disputes about how far out national sovereignty extends and for what purposes .
 In 2010, Russia and Norway agreed to divide portions of the Arctic Ocean into EEZs for the purposes of oil and gas extraction . The agreement ended a 40-year dispute between the two countries .
 sovereignty over a single tiny island can now bring with it rights to as much as 100,000 square miles of surrounding ocean . Because of the EEZs, sovereignty over the tiny island now brings with it right to more than 100,500 square miles .
 The zones overlap greatly, and shorelines do not run in straight lines . Many questions of interpretation arise about how to delineate territorial waters .
 Libya claims ownership of the entire Gulf of Sidra, treating it as a bay . The United States says it is a curvature in the shoreline and is international waters .
 In 1986, the United States sent warships into the Gulf of Sidra to make its point . The U.S. sent warships there to make it clear .
 United States planes shot down two Libyan jets that challenged the U.S. maneuvers . The Libyan jets were shot down by the United States in 2011 . The U.N. says the incident was a "human incident"
 A dangerous maritime dispute flared in 2010 when a South Korean warship sank in disputed waters in the Yellow Sea . South Korea and South Korea have been involved in a bitter maritime dispute since 2010 .
 International investigators concluded that a North Korean torpedo sank the vessel, although North Korea denied involvement . North Korea has denied involvement in the sinking .
 The two countries have never formally ended the Korean War by signing a peace treaty . North Korea and South Korea are still at odds over a peace deal .
 Airspace Airspace above a state is considered the territory of the state . Airspace is considered a state's territory and is considered to be its territory .
 To fly over a state's territory, an airplane must have that state’s permission . The plane must have permission to fly over the territory of that state .
 France would not grant permission for U.S. planes to use its airspace during the mission . In a 1986 raid on Libya, bombers based in Britain had to fly a long detour over the Atlantic Ocean .
 Outer space, by contrast, is considered international territory like the oceans . Outer space is considered to be an international territory, not outer space .
 International law does not define exactly where airspace ends and outer space begins . International law doesn't define where airspace begins and where it ends .
 orbiting satellites fly higher than airplanes, move very fast, and cannot easily change direction to avoid overflying a country . However, orbiting satellites can't change direction and fly very fast . Satellites fly higher and faster than airplanes .
 A norm of demilitarization of outer space has developed . All satellites have become useful to all the great powers as intelligence gathering tools .
 In 2007, China successfully destroyed one of its own satellites with an antisatellite missile . China rattled nerves by successfully destroying the satellite with a missile, strewing debris .
 Control of islands, and of the large exclusive economic zone that surrounds them under the law of the sea, has created a number of complicated interstate conflicts . Control of such an area has created numerous conflicts in the past .
 Japan claims Okinotori, shown here in 2005, as an island with an EEZ, but China calls it merely a ""rock"" without surrounding economic rights . China says it is merely a "rock" without surrounding areas of land .
 Most struggles to control territory do not involve changing borders . Despite the many minor border disputes that continue to plague the world, most struggles are not .
 Governments are fighting over which governments will control entire states . This is not just about how governments control states, but it's about how they control entire nations .
 In theory, states do not interfere in each other’s governance, because of the norm of sovereignty . The norm is states not interfering in other nations' governance .
 In practice, states often have strong interests in the governments of other states . States often use a variety of means of leverage to influence who holds power in those states .
 These conflicts over governments take many forms, some mild and some severe . Some are deeply entwined with third parties, and some more or less bilateral . These conflicts are some mild, some severe or severe, some deep entwings .
 Sometimes a state exerts subtle influences on another state’s elections . Other times, a state supports rebel elements seeking to overthrow the second state's government . Sometimes state influences influence elections in other states .
 During the Cold War, both superpowers actively promoted changes of government in countries of the global South through covert operations and support of rebel armies . The Cold War used covert operations to promote change of government .
 The civil wars in Angola, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua are good examples of civil war in the world .
 The election divided the largely Russian-speaking, Eastern Orthodox part of Ukraine to the east . The Ukrainian-speaking Catholic, western part of the country is largely Catholic .
 The pro-Russian incumbent carried the eastern region and was declared the winner after an election that international monitors declared unsound . International monitors declared the election uninsound .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin personally campaigned with him, and strongly opposed letting Ukraine come under the influence of the West . Vladimir Putin had personally campaigned for Ukraine to become part of Ukraine .
 Pro-Western candidate was poisoned during the campaign, but survived . Meanwhile, pro-Western politician was poisoned in the campaign . Pro-West candidate survived the poisoning .
 His supporters took to the streets in late 2004 demanding new elections . The top Ukrainian court eventually ordered and which the opposition won . The opposition won.
 Occasionally, one state invades another in order to change its government . Sometimes this happens to happen to happen in the United States . Sometimes, the U.S. invades other states to change their governments .
 The Soviet Union did this in Czechoslovakia in 1968; the U.S. did so in Iraq in 2003 . The United States did this during the Cold War .
 People generally resent having foreigners choose their government for them, even if they did not like the old government . The international community frowns on such overt violations of national sovereignty .
 International conflicts over the control of governments are likely to lead to violence . The use of violence is likely to be used in international conflicts, says CNN.com .
 State of the Status and integrity of states involve core issues of status and integrity . The stakes tend to be high, and the interests of involved actors are often diametrically opposed .
 By contrast, economic conflicts among states are more common but far less likely to lead to violence . Economic conflicts are less common among states but more common among them than violence .
 Economic competition is the most pervasive form of conflict in international relations . Economic transactions are pervasive in the world, and economic competition is most pervasive . The conflict is based on economic transactions .
 Every sale made and every deal reached across international borders entails a resolution of conflicting interests . Every deal made, every sale made, involves resolution of opposing interests, says CNN.com editor .
 Costa Rica wants the price of coffee, which it exports, to go up . Canada, which imports coffee, wants it to go down . Costa Rica exports coffee; Canada imports coffee .
 Angola wants foreign producers of Angolan oil to receive fewer profits from oil sales . Those companies’ home states want them to take home more profits . Angola wants the foreign producers to receive less profits from their sales .
 In a global capitalist market, all economic exchanges involve some conflict of interest . In the world, all of the world's economic transactions involve conflict of interests .
 The use of violence would for the most part interrupt and diminish such profit by more than could be gained as a result of the use of such violence . Violence would interrupt or diminish profits by more .
 Economic conflicts do not usually lead to military force and war . Thus, economic conflicts don't usually lead military force or war .
 Economic conflict seldom leads to violence today because military forms of leverage are no longer very effective in economic conflicts . The U.S. has a long history of economic conflict in the form of economic leverage .
 The use of force is seldom justified to solve an economic issue, the author says . With the tight integration of the world economy and the high cost of military actions, the use of military action is rarely justified, he says .
 Even if an agreement is not ideal for one side in an economic conflict, rarely is what can be gained by military force worth the cost of war .
 The Foreign Imposition of Domestic Institutions. Thus, most economic . economic . institutions. The foreign  institutions.
 Economic conflicts do still bear on international security in some ways . But economic conflicts still bear some of the burden of international conflict .
 A trade surplus confers an advantage in international security affairs over the long run . Trade conflicts have implications for international security relations, author says .
 The theory of lateral pressure also connects economic competition with security concerns . Second, the theory of economic competition and security concerns are linked to security .
 As great powers expand their economic activities outward, their competition leads to conflicts and sometimes to war . Great powers expand economic activity outward, resulting in conflicts .
 There is a world trade in such items, but national governments try to keep control of such production . National interests take priority over those of manufacturers and that the state is militarily self-sufficient in case of war .
 The transfer of knowledge about high-tech weaponry and military technologies to potentially hostile states is a related concern . The transfer is also a concern for the transfer of information to potential hostile states .
 A different kind of economic conflict revolves around the distribution of wealth within and among states . The United States has been hit by a wave of economic inequality in recent years .
 As discussed in Chapter 12, the tremendous disparities in wealth in our world create a variety of international security problems with the potential for violence . Terrorist attacks on rich countries by groups in poor countries could be possible, author says .
 Revolutions in poor countries are often fueled by disparities of wealth within the country as well as its poverty relative to other countries . Revolutions are fueled by disparity of wealth in the country and within its country .
 These revolutions often draw in other states as supporters of one side or the other in a civil war . These revolutions in turn draw in supporters of either side of the war .
 Marxist approaches to international relations, discussed in Chapters 4 and 12, treat class struggle between rich and poor people as the basis of interstate relations . The Marxist approach to interstate relations is based on class struggle in relation to the poor .
 According to these approaches, capitalist states adopt foreign policies that serve the interests of the rich owners of companies, writes David Frum . Frum argues that capitalist states should not be allowed to engage in foreign policy .
 Conflicts and wars between the global North and South are seen as reflections of the domination and exploitation of the poor by the rich—imperialism in direct or indirect form .
 Marxists saw the Vietnam War as a United States effort to suppress revolution in order to secure continued U.S. access to cheap labor and raw materials in Southeast Asia . For example, most Marxists thought Vietnam War was an attempt to suppress the revolution .
 Marxists portray conflicts among capitalist states as competition over the right to exploit poor areas . Many Marxists say capitalist states are competing to exploit the poor areas of the world .
 Lenin portrayed World War I as a fight over the imperialists’ division of the world . Lenin portrayed the conflict as a struggle against imperialists' division of world .
 The Sino-Soviet-American Triangle and the Modern Security Problematique. The S.Sino-S.A. Triangle. U.S. and the Soviet-China Triangle.
 Military forces participate regularly in operations against heavily armed drug traffickers . Drug trafficking also has become linked with security concerns because military forces participate .
 Conflicts over drugs generally concern states on one side and nonstate actors on the other . Conflicts are often state-run and non-state actors involved .
 Other states can be drawn in because activities cross national borders and may involve corrupt state officials . But other states can also be drawn into the case because of the activities in question .
 The U.S. government is trying to prevent cocaine cartels based in Colombia from supplying cocaine to the United States . Colombia has a history of drug trafficking in the U.K. and Mexico . The United States is cracking down on drug cartels in Colombia .
 Such cocaine derives mostly from coca plants grown by peasants in mountainous areas of Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia itself . Coca plants are grown in some of the world's most mountainous areas .
 The cocaine moves from Colombia through other countries such as Panama before arriving in the U.S. Processed in simple laboratories in the jungle, the cocaine is processed in simple labs .
 In each of these countries, drug smugglers have bribed some corrupt officials, including military or police officers, to stay clear . In each country, the drug smugglers are bribed to stay away from each other .
 State officials in each country are working with U.S. law enforcement agencies and the United States military to crack down on the cocaine trade . The cocaine trade has been a major problem in Colombia since 2002 .
 In 2005, Bolivians elected as president an anti-American former coca farmer who supports farming coca though not the production of cocaine . Bolivian president is anti-U.S. and supports coca farming .
 Segments of the populations in several of these countries, especially in cocaineproducing regions, benefit substantially from the drug trade . The drug trade is a major source of income for some of the world's poorest people .
 For poor peasants, the cocaine trade may be their only access to a decent income . The cocaine trade is the only way to make a living in Colombia .
 Two of the world’s 14 active wars --Afghanistan and Colombia -- fund their operations primarily through control of the trade in illicit drugs . More importantly for international security, rebel armies in 2 of the 14 active war-torn countries fund their activities primarily through illicit drug sales .
 Afghanistan is the central front in the West’s struggle against Islamist extremism . Because drug trafficking crosses national borders and involves lots of guns and money, it is a source of interstate conflict .
 Afghanistan supplies most of the opium used to make heroin worldwide . The illicit trade funds the Taliban in its fight against NATO and the Afghan government . Afghanistan supplies the heroin used to create heroin .
 Afghan farmer dependent on opium poppies to make a living . Afghan farmers are dependent on the opium poppy crop .
 In Latin America, the long history of U.S. military intervention makes state cooperation with United States military forces a sensitive political issue . State cooperation with US military forces is a sensitive issue in Latin America .
 In some countries, governments have faced criticism for allowing the ‘Yankees’ to “invade” in the drug war . The “Yankee’s” role has been criticized in some countries .
 In 1989, United States forces invaded Panama; arrested its leader, dictator Manuel Noriega . In 1989 he was convicted in U.S. courts of complicity in drug trafficking through Panama .
 There are many possible outcomes of conflict, many types of war, and varied propensities for violence among different states . Just as there is great diversity in how force is used if conflict leads to violence, so too is there great diversity of force used .
 States develop a wide array of military forces, which vary tremendously in their purposes and capabilities . The U.S. has a wide range of military capabilities, ranging from military personnel to military hardware .
 These wars vary greatly in size and character, from guerrilla wars and raids to hegemonic war for leadership of the international system . These include guerrilla wars, raids and raids, as well as international wars .
 The exact definition of war is uncertain . Along this spectrum of uses of violence, the exact definition is unknown .
 Contradictory theories have been proposed at each level of analysis and, with two exceptions, none has strong empirical support . None of these theories have strong evidence to support them .
 Political scientists cannot reliably predict the outbreak of war . Thus, political scientists cannot predict the start of war, they say . Political scientists can't predict the end of war.
 It is hard to explain why people’s loyalties are sometimes to their ethnic group and sometimes to a multiethnic nation . It's hard to understand why people's loyalty to ethnic groups is sometimes to ethnic group or not to nation .
 State leaders can use ideologies to justify whatever actions are in their interests . State leaders often use ideology to justify their actions, says CNN.com .
 Almost all the world’s borders are now firmly fixed and internationally recognized . With a few exceptions, however, almost all of the world's borders have been firmly fixed .
 European textbooks were revised after World War II to reduce ethnic and national stereotypes and to give a fairer portrayal of Europe's various nations .
 The rise of fundamentalism among the world’s major religions challenges traditional notions of state sovereignty . The rise in fundamentalism is challenging traditional notions .
 If you were a mediator in negotiations between two states, each claiming the same piece of land, you would be surprised to see how much of the land is worth .
 When the Cold War ended in the years between 1989 and 1991, observers hoped for a new age of U.S.-Russian cooperation . Russia and the United States have been at odds for decades over the years .
 Russia threatened to veto UN Security Council resolutions concerning Iraq in the 1990s and 2000s . Russia has been involved in several of the world's most recent conflicts with Iraq .
 The United States arrested several high-profile spies who were continuing to operate in America long after the end of the Cold War . The U.S. arrested several of the high profile spies .
 American withdrawal from the AntiBallistic Missile Treaty in 2001 spurred Russian fears that the U.S. would engage in another arms race . The withdrawal of the treaty in 2001 sparked Russian fears of an arms race with the United States . The treaty was the result of a U.N.
 During the lead-up to the 2003 Iraq War, Russia consistently opposed American efforts to gain UN Security Council approval . Russia threatened to veto any resolution proposed by the U.S. to the UN .
 No one believes Russia and the U.S. will engage in war with one another . Many do wonder if a new Cold War will emerge between the two former rivals .
 Russia and the U.S. have major differences in key policy areas . A new Cold War will emerge between the two countries, experts say .
 On several important issues, Russia and the United States do not see eye-to-eye . Russia and U.S. don't see eye to eye on many of the world's issues .
 Russia considers NATO expansion a direct threat to its security . The U.S. is committed to NATO expansion, which Russia considers a threat .
 The U.S. is committed to deploying antiballistic missiles in Europe, which Russia opposes . Russia opposes the deployment of anti-missile missiles in the region . The United States also plans to deploy anti-NATO missiles .
 Democracy in Russia is imperfect at best, creating additional tensions with the U.S. The country's democracy in Russia has been criticized by some for its lack of transparency . Democracy in the United States is imperfect, creating further tensions .
 Opposition leaders are jailed, corruption is extensive, and the press is threatened when it investigates wrongdoing . Corruption is extensive in the country, and corruption is rife, says the BBC .
 The United States has hinted that future aid will be based on Russia's improving its democratic institutions . The U.S. has angered Russia's leaders, angering them, by hinting that aid will come from Russia .
 Russia reaches out to U.S. enemies and confronts United States allies . Russia's President Vladimir Putin has been accused of trying to cover up his actions . Putin says Russia is ready to confront its enemies and confront allies .
 Russia has recently conducted joint military exercises with Venezuela and has a cordial relationship with Iran . Russia also has a relationship with Venezuela, Iran and other countries .
 Russia has recently gone to war with Georgia over disputed territory and continues to threaten Ukraine over natural gas prices . Russia has also threatened Ukraine over gas prices and gas disputes .
 Russia depends on Western aid and acceptance from the West . No new Cold War will emerge between the U.S. and Russia, argues John Avlon says . Russia's relationship with the United States has been strained for years .
 Russia greatly values its membership in key IGOs such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund . Russia has a strong reputation for its role in the world's most powerful institutions, including the IMF and World Bank . Russia is one of the most powerful countries in the Middle East and
 It also covets membership in the World Trade Organization, which it hopes to join . The U.S. also wants to join the world trade organization .
 There are no major ideological differences between the U.S. and Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . The United States and Russia share no ideological differences .
 Unlike during the Cold War, there are no major ideological divides between these two great powers . Unlike during during the 1950s, there is no major ideology divides between the two countries .
 While Russian democracy may be imperfect, Russia is unlikely to re-embrace communism or abandon its experiment with capitalism . Russia's democracy is imperfect, but it is not likely to be overthrown by the West .
 Where their interests converge, U.S.-Russian cooperation works smoothly in Afghanistan, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Where they converge, they work smoothly in the war against Islamic extremists"
 During the Cold War, Europe was divided into two camps, each supported by one of the superpowers . During the 1950s and 1960s, the two camps were in contact with each other . The Cold War was a two-fronted war between Russia and the West .
 Now, Europe is united and can serve as a mediator between the U.S. and Russia, CNN's John Sutter says . Europe can help mediate between Russia and the United States, he says .
 Europe has strong economic and political interests in continued cooperation with both sides . Europe will work to ensure tensions do not spiral out of hand, EU says .
 Revolutions, Rigged Elections; and Pipeline Politics in the Former Soviet Union . Revolutions and Rigged elections in the former Soviet Union.
 These levers set armies marching, suicide bombers blowing up, or missiles flying . The levers are used to control the world's most powerful weapons systems .
 Evidence shows that the utility of military force relative to nonmilitary means is slowly declining over time . Evidence also shows that military force is declining relative to other means .
 Most states still devote vast resources to military capabilities compared to other means of influence . Yet most states still spend vast resources on military capabilities . The U.S. has spent much more on the military than any other nation .
 Because of the security dilemma , states believe they must devote large resources to military capabilities if other states are doing so . Because of security dilemma, states think they must spend large resources .
 Beyond defending their territories, states develop military capabilities for several other purposes . The U.S. has a long history of developing military capabilities in the past .
 They may also hope to compel other states to behave in certain ways, by threatening an attack if the state does not comply with the law .
 U.S. Department of Defense 1 Art, Robert J. and Kenneth N Waltz, eds. 1 Art . Robert J., and Kenneth . Waltz . 1 Art. Robert . J. Waltz: "Art" is the first Art of the Art of Defense .
 You Are a Military Commander"" at MyPoliSciLab assistance after disasters, for peacekeeping, for surveillance of drug trafficking, and for repression of domestic political dissent .
 Together, they account for about two-thirds of world military spending, a third of the world’s soldiers and a third . of the weapons, 98 percent of nuclear weapons, and 90 percent of arms exports . The two countries are responsible for about 2.3 percent of the
 Most wars involve a struggle to control territory . War is often a struggle for control of territory .
 Territory holds a central place in warfare because of its importance in the international system, and vice versa . Territory is a central part of warfare because it is important in international relations .
 Borders define where a state’s own military forces and rival states’ military forces are free to move . Borders are defined by the borders of a state and borders define where its military forces can move . Border borders are used to define borders between states and rivals .
 Military logistics makes territoriality all the more important because of the need to control territories connecting military forces with each other . The U.S. military says territoriality is important because it is important to maintain military supply lines .
 An army's supplies must flow from home territory along supply lines to the field . An army’s supplies must now flow from the home territory to the battlefield .
 Most fundamental purpose of conventional forces is to take, hold, or defend territory . Thus the most fundamental purpose is to protect territory, he says .
 Military forces with armed foot soldiers can occupy a territory militarily . Armed foot soldiers are key to the success of the military's military .
 Although inhabitants may make the soldiers’ lives unhappy through violent or nonviolent resistance, generally only another organized, armed military force can displace occupiers . The U.S. military says it will not be able to displace occupied people .
 They use assault rifles and other light weapons as well as heavy artillery of various types . They are armed with assault rifles, other weapons and heavy artillery .
 In desert, mechanized ground forces combine armor, artillery, and infantry . In open terrain, such as desert, forces typically combine armor and artillery .
 In close terrain, such as jungles and cities, foot soldiers are more important . Foot soldiers are important in close terrain such as jungle and city jungles .
 The armies of industrialized states have a greater advantage over poor armies in open conventional warfare, such as in the Kuwaiti desert . For this reason, the armies of industrialized states are more likely to win in open warfare .
 In jungle, mountain, or urban warfare, such advantages are eroded, such as in Afghan mountains and Iraqi cities . A cheaper and more lightly armed force of motivated foot soldiers or guerrillas may ultimately prevail over an expensive conventional army .
 The superiority of conventional armed forces to irregular forces in open battle was graphically demonstrated in Somalia at the end of 2006 . In Somalia, conventional forces were outnumbered by irregular forces .
 An Islamist militia had taken control of most of the country and the capital, leaving a transitional government near Ethiopia’s border . The transitional government is backed by Ethiopia's large conventional military .
 The Islamists closed schools and sent teenagers with rifles in pickup trucks to attack the provisional government . The government has been overthrown by the government .
 The Ethiopian army ousted the rebels from the whole country in two weeks . They were no match for the Ethiopian army, which then ousted them from the country .
 The Islamists had to fall back to guerrilla attacks rather than taking and holding territory . The Islamists, like most irregular forces, then had to go on guerrilla attacks . They had to rely on the help of the U.S. to take back territory .
 The conventional Ethiopian military proved no match, and the Islamists gained ground steadily .
 Author's estimates based on data provided by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute and Institute for International and Strategic Studies .
 After their departure, Somali Islamist groups captured most of the country’s territory . They overpowered government forces and fighting peacekeepers from the African Union .
 Somalia's government incorporated moderate Islamist factions but continued to fight more radical Islamist groups . Somalia’s government has incorporated moderate Islamists but has also fought more radical groups .
 By 2010, the African Union had voted to send reinforcements to battle Islamist forces . The African Union voted in 2010 to send troops to fight Islamist forces in Somalia .
 Counterinsurgency has received growing attention in recent years because of Iraq and Afghanistan, but it is central to all 14 wars currently in progress worldwide . Counterinurgency is a key component of all 14 conflicts currently in the world .
 Counterinsurgency warfare often includes programs to try to “win the hearts and minds” of populations so that they stop sheltering the guerrillas . The U.S. government says it is trying to win the hearts of the people in Afghanistan .
 In some ways, counterinsurgency warfare is as much about political gains as military strategy, it is the most complex type of warfare . Counterinsurgent warfare is about politics as much as strategy, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 While battling armed factions of an insurgency, a government must essentially conduct a public relations campaign to persuade the population to abandon the movement . Government must provide public services to show a government’s responsiveness to the population .
 A government must be strong militarily, but cannot be too brutal in the application of force . The government must not support guerrillas, but must support them, says David Cameron .
 U.S. military forces conducted counterinsurgency campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan for years . United States military forces fought insurgents in Iraq, Afghanistan . The United States has been involved in both countries since 2001 .
 The campaigns included the use of lethal military force, payments to key tribal leaders to support U.S. efforts to combat the insurgency .
 These types of activities place tremendous stress on militaries, which are usually trained only to fight wars, not undertake rebuilding distant governments .
 The United States Army’s counterinsurgency manual suggests deploying 20 troops for every 1,000 citizens to be protected from insurgents . For example, the U.S. Army suggests deploying . 20 troops per person to protect from insurgents.
 The United States never reached such a ratio of troops-to-population in Iraq or Afghanistan . Even including allied forces, the U.S. never reached that ratio in either Iraq, Afghanistan .
 A common tool of guerrillas, insurgents, and governments fighting them are land mines . Land mines are simple, small, and cheap containers of explosives with a trigger activated by contact or sensor .
 In places such as Angola, Afghanistan, Cambodia, and Bosnia, they were used extensively by irregular military forces that never disarmed them . These mines were a particular focus of public attention in the 1990s .
 Land mines continue to maim and kill civilians who try to reestablish their lives in former war zones . Long after such a war ends, land mines still kill and injure civilians .
 Public opinion and NGOs have pressured governments to restrict the use of land mines . Land mines have been used by the majority of the world's governments .
 Counterinsurgency warfare has become central to the missions of uniformed military forces worldwide . Russia and Japan signed on shortly afterward, but not the U.S., Japan .
 The United States military rewrote its counterinsurgency manual and changed its tactics in Iraq and Afghanistan to emphasize political and economic activities and positive relations with civilian populations . The U.S. military changed tactics in Afghanistan and Iraq to emphasize economic and political activities .
 Ugandan soldier with the African Union force works on befriending local children after the AU ousted Islamist militants from the capital of Somalia .
 Navies are adapted primarily to control passage through the seas and to attack land near coastlines . Controlling the Seas is a military strategy adapted to control the seas .
 Navies can also blockade enemy ports, as, for example, Israel does to control sea access to Hamas-ruled Gaza . Navies are also able to control access to enemy ports .
 In 2008-2012, navies of the Western powers responded to the rapid growth of piracy in three of the world’s vital shipping lanes . The Straits of Malacca in Indonesia connecting the Indian Ocean with East Asia; and the waters off West Africa .
 The Somali pirates, taking advantage of near-anarchy in that country, established safe havens onshore and ventured out to capture dozens of ships . They held vessels, cargoes, and crews for ransom for ransom .
 Shipping companies generally paid up, millions of dollars per ship, rather than lose valuable goods and people . Shipping companies often paid up to thousands of dollars a year to ship .
 The pirates captured a Ukrainian freighter loaded with tanks and weapons and a Saudi oil tanker with $100 million of oil . The pirates pushed the limits by capturing first a Ukraine freighter and then a Saudi tanker .
 Armed with automatic rifles and grenade launchers, they toss up grappling hooks, climb the sides, and subdue the crew, typically within about ten minutes . They are armed in very small, fast boats, armed with automatic weapons and grenades launchers .
 The world’s navies patrolled the area to deter piracy , but with incomplete success because of the sheer size of the oceans . The world's navies patrol the area but have incomplete success .
 In 2008, the UN Security Council unanimously called for international cooperation in fighting the surge in hijackings . The UN has called on international cooperation to fight the rise in hijacking .
 Many states responded, including the five permanent members of the Security Council . Many states have responded to the request .
 Special Forces killed hijackers of one American ship in 2009 . European Union attack helicopters raided an onshore pirate base in 2012 . Somali rescue freed a ship in late 2012 .
 All these measures led to a sharp decline in Somali hijackings in 2012, says Somali official . Somali hijackers were attacked in Somalia in 2012 .
 A notorious pirate leader, “Big Mouth,” announced his disarmament and retirement in 2013 . He had once seized the Ukrainian ship full of tanks, and once seized a Ukrainian ship .
 Aircraft carriers are instruments of power projection that can attack virtually any state in the world . Aircraft carriers --mobile platforms for attack aircraft -- are mobile platforms for aircraft carriers .
 Aircraft carriers are extremely expensive and require 20 to 25 supporting ships for protection and supply . Aircraft carriers typically require 20-25 supporting ships to protect and supply them .
 Only the U.S. operates large carriers, known as supercarriers, costing more than $5 billion each . Only the United States operates such large carriers .
 In 2015, the U.S. Navy plans to launch a newly designed supercarrier, costing $14 billion . The U.N. plans to spend the next two years building a new super carrier .
 China has acquired and renovated one carrier, which it uses for training . China also uses one carrier to train its pilots .
 Eight other countries maintain smaller carriers that use helicopters or small airplanes . France, India, Russia, Spain, Brazil, Italy, Thailand, Thailand and the United Kingdom .
 Keegan: Because of small missiles, small missiles now reach from dozens to hundreds of thousands of pounds . Keegan, John. Keegan says the missile range can now reach hundreds of pounds per hour . He says the range of missiles can now range from dozens of pounds to hundreds .
 Naval warfare emphasizes detection at great distances without being detected oneself . Radar surveillance and electronic countermeasures are a cat-and-mouse game of radar surveillance .
 Marines are useful for great power intervention in distant conflicts where they can insert themselves quickly and establish local control . Marines are also useful for . great power . intervention in . distant conflicts .
 Air forces serve several purposes: strategic bombing of land or sea targets; “close air support” ; interception of other aircraft; reconnaissance; and airlift of supplies, weapons, and troops . Air forces are used to control the skies, and to protect the nation .
 Missiles --whether fired from air, land, or sea --are increasingly important . Missiles are increasingly important in America's armed forces .
 Air forces have developed various means to try to fool such missiles, with mixed results . Air force has developed various ways to fool missiles, such as fool missiles .
 In the Soviet war in Afghanistan, portable Stinger missiles used by guerrillas took a heavy toll on the Soviet air force . The U.S.-made portable missiles were used by the Soviet Air Force in Afghanistan .
 In 2003, the threat from shoulder-fired missiles kept the Baghdad airport closed to commercial traffic for more than a year after U.S. forces arrived . The airport was also closed in 2003, when the threat of shoulder-fire missiles kept it closed .
 Traditionally, aerial bombing resembles artillery shelling in that it causes great destruction with little discrimination . Aerial bombing is similar to artillery shelling .
 Other bombs use GPS navigation to hit targets through clouds, smoke, or sandstorms . Other bombs using GPS navigation can also hit targets in sandstorms or clouds .
 Most of the bombing in the 1991 Gulf War was highaltitude saturation bombing using large numbers of dumb bombs . The bombs were used in the Gulf War as part of a high-altitude bombing .
 In typical wars, such as Russia’s 1995 Chechnya War, bombing of cities causes high civilian casualties . In typical war, bombings of cities cause high civilian deaths, experts say .
 Smart bombs hit far more targets with fewer bombs than bombs in Iraq War . Smart bombs were used in the 2003 Iraq War to hit more targets using fewer bombs . The Iraq War was the first to use smart bombs in a major air campaign .
 Thousands of civilians have apparently died in U.S. airstrikes in Iraq since 2003 . Even so, thousands of people have apparently been killed in the United States airstrikes .
 Israel found that Lebanese guerrillas were able to jam some of its radar systems with rudimentary electronic devices, creating difficulties for the Israeli military . Israel found, however, that Lebanon's guerillas could jam some radar systems .
 The increasing sophistication of electronic equipment and the high-performance requirements of attack aircraft make air forces expensive—totally out of reach for some states . Some states are struggling to pay for air forces .
 Air superiority is often the key to the success of ground operations, especially in open terrain . Despite the expense, air superiority often is key to success of the ground operations .
 The United States bombings of Iraq, Serbia and Afghanistan demonstrated a new effectiveness of air power . The U.S. bombings were not against the morale of enemy populations, but directly targeted from afar at battlefield positions .
 The United States ability to decimate distant military forces while taking only very light casualties is historically unprecedented . The U.S. ability to kill and destroy distant forces is unprecedented .
 The 2003 attack on Iraq demonstrated the usefulness of air power, but also its limits . The 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq demonstrated that air power can be used in the war .
 A massive precision bombing raid on Baghdad a few days into the war destroyed hundreds of targets of value to Saddam Hussein’s government . Hundreds of targets were destroyed .
 United States forces still had to fight it out on the ground to get to Baghdad . U.S. forces were still fighting for the Iraqi government .
 Aircraft carriers are used for power projection in distant regions, such as in the Afghanistan and Iraq campaigns . Aircraft carriers have been deployed in the past two decades of the U.S.
 The U.S. continues to invest heavily in its own air force, creating new technologies to stay ahead of Chinese advances .
 Air power may be less useful in small-scale warfare, but states continue to build their air forces in the event of more largescale conflicts . And while air power may not be useful in such cases, it is still useful in larger conflicts .
 Military logistics is a huge operation, and in most armed forces the majority of soldiers are not combat troops . Most of the soldiers in the armed forces are not involved in combat .
 Global-reach capabilities combine long-distance logistical support with various power-projection forces . These capabilities allow a great power to project military power to distant corners of the world .
 Britain and France are in a distant second place, able to mount occasional distant operations of modest size such as the Falklands War .
 Space forces are military forces designed to attack in or from outer space . Space forces were formed in the 1970s and 1980s . The first space force was formed by Soviet Union .
 Only the United States and Russia have substantial military capabilities in space . Only the U.S. and Russia are capable of space-based missions .
 China put an astronaut in orbit in 2003, successfully tested an antisatellite missile, and launched a lunar orbiter in 2007 . China has fewer space capabilities overall overall, but it has more space capabilities .
 U.S. Department of Defense 7 Harkavy, Robert E. E. Bases Abroad: The Global Foreign Military Presence. U.D.E. E has published a book on the topic .
 The far more common uses of space by the military are for command and coordination purposes . Space is used for command, coordination purposes, rather than for military purposes .
 Satellites are used extensively for military purposes, but these purposes thus far do not include attack . This is not the first time a satellite has been used in a military attack .
 Satellites perform military surveillance and mapping, mapping, communications, weather assessment, and early warning of ballistic missile launches . They also perform communications, communications and weather assessment .
 Satellites also provide navigational information to military forces, including military units, ships, planes, and guided missiles in flight .
 Handheld receivers are available commercially, so the military forces of other countries can free-ride on these satellite navigation beacons . The military forces are able to use these beacons to communicate with each other .
 Russia sells satellite photos for hard currency in hard currency . Poorer states can buy satellite photos from Russia .
 The terrorists who attacked Mumbai, India, in 2008 planned their attack using satellite images available through Google Earth . In fact, access to such information has diffused to the point .
 Hezbollah forces used GPS jammers to complicate Israeli air support and targeting operations . In the 2006 war between Hezbollah and Israel in Lebanon in Lebanon, the jammers complicated Israeli air strikes .
 In outer space great powers have advantages over smaller or poorer states . Great powers generally have advantages in outer space . But generally, great powers are more likely to have advantages .
 Intelligence gathering also relies on electronic monitoring of telephone lines and other communications, reports from embassies, and information in the open press .
 Some kinds of information is obtained by sending agents into foreign countries as spies . Some of the information obtained is obtained through the use of spies .
 They use ingenuity to penetrate walls of secrecy that foreign governments have built around their plans and capabilities . They also penetrate walls that governments have constructed around them .
 A Russian spy taped conversations from a listening device planted in a high-level conference room at the U.S. State Department . In 1999, a Russian spy recorded conversations in the same room .
 The 2001 terrorist attacks showed a weakness in U.S. “human intelligence” capabilities . The attacks showed that the United States had not penetrated a large terrorist network based in Afghanistan .
 The largest United States military intelligence agency is the National Security Agency . Its mission is encoding U.S. communications and breaking the codes of foreign communications .
 The NS A intercepts truly massive amounts of information from such sources as undersea phone cables . NSA intercepts such information then sifts through it to find significant conversations . The NSA intercepted the conversations .
 The NS A employs more mathematics Ph.D.s than anyone in the world . It is the second largest electricity consumer in the state of Maryland . It has a budget larger than the CIA’s .
 The budgets of United States intelligence agencies were revealed in 2005 to be around $44 billion a year . Altogether, the budgets of U.S. intelligence agencies, although officially secret, were revealed to be $44billion a year in 2005 .
 These operations taken together are very large and growing in importance as the information revolution proceeds . The war on terror makes their mission more central. Clearly these operations take together very large .
 Evolving Technologies have changed the nature of military force in several ways . Technological developments have changed how military force operates .
 First, resort to force in international conflicts now has more profound costs and consequences, says David Cameron . Second, resorting to force is now having more profound consequences, he says . First, force is no longer necessary in international conflict, says Cameron .
 Great powers can no longer use force to settle disputes among themselves without risking massive destruction and economic ruin . Great powers in particular can't use force against each other without risking economic ruin, says CNN.com .
 As a presidential candidate in 2012, you publicly promised to continue and accelerate the American troop withdrawal from Afghanistan . President Obama has been criticized for his comments on Afghanistan .
 International forces (including U.S. troops) to leave Afghanistan by next year . There is now a timetable set for international forces to leave the country .
 This removal of international forces comes despite the fact that large parts of Afghanistan are still relatively unstable after the 12-year-long war .
 The Haqqani network, a group of anti-U.S. fighters allied to the Taliban, continues to attack United States forces in Afghanistan . The group is allied with the Taliban and the Taliban .
 This network has significant ties to the security forces in neighboring Pakistan, where Haqqani fighters take refuge after raids in Afghanistan . This network is known for its ties to security forces .
 Terrorism and the war in Afghanistan are still key issues in U.S. public opinion . The economy is the major issue for your administration, but terrorism and Afghanistan are also key issues .
 The American public has grown quite weary of the war in Afghanistan . After the death of Osama bin Laden, growing numbers question the continued military presence .
 Opinion polls showed strong support for your decision to establish a firm date for withdrawal from that conflict . Public opinion polls show strong support of your decision, President Obama .
 Imagine that as international forces withdraw from Afghanistan, attacks against American troops increase significantly . Imagine what would happen if the U.S. withdraws from Afghanistan .
 The Taliban, with help from the Haqqani network, reemerges as a major political actor . The Taliban threatens to defeat the Afghan government in several key provinces . Taliban has helped to defeat Afghanistan's government in recent years .
 Some Pakistani officials push to help Afghan government, while others support pro-Taliban forces . Pakistan's government is divided, with some pushing to help the Afghan government .
 U.S. troops in Afghanistan could leave the country in 2015 . That would likely put off the Taliban advances, but perhaps put off their inevitable withdrawal .
 U.S. intervened to topple 9/11 forces that America intervened in the wake of the attacks . That would be popular at home, but risk the re-emergence of anti-U.S forces .
 These technological advances undermine the territorial basis of war and the “hard shell” of the state itself . The state itself is threatened by these advances, the author says .
 In recent years, unmanned drone aircraft have been used in U.S. military efforts in Pakistan, Yemen, and Libya . The trend has accelerated with the use of drones armed with missiles .
 In addition to America’s 7,000 drones in 2011, other countries have been rapidly acquiring them . Other countries also rapidly acquiring drones .
 Britain and Israel have used drones for attacks, but most drones worldwide are used for surveillance . Most drones in the world are used to provide surveillance .
 U.S. underwater sea drones for mine clearing, produced by Germany, were sent to the Persian Gulf in 2012 as tensions with Iran escalated .
 Electronic warfare refers to the uses of the electromagnetic spectrum in war . It is critical to all technologically advanced military forces . Electronic warfare is a form of warfare .
 Strategies for cyberwar may figure prominently in future wars, although they have not yet yet . Disrupting enemy computer networks to degrade command and control, or even hacking into bank accounts electronically .
 The United States decided against using cyberattacks to disable Libya’s air defenses in 2011 out of fear of the precedent such an action could set . The U.S. decided not to use cyberattacks against Libya in 2011 .
 Terrorist attacks also could target computer networks, including the Internet and critical infrastructure such as electric grids . In the future, terrorist attacks could target computers and Internet networks, such as the Internet .
 In 2010, the U.S.-Israeli Stuxnet virus targeted Iran’s nuclear centrifuges, and in 2012, the Flame virus was found on thousands of computers across the Middle East, mostly in Iran .
 It could grab screenshots and keystrokes, and remotely turn on computer microphones . It could help the creators spy on operations in the Iranian nuclear program .
 A few months later, a virus deleted files on the computers of a major Saudi oil company, replacing them with an image of a burning American flag . The virus was probably in response to a similar virus, probably a copy of the image .
 Stealth technology uses special radar-absorbent materials and unusual shapes in aircraft, missiles, and ships to scatter enemy radar . Stealth technology also uses unusual shapes and special materials to scatter radar .
 Stealth is expensive (the B-2 stealth bomber costs about $2 billion per plane) However, stealth is expensive and prone to technical problems . The stealth bomber is expensive, but it is prone to problems .
 These periods combine innovative applications of new technology with changes in military doctrine, organization, or operations . These periods are usually combined with new technology .
 Revolutionary France mobilized an entire nation into a war machine two centuries ago . Such revolutions may arise from innovations in organization, as when revolutionary France mobilized a nation into war machine . The French revolution was first organized in France in the 1800s .
 They may arise from new military doctrine as when Germany used the ‘blitzkrieg’ to overwhelm Poland and France at the outset of World War II, or from technology alone as with the invention of nuclear weapons . Or they may emerge from new doctrine as well as technology alone
 Many military analysts consider the present period, starting with the 1991 Gulf War, a revolution in military affairs, especially in U.S. forces . The present period is considered a 'revolution' in the military .
 Two centuries ago, Carl von Clausewitz described as a ‘fog of war’ The fog of war is confusion and uncertainty that greatly reduces the effectiveness of armies in battle .
 Today’s U.S. forces are piercing that fog for themselves while thickening it for their enemies . The fog is thickening for the enemies of the United States .
 As the fog of 10 Herz Herz, John H International Politics in the Atomic Age. 10 Herz, 10 Herz .
 Kosovo campaign was notable in achieving its war aims without loss of a single U.S. life to hostile fire . The Kosovo campaign achieved its aims without losing a single United States life . Kosovo campaign in 1999 was notable for its lack of loss of life in the war .
 Small groups of lightly armed U.S. special forces used lasers to illuminate targets for smart bombs dropped by high-flying aircraft . The lasers were used by small groups inserted across the country .
 The integration of these diverse forces using information-rich battle management systems resulted in a stunningly effective bombing campaign that destroyed the Taliban as an effective army and handed victory to smaller anti-Taliban armies .
 The 2003 invasion of Iraq seemed to continue this success, but then the postinvasion security situation in Iraq unraveled over several years . Despite the revolutionary technologies of U.S. forces, Iraq's security situation unraveled .
 A more unsettling thought is that the revolution in military affairs may work for terrorists as well as states . The revolution may also work for terrorist groups, as it does for states, the author says .
 September 2001 attackers used information technology to coordinate forces while keeping U.S. authorities in the dark . The September 2001 attacks were carried out using information technology, such as encrypted Internet communications .
 Airstrikes carried out precision strikes over long distances with very small, dispersed units . The strikes were carried out with precision precision strikes .
 19 attackers killed nearly 3,000 people, and an expenditure of under $1 million caused tens of billions of dollars in damage . As a result of the attack, 19 attackers were killed, and the damage was estimated at $1 billion . 19 attackers died in the attack .
 Information revolution is making smaller weapons and smaller dispersed units more potent . The information revolution is changing the way weapons are distributed .
 A ""revolution in military affairs"" is driving changes in U.S. military strategy, including the expanding use of unmanned drones . A revolution is driving the changes in United States military strategy .
 Insect-sized drone could collect real-time intelligence in complex urban environments . Insect-size drone could be used to collect intelligence from complex urban landscapes .
 The United States State Department listed 45 foreign terrorist organizations in 2010 . Bin Laden was killed in Pakistan in 2011 .
 In Chapter 5 we discussed conflicts involving armed Islamist militias and terrorist networks . Chapter 5 discussed the role of Islamist militias in the Middle Eastern region .
 Since September 2001, governments and ordinary people have paid much more attention to terrorism than ever before . Since September 11, governments have paid a greater attention to the threat of terrorism .
 More than guerrilla warfare, terrorism is a shadowy world of faceless enemies and irregular tac1 T tics marked by extreme brutality . The world of terrorism is more shadowy and more violent than the Taliban .
 The purpose of terrorism is to demoralize a civilian population in order to use its discontent as leverage on national governments or other parties to a conflict . Traditionally, the purpose of terrorist terrorism is demoralizing a civilian .
 Related to this is the aim of creating drama in order to gain media attention for a cause . The aim of this is to create drama for the sake of a cause, rather than create drama .
 IRA planted bombs in London in the 1960s and 1970s to make life miserable enough for Londoners that they would insist their government settle the Northern Ireland issue . IRA hoped to make Londoners want to settle the issue in Northern Ireland .
 The bombing also sought to keep the issue of Northern Ireland in the news, in the hope that the British government would then be pressured to concede terms more favorable to the IRA than would otherwise be the case .
 Terrorism is seldom mindless; rather, it is usually a calculated use of violence as leverage . Terrorism is not mindless; it is often calculated to use violence to gain leverage, says author .
 Motive motives and means of terrorism vary widely, having a common only that some actor is using violence to influence other actors . However, motives and ways of terrorism are widely varied .
 In part, the effectiveness of terrorism in capturing attention is due to the dramatic nature of the incidents, especially as shown on television news, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Terrorists capture attention by capturing attention with dramatic events .
 Millions of people realize ‘It could have been me,” because they, too, shop in markets . Although only a few dozen people may be injured by a bomb left in a market, millions of people think “It could've been me”
 Attacks on airplanes augment this fear because many people already fear flying . Attacks on planes add to the fear of flying .
 Terrorism amplifies a small amount of power by its psychological effect on large populations, this is why it is usually a tool of the weak . Terrorism thus amplifies power by psychological effect of large populations . Terrorism is usually used by the weak, but it is often a tool for the weak
 Al Qaeda’s attacks follow a somewhat different pattern, planned less to create fear than simply to kill as many Americans and their allies as possible . The attacks are intended to touch off apocalyptic violence that al Qaeda's followers believe will bring about God's intervention . However, al Qaeda�
 Terrorist attacks in general have become more deadly over the past 50 years . Terrorist tactics have increasingly employed more violent means to injure or kill civilians . Terrorists are increasingly employing more violent ways to injure, kill civilians, writes Peter Bergen .
 The psychological effect is aimed at Muslim populations worldwide rather than at Americans . It's aimed at Muslims worldwide, not at Americans, but at Muslims in America .
 In the World Trade Center attack, tangible damage was far greater than in previous terrorist attacks . Thousands of lives and tens of billions of dollars were lost in the attack .
 The psychological impact was even stronger than the physical damage caused by the loss of the U.S. President George W. Bush . The loss of Bush Sr. changed the United States' political and cultural landscape instantly .
 The same terrorist network was trying to obtain nuclear weapons with which to kill not thousands, but hundreds of thousands of Americans . The U.S. has been hit by a series of terrorist attacks since 9/11 .
 The classic cases of terrorism are those in which a nonstate actor uses attacks against civilians by secret nonuniformed forces, operating across international borders, as a leverage against state actors .
 Radical political factions or separatist groups hijack or blow up airplanes or plant bombs in cafes, clubs, or other crowded places . Terrorists hijack planes, blow up planes or blow-up nightclubs .
 For example, Chechen radicals seized a school in Beslan, a small city in the Caucasus region, in 2004 . For three days, they held nearly 1,200 children, parents, and teachers without food or water .
 For example, the bombing of the Boston Marathon in 2013 was an unsophisticated attack by two brothers, yet it preoccupied news media for weeks afterwards . Yet, the attack preoccupied the media for several weeks afterwards.
 Often terrorism is used by radical factions of movements that have not been able to get attention or develop other effective means of leverage . Terrorists often use terrorism as a way of getting attention or get other effective leverage .
 It is often a tactic of desperation, and it almost always reflects weakness in the power position of the attacker . The tactic is often often used by the attackers, but it is often desperate and often reflects weakness .
 For instance, Palestinian radicals in 1972 had seen Arab states defeated by Israel in war and could not see a way to gain even a hearing for their cause . For example, in 1972, Palestinians in 1972 were unable to get a hearing .
 By capturing media attention worldwide with dramatic incidents of violence, the radicals hoped to make Palestinian aspirations an issue that Western governments could not ignore when deciding on policies toward the Middle East . The radicals wanted to make Western governments not ignore Palestinian aspirations .
 The persistence of terrorism is in some ways puzzling because the tactic has a mixed record of success . Yet, the persistence of terror is puzzling because of the tactic's mixed record . Terrorist terrorism has a history of success in the United States .
 Chechen terrorists’ 2004 school attack marked their end as a serious force in Chechnya . Suicide bombers were arguably effective at convincing the U.S. to leave Lebanon in 1983, but the 2004 attack marks their end .
 A1 Qaeda affiliates in Iraq alienated Sunni tribes that had sheltered them . Sunni tribes turned against them . A1 al Qaeda affiliates alienated the Sunni tribes in Iraq .
 Suicide bombers have yet to be effective at gaining a state for the Tamils in Sri Lanka or providing leverage for Hamas or Islamic Jihad against Israel . In addition, even large numbers of suicide bombers have not been effective .
 Some research has attempted to systematically analyze when particular types of terrorism, such as suicide bombings, are effective at achieving the goals of terrorist organizations . Suicide bombings are more likely to be successful in achieving terrorist organizations' goals .
 In particular, they occur most frequently against democracies rather than autocracies . This is because democracies are thought to be strongly influenced by public opinion . It is thought democracies are more likely to be influenced by the public opinion of their leaders .
 Study concludes that terror tactic has not been particularly successful at achieving significant goals . Still, this same study concludes that this terror tactic is not particularly successful . The study concluded that this tactic has failed to achieve significant goals.
 Terrorists are more willing than states are to violate the norms of the international system because they do not have a stake in that system . Terrorists more willing to violate international norms than states because they have no stake in the system, the author says .
 When a political group gains some power or legitimacy, its use of terrorism usually diminishes . Conversely, when a group gains power, terrorism often diminishes, a group's terrorism use is diminished .
 This was true of the Palestine Liberation Organization during the peace process in 1993-2000 as well as the Irish Republican Army in 1995 .
 Scholars tend to avoid the label “terrorism” for such acts, preferring to call it repression or war . States themselves carry out acts designed to terrorize their own populations or those of other states .
 No violent act taken during a civil or international war can necessarily fit neatly into the category of terrorism . In fact, no violent act during a war can be taken during or toward a warring party . This is not the case of terrorism, but terrorism .
 Warring parties often call each other terrorists . Of course, because war is hard to define, so is terrorism . Warring countries often use the term 'terrorism'
 The narrowest definition of terrorism would exclude acts by or against uniformed military forces rather than civilians . It would be the narrowest of terrorism .
 It would also exclude the bombing of German cities in World War II although the purpose was to terrorize civilians . The idea was also excluded from bombing of Germany during the war .
 In today's world of undeclared war, guerrilla war, civil war, and ethnic violence, a large gray zone surrounds clear cases of terrorism . But in today’s world, the gray zone is still a huge problem .
 Robert Pape: Disagreements about whether terrorism included Palestinian attacks . 15 Pape, Robert. 15: Pape says terrorism includes Palestinian attacks on Palestinian soil .
 State-sponsored terrorism refers to the use of terrorist groups by states by states to achieve political aims . It is usually under control of the state’s intelligence agency . The term is used to refer to groups under control by the state .
 Investigators found fragments of a tape recorder that had contained a sophisticated plastic explosive bomb . The bomb had been detonated in a controlled detonation .
 The U.S. and British governments identified the Libyan intelligence agents responsible . In 1992, backed by the UN Security Council, they demanded that Libya turn over the agents for trial .
 UN imposed sanctions including a ban on international flights to or from Libya . When Libya refused to comply with the UN, the UN imposed a travel ban on Libya .
 Libya turned over the suspects for trial in 1999, and the UN suspended its sanctions . Two received life in prison while a third was acquitted . In 1999, Libya turned the suspects over for trial, and UN suspended sanctions .
 Libya formally took responsibility for the bombing in 2003, struck a multibillion-dollar compensation deal with victims’ families . Libya has regained a normal place in the international community .
 U.S. unilateral United States sanctions are of limited effect . However, these kinds of unilateral sanctions have limited effect on Russia .
 North Korea removed from the list in 2008 in exchange for promises to halt its nuclear weapons program . North Korea was removed from North Korea's list of banned nukes in 2008 . The North Korean government was removed in 2008 from the North Korean nuclear program .
 The methods used by terrorists have become more diverse over the past decades, so have the policies implemented to prevent terrorist incidents . Counterterrorism policies have been implemented in the U.S.
 Debates over how to best prevent terrorist attacks are often heated since there are also debates about why individuals engage in terrorist attacks in the first place .
 Policies to combat terrorism can be placed along a spectrum involving more or less force in confronting terrorism and terrorist organizations . Policies can be put on a spectrum of force, such as using less force or less .
 On the nonviolent end of the spectrum are calls for economic development . On the non-violent end of that spectrum, calls for the development of the country's future .
 Advocates of these programs point out that in very poor states, people will be especially vulnerable to recruitment by terrorist organizations . Advocates say in poor states people are particularly vulnerable to terrorist recruitment .
 With no bright future ahead of them and little opportunities to better themselves, people will naturally lose hope, become angry, and undertake seemingly irrational acts since they feel they have nothing to lose . People will naturally become angry and lose hope and become irrational .
 There is little direct evidence that factors like poverty correlate directly with terrorist activities . But it is clear that very poor states with weak central governments have served as recruiting grounds for international terrorist organizations .
 These involve efforts by domestic police, usually in cooperation with other countries’ police forces, to apprehend or kill terrorists while breaking up terrorist organizations . These are usually made up of domestic police officers .
 Peru arrested the leader of the Shining Path movement, which at one point controlled over 20,000 militia members . The Shining Path had assassinated several Peruvian political leaders . The government used an elite investigative team of the national police force .
 The police arrested the movement’s leader after staking out a dance studio and digging through trash from the studio to find clues . The police said they were looking for clues in the studio .
 At the other end of the counterterrorism spectrum is organized military conflict . At one end of that spectrum, organized military conflicts are more likely to take place .
 States may undertake small or large-scale conflicts to counter terrorist organizations . States may take part in small or larger-scale operations to counter terror organizations .
 In 1998, the United States launched cruise missile strikes against a plant in Sudan believed to be producing chemical weapons for al Qaeda . The plant turned out to be making infant formula . The U.S. launched missile strikes in Sudan in 1998 .
 In addition, the U.S.-led war in Afghanistan was a response to the 9/11 attacks on the United States . In addition to the war, Afghanistan was also the focus of the war in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Nearly every state that undertakes counterterrorism policies uses some combination of these methods . Of course, nearly every state uses these methods to combat terrorism .
 In the United States, foreign aid is often justified in terms of assisting development and economic growth to decrease the possibility that the poor and uneducated can be easily drafted into terrorist organizations . In the U.S. foreign aid often helps the poor .
 Terrorist attacks often reflect the weakness of the perpetrators and their lack of access to other means of leverage . The FBI and local law enforcement cooperate with many international partners to track and track and prevent terrorist attacks .
 Terror can sometimes amplify a small group's power and affect outcomes, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Terror can amplify small groups' power, he says, but it can also affect outcomes .
 Al Qaeda's September 11, 2001, attacks, staged by a relatively small nonstate actor, led to withdrawal of U.S. troops from Saudi Arabia . The attacks ultimately led to the withdrawal of United States troops in Saudi Arabia and the Iraq War .
 The war in Afghanistan was a large war undertaken against the Taliban government that had protected al Qaeda . Finally, the war was also undertaken against al Qaeda in Afghanistan . The Taliban government had protected the Taliban .
 They are distinguished from conventional weapons by their potential lethality, given their small size and modest costs, and by their relative lack of discrimination in whom they kill . The weapons are distinguished by their enormous potential .
 When deployed on ballistic missiles, they can potentially be fired from the home territory of one state and wreak great destruction on another state . The missiles could potentially be launched from a state's home territory and then from another .
 The mere threat of such an action undermines the territorial integrity and security of states in the international system . But the mere threat to such a move undermines the sovereignty of the world, the author says .
 Of central concern today are the potentials for proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by more and more states . Of course, of central concern is the potential for proliferation .
 Weapons of mass destruction serve different purposes from conventional weapons . The U.S. has been hit by a range of weapons since 2001 . The United States has been involved in a number of terrorist attacks in the past .
 With a few exceptions, their purpose is to deter attack (especially by other weapons of mass destruction) by giving state leaders the means to inflict great pain against a would-be conqueror or destroyer . The purpose of these weapons is to protect the nation from attack .
 For middle powers, these weapons provide destructive power more in line with that of the great powers, thus serving as symbolic equalizers . Middle powers use weapons more destructive power than those of the big powers .
 "For terrorists, potentially, their purpose is to kill a great many people," says CNN.com's John Sutter . For terrorists, the purpose of terrorism is killing people, Sutter says .
 Watch the video ""Iran's Nuclear Ambitions" at MyPoliSciLab Nuclear Weapons . Nuclear weapons are, in sheer power, the world’s most destructive weapons .
 To understand the potential for nuclear proliferation, one has to know something about how nuclear weapons work . To understand potential for proliferation of nuclear weapons, one needs to know how nuclear arms work .
 When a fission weapon explodes, one type of atom is split, or fissioned, into new types with less total mass . Fission is a type of weapon that splits into new ones with less mass .
 The fission bomb that destroyed Nagasaki, Japan, in 1945 converted to energy roughly the amount of mass in a single penny . In fact, the atomic bomb was the largest mass in the world, and the energy equivalent to a penny .
 Two elements can be split in this way, and each has been used to make fission weapons . Fission weapons can be made using elements such as hydrogen and uranium .
 Fissionable materials are uranium-235 and plutonium . These elements are known as fissionable material . The elements are uranium and plutonium, which can be used in nuclear devices .
 Fission weapons were invented 60 years ago by U.S. scientists in secret World War II science program known as the Manhattan Project . The Manhattan Project was a secret science program in the United States .
 In 1945, one uranium bomb and one plutonium bomb were used to destroy Hiroshima and Nagasaki, killing 100,000 civilians in each city and inducing Japan to surrender unconditionally . Japan surrendered unconditionally.
 The weapons are the kind of weapon that might be built by a poor state or a nonstate actor . But they might be a weapon built by the likes of Russia or China, the author says . The weapon could be built in the hands of a stateless state .
 The No-Nonsense Guide to Nuclear, Chemical and Biological Weapons Today . The No.Nonsense guide to nuclear, chemical and biological weapons today .
 In the simplest design, one piece of uranium is propelled down a tube (by conventional explosives) into another piece of uranium in a tube . The simplest design is to propel uranium into a tube by conventional explosives .
 A more efficient but technically demanding design arranges high explosives precisely around a hollow sphere of plutonium so as to implode the sphere and create a critical mass . The implosion is a more efficient and technically demanding technique .
 The designs require sophisticated engineering, but are well within the capabilities of many states and some private groups . Although these designs require complex engineering, they can be easily built in the state .
 U-235, which can be used in the simplest bomb designs, is especially difficult to obtain . The bomb can be found in a variety of bomb designs .
 Natural uranium has less than 1 percent U-235, mixed with nonfissionable uranium . Natural uranium is mixed with nuclear non-weapons-freezing uranium .
 Extracting the fissionable U-235, referred to as enriching the uranium up to weapons grade, is slow, expensive, and technically complex . It is a major obstacle to proliferation . Extracting uranium up-grade is slow and expensive, expensive .
 Nuclear weapons were invented during World War II and used on two Japanese cities in 1945 . North Korea, Iran, Iraq, and Libya all built the infrastructure to do so in nuclear weapons .
 Obtaining fissionable materials is the main difficulty in making nuclear weapons . Obtaining nuclear materials is main difficulty for nuclear weapons, experts say .
 In 1999, a United States congressman displays a mock-up of the Soviet-built nuclear ""suitcase bomb"" that, in the wrong hands, could kill hundreds of thousands of people . The bomb could be used to carry out nuclear weapons .
 Plutonium is also used in commercial breeder reactors, which Japan and other countries have built recently . It is another source of fissionable material .
 North Korea tested a plutonium bomb in 2006, achieving fission although with a low yield . North Korea achieved fission in 2006 but tested a low-yielding bomb .
 Fusion weapons are extremely expensive and technically demand recent years . Fusion weapons have been developed in the U.S. for decades .
 It made progress in 2007-2008, albeit behind schedule, but it was behind schedule . It is now in the process of reaching out to the world's most ambitious projects .
 Plutonium is more easily produced from low-grade uranium in nuclear power reactors . extracting the plutonium requires a separation plant . Plutonium can be extracted from low grade uranium in reactors .
 Two small atoms fuse together into a larger atom, releasing energy . The atoms release each other to release energy .
 Weapons designers use fission weapons to create these high energies and trigger an explosive fusion reaction . Weapons designers create high energies to create high energy weapons .
 In the post-Cold War era, megaton weapons have become irrelevant . Megaton weapons are too powerful for any actor to use productively and too difficult for terrorists or small states to build .
 The effects of nuclear weapons include not only the blast of the explosion, but also heat and radiation . Nuclear weapons are a form of radiation and heat that can be caused by nuclear weapons .
 Radiation creates radiation sickness, which at high doses kills people in a few days . At low doses, radiation sickness creates long-term health problems, especially cancers . Radiation sickness can kill people in few days, but at low doses it can cause long term health problems .
 Radiation is most intense in the local vicinity of a nuclear explosion, but some is carried up into the atmosphere and falls in more distant locations as nuclear fallout . Some of the most intense radiation is carried away from the blast site .
 Nuclear weapons create electromagnetic pulses that can disrupt electronic equipment . Nuclear weapons also create electromagnetic pulse that can destroy electronic equipment.
 Nuclear warheads can be made quite small—weighing a few hundred pounds or even less . They are adaptable to a wide variety of delivery systems, such as delivery systems .
 During the Cold War, nuclear delivery systems were divided into two categories . During the 1950s, the U.S. nuclear weapons system was divided into one category .
 In the Cold War years, both superpowers integrated tactical nuclear weapons into their conventional air, sea, and land forces . They used a variety of delivery systems, including gravity bombs and artillery shells .
 The tens of thousands of nuclear warheads integrated into superpower conventional forces posed dangers such as theft or accident .
 Their actual use would have entailed grave risks of escalation to strategic nuclear war, putting home cities at risk . The actual use of the nukes would have involved a nuclear strike in a nuclear war .
 Both superpowers phased out tactical nuclear weapons almost entirely when the Cold War ended . The Cold War was over when it ended .
 The main strategic delivery vehicles are ballistic missiles, unlike airplanes, they are extremely difficult to defend against . Unlike airplanes, missiles can be very hard to defend from .
 Ballistic missiles carry a warhead up along a trajectory and let it drop on the target . Ballistic missiles are carried out on a trajectory by a ballistic missile .
 A trajectory typically rises out of the atmosphere—at least 50 miles high, before descending . The trajectory typically typically rises from the atmosphere before descending.
 The longest-range missiles are intercontinental ballistic missiles . They have a range of more than 5,000 miles . The longest range of missiles is intercontinental missiles .
 Of special interest today are short-range ballistic missiles with ranges of well under 1,000 miles . Short-range missiles can be launched under the age of 20 years old .
 The modified Scud missiles fired by Iraq at Saudi Arabia and Israel during the Gulf War were SRBMs . The modified missiles fired at Israel and Saudi Arabia during the war were SRBM missiles .
 In regional conflicts, the long range of more powerful missiles may not be necessary . More powerful missiles are not needed in regional conflicts .
 Short-range and some medium-range ballistic missiles are cheap enough to be obtained and even home-produced by small middle-income states . The missiles can be easily produced by small, middle-class states in the United States .
 Short-range ballistic missiles are highly inaccurate but still very difficult to defend against . Many short-range missiles, including those used by Iraq during the Gulf War, were highly inaccurate .
 With nuclear, chemical, or biological warheads, these missiles could be deadlier . With nuclear or chemical warheads, they could be more deadly than conventional ones .
 The accuracy of delivery systems of all ranges improves as one moves to great powers, especially the U.S., especially in the United States .
 After traveling thousands of miles, the best U.S. missiles can land within 50 feet of a target half of the time . The best United States missiles land within half of their target's 50 feet .
 The trend in the U.S. nuclear arsenal has been toward less powerful warheads but more accurate missiles, for flexibility . The trend has been in favor of fewer powerful warheads, but more reliable missiles .
 Cruise missile is a small winged missile that can navigate across thousands of miles of previously mapped terrain to reach a target, with the help of satellite guidance . The cruise missile can navigate thousands of . miles of . previously mapped . terrain to . reach a . target, using satellite guidance,
 Cruise missiles can be launched from ships, submarines, airplanes, or land . Cruise missiles are launched by submarines, planes, ships, and even land .
 Theodore Postol, Theodore A Lessons of the Gulf War Experience with Patriot. The United 19 Postol . Theodore A. Postol. Theodore . Postol: "The Gulf War experience with Patriot Patriot"
 List of potential targets includes both hostile and friendly states, and is suggestive rather than comprehensive . List includes both friendly and hostile states, as well as friendly states . List of possible targets includes countries with hostile or hostile states .
 Saudi range is for a two-ton payload; South Korean range for a half-ton . Saudi range was for a 2.5 ton payload . South Korea range is a half tonne payload .
 Through the Missile Technology Control Regime, industrialized states try to limit the flow of missile-relevant technology to states in the global South . But with limited success, they have limited success in limiting the flow .
 Shortand mediumrange missiles apparently being developed by Iran, Israel, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, India, North Korea, Pakistan and possibly Argentina and Brazil .
 Iran alarmed the West in 2009 by testing a missile that could reach Egypt, Israel, and parts of Europe . In 2009, Iran tested a missile capable of reaching parts of the Middle East . Iran has been accused of testing the missile in the past .
 In 2012, North Korea, evidently in cooperation with Iran, successfully tested a long-range missile capable of transcontinental distances . North Korea is believed to be working with Iran to develop the missile .
 Small states or terrorists may acquire nuclear weapons in the future could deliver them through innovative means . Small states could use innovative means to deliver them via innovative methods .
 Because nuclear weapons are small, one could be smuggled into a target state by car, by speedboat, or in diplomatic pouches . Nuclear weapons could be small enough to smuggle into target states by car .
 Since 2001, the United States has run a container security initiative aimed at preventing weapons of mass destruction from reaching U.S. shores in seaborne shipping containers . The initiative has been in place since 2001 .
 Nearly 8 million shipping containers pass through U.S. ports every year . But doing so without impeding the flow of international trade is a daunting challenge .
 Chemical and Biological Weapons A chemical weapon releases chemicals that disable and kill people . The chemicals vary from lethal ones such as nerve gas to merely irritating ones such a tear gas .
 Different chemicals interfere with the nervous system, blood, breathing, or other body functions . Chemicals interfere with nerves, blood and other functions in the body .
 Some persist in the target area long after their use; others disperse quickly . Some persist long after they are used . Others disperse quickly. Some remain in the area even after use .
 It is possible to defend against most chemical weapons by dressing troops in protective clothing and gas masks and following elaborate procedures to decontaminate equipment .
 But protective suits are hot, and antichemical measures reduce the efficiency of armies . Anti-armship measures reduce efficiency of army, says U.S. President Obama .
 Civilians are less likely to have protection against chemicals than are military forces . Civilians also have less protection against chemical warfare agents than military personnel .
 Mustard gas, which produces skin blisters and lung damage, was widely used in artillery shells in World War I . The use of chemical weapons was banned in the 1925 Geneva protocol, still in effect today .
 In World War II, both sides were armed with chemical weapons but neither used them, for fear of retaliation . Both sides used chemical weapons in WWII, but never used them .
 Only Iraq has violated the treaty against Iran in the 1980s . Since then only Iraq has broken the treaty .
 Iraq’s actions breached a psychological barrier against using chemical weapons . It showed such weapons to be cheap and effective against human waves of attackers without protective gear . Unfortunately, Iraq's actions not only breached psychological barriers against using such weapons, but also showed them were cheap .
 This example stimulated dozens more poor states to begin acquiring chemical weapons . This example prompted dozens of poor countries to acquire chemical weapons.
 Chemical weapons are a cheap way for states to gain weapons of mass destruction, experts say . Chemical weapons have been banned in Iraq and Syria since 2003 .
 Chemical weapons can be produced using processes and facilities similar to those for pesticides, pharmaceuticals, and other civilian products, which makes it difficult to find 20 Mistry .
 The U.S. has been involved in the Middle East's largest arms control operation in the world . The United States and the United Kingdom are involved in a number of countries involved in arms control .
 The 1925 treaty did not ban the production or possession of chemical weapons, only their use . Several dozen states built stockpiles of them .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union maintained large arsenals of chemical weapons during the Cold War . They have reduced them greatly in the past decade .
 The 1992 Chemical Weapons Convention to ban the production and possession of chemical weapons has been signed by all the great powers and nearly all other states . A few exceptions including Egypt, Syria, and North Korea have been exceptions to the convention .
 The new treaty includes strict verification provisions and the threat of sanctions against violators including nonparticipants in the treaty . It also includes the threat to impose sanctions on violators .
 Several states (including India, China, South Korea, France, France) have chemical weapons programs, which are now being dismantled under international oversight . Several states, including India and China, have been involved in the program .
 Russia still faces very costly and long-term work to destroy a 44,000-ton arsenal of chemical weapons built during the Cold War . Russia still has a huge stockpile of weapons dating back to the 1950s .
 Biological weapons resemble chemical ones, but use deadly microorganisms or biologically derived toxins . Biological weapons can be used in biological warfare, such as biological warfare agents . Biological warfare agents can be found in biological weapons .
 Some use viruses or bacteria that cause fatal diseases, such as smallpox, bubonic plague, and anthrax . Others use viruses, bacteria that can cause deadly diseases, like smallpox .
 Others cause non-atal, but incapacitating, diseases or diseases that kill livestock . Some animals are killed by non-lethal, but not fatal, disease or disease .
 Theoretically, a single weapon could spark an epidemic in an entire population, but this would pose too great a danger . Less contagious microorganisms are preferred to be kept out of circulation .
 The superpowers destroyed their stocks of biological weapons and had to restrict their biological weapons complexes to defensive research rather than the development of weapons .
 The treaty makes no provision for inspection and because biological weapons programs are, like chemical ones, relatively easy to hide . Several states remain under suspicion of having biological weapons .
 UN inspections of Iraq in the mid-1990s uncovered an active biological weapons program . UN inspectors of Iraq uncovered a biological weapon program in the 1990s .
 Evidence surfaced after the collapse of the Soviet Union that a secret biological weapons program had been under way there as well as a secret weapons program .
 In 2001, the United States pulled out of the 1972 treaty, declaring the proposed modifications unworkable . Britain admitted to having secret VULNERABLE Civilians are more vulnerable to chemical weapons than soldiers .
 Israeli kindergarteners prepare against a chemical warfare threat from Iraqi Scud missiles during the Gulf War, 1991 .
 Proliferation Proliferation is spread of weapons of mass destruction into the hands of more actors . Proliferation includes nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles, and chemical or biological weapons .
 The implications of proliferation for international relations are difficult to predict but profound, say experts . The implications for proliferation in the world are not predicted but profound .
 Ballistic missiles with weapons of mass destruction remove the territorial protection offered by state borders . Each state is vulnerable to others, making each state vulnerable to other nations . Ballistic missiles remove territorial protection and make state borders vulnerable .
 Some realists, who believe in the rationality of state actions, are not so upset by this prospect . Some even welcome it, and some welcome it .
 In a world where the use of military force could lead to mutual annihilation, there would be fewer wars . Just as during the arms race of the Cold War, the superpowers did not blow each other up .
 IR scholars who put less faith in the rationality of state leaders are much more alarmed by proliferation . Other IR scholars are concerned by proliferation of state weapons .
 Miscalculation or accident could lead to the use of weapons of mass destruction on a scale unseen since 1945, experts fear .
 They have tried to restrict the most destructive weapons to the great powers . They have also tried to limit the use of weapons to great powers. But they have failed to do so so far .
 Proliferation erodes the great powers’ advantage relative to the middle powers . Proliferation of nuclear weapons erodes great powers relative to middle powers, experts say . The U.S. is one of the world’s most powerful countries .
 Evidence captured during the 2001 war in Afghanistan showed that al Qaeda was trying to obtain weapons of mass destruction and would be willing to use them . The al Qaeda organization was captured in Afghanistan in 2001 .
 Lax security at the vast, far-flung former Soviet nuclear complex increased fears that fissionable 9 S materials could reach terrorists . Nuclear proliferation could occur simply by a state or nonstate actor’s buying (or stealing) one or more nuclear weapons or the components to
 The means to prevent this include covert intelligence, tight security measures, and safeguards to prevent the weapon being used .
 In 2007, two teams of armed assailants broke into the South African nuclear facility where atomic bombs had once been designed and produced . The South African facility was destroyed in 2007 .
 After reaching the control room and shooting one guard, they were repelled, leaving a mystery along with doubts about the security of such nuclear facilities . The group was repelled by a guard, leaving the mystery behind .
 As political unrest occurs in other nuclear states, thoughts often turn 9 A toward the safety of nuclear weapons and materials . Pakistan, notably Pakistan, has a history of political unrest .
 Lax Nuclear Security in Russia is cited as way for bin Laden to get arms . Lax nuclear security in Russia has been cited as a key factor in bin Laden's success in obtaining arms .
 North Korea tested weapons in 2006 and 2009, and negotiations over its program continue . Talks over North Korea's nuclear weapons program are ongoing .
 South Africa reported after the fact that it had built several nuclear weapons but then dismantled them in the 1980s before white minority rule ended . South Africa's nuclear weapons were built in the 1970s, but were dismantled in 1980s .
 In the 1990s, Pakistan’s top nuclear scientist sold bomb kits with lowgrade uranium, enrichment centrifuges, and bomb designs to Libya, Iran, and North Korea . Libya, North Korea, Iran and Libya were among the countries selling bomb kits .
 Libya gave its up, North Korea negotiated but remained coy about its uranium program . Iran continues to enrich uranium . Libya gave up and North Korea has a uranium enrichment program .
 Israel has never officially admitted it has nuclear weapons but it is widely believed to have a hundred or more . Israel is widely thought to have more than 100 nuclear weapons .
 Israel wants Arab leaders to convince them that military conquest of Israel is impossible . Israel wants to convince Arab leaders that military conquests of Israel are impossible .
 Israel carried out a bombing raid on the main facility of the Iraqi nuclear complex in 1981 . To prevent Iraq from developing nuclear weapons, Israel bombed the Iraqi facility .
 In 2007, Israeli warplanes destroyed a site in Syria thought to be a nuclear reactor of North Korean design . Israel destroyed a similar site in 2007 thought to have been a site of North Korea design .
 The Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968 created a framework for controlling the spread of nuclear materials and expertise . The Treaty was created in 1968 to prevent nuclear proliferation in the world .
 The International Atomic Energy Agency is charged with inspecting the nuclear power industry in member states to prevent secret military diversions of nuclear materials . The agency is based in Vienna, Austria, and is a UN agency .
 In 2006, a deal between the U.S. and India to share nuclear technology led many states to question the NPT . The deal was supposed to be reserved for only signatories to signatories, but it was never agreed .
 The deal received final United States and Indian approval in 2008 . Nonetheless, it received final approval in the United States .
 North Korea withdrew from the IAEA in 1993, then bargained with Western leaders to get economic assistance, including safer reactors, in exchange for freezing its nuclear program .
 Iran's enrichment of uranium could give that country nuclear bombs within the decade . Iran could be able to produce nuclear weapons within a decade, experts say .
 Fueling Western suspicions, Iran has not been forthcoming with international inspectors . Iran has been accused of not being forthcoming with inspectors .
 Iran bulldozed this large site and removed its topsoil in 2004 before letting inspectors in . The site was removed by Iran in 2004 and is now being investigated by the US government .
 In 2006 and 2007, the UN Security Council applied mild sanctions against Iran over its refusal to stop enriching uranium . Iran has been hit with mild sanctions over the past two years .
 In 2002, the U.S. confronted North Korea with evidence of a secret uranium enrichment program, which the North Koreans then admitted to having . The United States confronted the North Korea in 2002, then admitted it had a secret enrichment program .
 North Korea then pulled out of the agreement, restarted its nuclear reactor and apparently turned its existing plutonium into a half-dozen bombs within months . One of which was tested in 2006, one of which it tested .
 North Korea again agreed to give up its nuclear program in 2008, but after another nuclear test in 2009, it began processing nuclear material again . North Korea agreed to stop its program in 2007, but then began processing material again in 2009 .
 Iran first agreed to suspend its uranium enrichment program and allow surprise IAEA inspections in 2003 . Iran then restarted enrichment, suspended it again, and restarted it again . Since 2003, Iran has restarted its program and allowed surprise inspections .
 In 2005, U.S.-backed efforts by Europe to offer Iran economic incentives to dismantle its program, both faltered . Efforts by Europe and Russia to enrich Iran’s uranium on Russian soil with safeguards faltered in 2005 .
 UN Security Council condemned Iran’s actions and imposed mild sanctions in 2006 . In 2006, the UN . Security Council imposed mild . sanctions against Iran .
 Iran insisted on its right to enrich uranium for what it called peaceful purposes . Iran insisted it was enriching uranium for the purposes of a peaceful purpose .
 In 2008, Iran’s behavior led to further UN Security Council sanctions . In 2009, after a secret underground processing facility was discovered, Iran was engaged in talks over the program with Western powers .
 A number of middle powers and two great powers have the potential to make nuclear weapons but have chosen not to do so . Middle powers and great powers chose not to use nuclear weapons in nuclear weapons .
 The reasons for deciding against “going nuclear” include norms against using nuclear weapons, fears of retaliation, and practical constraints including cost . Cost is a factor in deciding against "going nuclear"
 After the creation of nuclear weapons in World War II, the two superpowers built large arsenals of them during the decades of the Cold War . Limiting Nuclear Arsenals is a way of limiting nuclear weapons .
 These nuclear weapons posed a grave danger that miscalculation or accident could lead to truly catastrophic consequences . Miscalculation of nuclear weapons poses a great danger, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Limiting and controlling nuclear arms, to avoid this catastrophic outcome, is a collective good . Limiting nuclear arms is a 'collective good' for the world, says Peter Bergen .
 Both sides benefited if nuclear war was avoided, regardless of which side gave up however many weapons in a negotiated agreement . Both sides would benefit from the outcome of a negotiated nuclear war .
 Arms races represent the dark side of the reciprocity principle, author says . Arms races are a downward spiral of relations in which each reciprocates the other’s hostile actions .
 The two sides have used negotiated agreements to try to control the arms race . Ever since the 1960s, the U.S. and Russia have been involved in the arms races .
 For decades the effort merely channeled and illuminated the steady buildup of arms on both sides . For decades, the effort was merely channeling and illuminating the steady build of arms .
 The term nuclear strategy refers to decisions about how many nuclear weapons to deploy, what delivery systems to put them on, and what policies to adopt regarding the circumstances in which they would be used . Nuclear Strategy and Arms Control is the subject of nuclear strategy .
 The reason for possessing nuclear weapons is almost always to deter another state from a nuclear or conventional attack by threatening ruinous retaliation by threatening to do so . The threat of a nuclear strike is the ultimate deterrent to a nuclear attack .
 This should work if state leaders are rational actors wanting to avoid the huge costs of a nuclear attack . This should be true, says the author of the book .
 It will work only if other states believe that a state’s threat to use nuclear weapons is credible, experts say . But it will only work if other countries believe such a threat is credible .
 Search for credible deterrent by two or more hostile states tends to lead to an ever-growing arsenal of nuclear weapons . The search for a credible deterrent leads to a growing arsenal of weapons .
 India would not attack Pakistan unless it could prevent Pakistan from using its missile . Then India wouldn't attack, unless Pakistan could use its missile, it would be easier to do so .
 The Pakistani missile, rather than deter India, would merely spur India to destroy the missile before any other attack . Then the Pakistani missile would merely deter India from attacking the missile .
 An attack intended to destroy—largely or entirely—a state’s nuclear weapons before they can be used is called a first strike . A first strike is a strike aimed at destroying a state's nuclear weapons in advance .
 Each side has matched the other’s reductions in weapons, governed by a series of formal, verifiable treaties . The United States and Russia have agreed to reduce their weapons arsenals .
 In 2010, the United States and Russian presidents signed a new nuclear arms control treaty . The U.S. and Russia signed an agreement to reduce nuclear weapons production .
 Over seven years it will cut strategic nuclear warheads by almost onethird . From 2,200 to 1,550 for each side, the U.S. will cut nuclear warheads .
 Each side agrees to extensive monitoring to ensure that the other side is living up to its bargain . Each side also agrees to monitor each other's performance .
 The former superpowers have used step-by-step measures to limit their stockpiles of nuclear weapons . Using the reciprocity principle, each side matched the other, to limit and then greatly reduce their stockpile . The reciprocity process has been used in the past to limit nuclear weapons stockp
 U.S. and Russian presidents sign thick arms control treaty, 2010 . The United States and Russia signed the treaty in 2010 .
 It could also build more nuclear missiles so that even if some were destroyed in a first strike, some would survive . Some would survive with which to retaliate . The U.S. could build more nukes to protect itself from an Indian strike .
 Weapons that can take a first strike and still strike back give a state second-strike capabilities . Weapons can take first strike, strike back, give state second strike capabilities, experts say .
 Possession of second-strike capabilities by both sides is called mutually assured destruction . Neither side can prevent the other from destroying it, says the U.S. president .
 The term implies that the strategy, though reflecting “rationality,” is actually insane because deviations from rationality could destroy both sides . “Ruthless’s” strategy is “insane” because deviation from rationality is ‘dangerous’
 If India could not assuredly destroy Pakistan’s missile, it would undoubtedly deploy its own nuclear missile to deter Pakistan from using its missile .
 In theory, India could launch a nonnuclear attack on Pakistan, knowing that rational Pakistani leaders would rather lose such a war than use their nuclear weapons and bring on an Indian response .
 Defense has played little role in nuclear strategy because no effective defense against missile attack has been devised . Defense has been played a part in the development of nuclear weapons, experts say .
 The United States is spending billions of dollars a year to try to develop missile defenses . The U.S. is developing missile defenses that could shoot down incoming missiles .
 It originated in President Ronald Reagan’s 1983 call for a comprehensive shield that would make nuclear missiles obsolete . The shield was created in the wake of the Reagan administration's 1983 proposal .
 After the Cold War, the focus shifted again, to protecting U.S. territory from a very limited missile attack (at most a few missiles)
 Japan is spending $1 billion a year to build a U.S.-designed missile defense system . The system was tested successfully in late 2007 . Japan tested the system in 2007 .
 As of 2010, the U.S. is deploying a multilayer system with 24 ground-based interceptor missiles in Alaska and California . The Cold War led to strategies and arms control agreements that helped develop norms .
 India and Pakistan have followed a similar arms race, leading to mutual deterrence . Pakistan and India have followed an arms race in the past .
 Recently, defense against missiles has begun to enter the strategic calculus . Defense against missiles is becoming a key part of the strategic strategy .
 Israel's new Iron Dome system shoots down short-range missiles from Gaza in 2012 .
 In 2012, Israel used a new ‘Iron Dome’ defense system to shoot down short-range missiles fired by Hamas in large numbers . Israel used the Iron Dome system in 2012 to protect Israel from Hamas missiles fired from Hamas .
 A true strategic defense would also have to stop cruise missiles, airplanes, and more innovative delivery systems . In addition to the technical challenges of stopping incoming ballistic missile warheads, such as distinguishing warheads from decoys .
 If a rogue state or terrorist group struck the U.S. with a nuclear weapon, it would probably not use an ICBM to do so .
 During the Cold War, the superpowers’ nuclear forces grew and technologies developed . The Cold War was a time when superpowers were at odds with each other .
 The evolving force structures were codified by a series of arms control agreements . Those agreements were made under the terms of an arms control agreement .
 Arms control is broader than just nuclear weapons . In the Cold War nuclear weapons were the main focus of arms control . After World War I great powers negotiated limits on sizes of navies .
 Arms control agreements typically require long, formal negotiations with many technical discussions, culminating in a treaty . Arms control treaties are often followed by lengthy negotiations to reach an agreement .
 The 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty prevented either side from using a ballistic missile defense as a shield from which to launch a first strike . The 1972 treaty was signed by the U.S. and South Korea .
 The United States withdrew from the ABM Treaty with six months’ notice in 2002 . However, to allow full-scale testing of missile-defense technologies, the U.S. pulled out of the treaty in 2001 .
 The Strategic Arms Limitation Treaties in the 1970s put formal ceilings on the growth of both sides’ strategic weapons . The treaties were put into place by the U.S. in the 1980s . They were put formal limits on both sides' strategic weapons growth .
 Arms control agreements regulated the substantial reduction of nuclear forces after the end of the Cold War . More recent arms control agreements regulate the substantial reductions in nuclear forces .
 The U.S. arsenal peaked in the 1960s at more than 30,000 warheads; the Soviet arsenal in the 1980s peaked in more than 40,000 . The United States and the Soviet Union have the highest arsenals in history .
 2002 treaty called for further reductions to 2,200 each by 2012, but relies on START mechanisms for verification . SORT treaty calls for further reduction of 2,000 by 2012 . 2002 treaty also called for a further reduction in the number of countries involved .
 In March 2010, the sides signed a treaty that will lower the number of warheads to 1,550 . The treaty will also create additional verification mechanisms for both sides .
 The reciprocity principle that helped fuel the arms race also enables its step-by-step reversal . It is the principle that helps reverse the reverse of the arms war .
 China, France, and Britain each have several hundred weapons . China’s weapons are mostly on submarine-launched missiles . France and Britain's weapons are on submarines and long-range bombers .
 Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty to halt all nuclear test explosions was signed in 1996 after decades of stalemate . Treaty was reached in 1996 following a stalemate between nuclear testing and nuclear testing .
 U.S. B-52 bombers are being chopped up, under the eye of Russian satellites, to bring force levels down . of nuclear weapons .
 The treaty does not take effect until signed and ratified by all 44 states believed to be capable of building at least a crude nuclear weapon .
 India did not sign the CTBT and defied it in 1998 with five nuclear tests . India defied it with a series of nuclear tests in 1998 . The CTBT is a non-procedure agreement between India and Russia .
 All the weapons of mass destruction are relatively difficult and expensive to build, yet provide only specialized capabilities that are rarely if ever actually used . The weapons are expensive and difficult to build and rarely used .
 Most states that could technically acquire them have decided not to do so . This is why most states have decided to keep them from acquiring them .
 Such cost-benefit thinking also applies more broadly to states’ decisions about the acquisition of all kinds of military forces, says the author .
 This question confronts all states but they answer it differently, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's a question: What do you do? What do we do?"
 People once believed in the United States that “war is good for the economy” because, seemingly, military spending had helped end the Great Depression in the late 1930s . People once thought in the U.S. that ‘war’s good for economy’
 If this were true, state leaders would not face difficult choices in setting military budgets . State leaders would be faced with difficult choices if they were forced to make difficult decisions about military spending .
 Allocating resources for military purposes deprives the rest of the economy and reduces its long-term growth . Unfortunately for state leaders, allocating economic resources deprives them of the rest, and reduces growth .
 Both the longand short-term effects of military spending are magnified by actual warfare . The long-term effect on military spending will be magnified when actual warfare occurs .
 Serbian ultranationalists made fortunes off the plunder of Bosnians whom they “ethnically cleansed” Congolese militia leaders enriched themselves with minerals exported during the civil war .
 Another potential economic benefit of war is to stir up a population’s patriotism so that it will work harder for less pay . War could stir up patriotism so it will force people to work for less, he says .
 Overall, the economic costs of war usually far surpass any benefits . But overall, war costs of wars usually far exceed any benefits, experts say .
 States vary widely in military spending, from Costa Rica to North Korea . North Korea devotes 20 percent or more of GDP to military purposes . Costa Rica has virtually no military spending .
 If military budgets are too low, states may be unprepared to meet a security threat . In the worst case, they may even be overrun and conquered militarily . If budget is too low state may be unable to meet security threats .
 If leaders set military budgets too high, they will overburden and stifle the economy . But if leaders set . high military budgets . too high they will stifle and over-burden the national economy, he says .
 World military spending is about 2. percent of the total goods and services in the world economy . About $1. trillion every year, or roughly $1 million every 20 seconds, is spent on the military .
 Most is spent by a few big states, nearly half by the United States alone . Nearly half of the money is spent in the U.S. alone .
 World military spending is a vast flow of money that could, if redirected to other purposes, change the world profoundly and improve major world problems . Of course, ‘the world’ does not spend this money or choose how to direct it .
 In recent decades, about half of these arms imports have been in the Middle East . Recently, India and China have taken a growing share .
 The great majority of international arms exports come from the United States . Russia, France, and Britain also rank highly in the world's largest arms exports .
 In the immediate post-Cold War era, global arms sales fell, but have since climbed back to near Cold War levels . Global arms sales are now at near-cold War levels in the wake of the Cold War era .
 Activists have called attention to the sales of small arms, especially assault rifles, to unstable conflict zones where irregular armies commit brutalities . Activists say small arms sales should be banned in unstable regions .
 The United States, by far the largest exporter of small arms, blocked proposals to restrict sales of military weapons to rebel movements and civilians . The U.S. is the world's largest arms exporter, with more than 1,000 small arms exports .
 In the fall of 2009, the UN General Assembly voted nearly unanimously to begin work on an Arms Trade Treaty . The treaty is expected to be signed by the end of the year .
 The treaty passed the General Assembly in 2013 with only Iran, North Korea, and Syria voting no . The treaty was passed by the U.N. in 2013 .
 The Effect of Arms Transfers in War Outbreak, Involvement, and Outcomes, is published on the basis of a study by the U.S. National Institute for Human Rights Studies .
 During the Cold War, about half of all military spending in the United States budget was directed toward the East-West conflict in Europe . Half of all U.S. military spending during Cold War was directed to Europe .
 "Now other missions such as intervention in regional conflicts and counterinsurgency are more important," says the U.S. president .
 One state leader cannot take for granted the ability of a state leader to make military forces take desired actions . State leaders should not be taken for granted that they can control military forces .
 At best, military forces are large and complex institutions, operating in especially difficult conditions during wartime . At best military forces operate in difficult conditions, especially during war .
 Sometimes, the state leader appears to exert only incomplete control over the military . Sometimes, it appears to be only partial control of the state .
 States control military forces through a chain of command running from the highest authority through a hierarchy spreading out to the lowest-level soldiers . States control their military through a chains of command .
 The highest authority, or commander in chief, is usually the top political leader . Commander in chief is the highest authority in the world .
 The importance of this military hierarchy is illustrated by a story from ancient China in which a king was thinking of hiring Sun Tzu as an advisor . A king in ancient China was considering a king's decision to hire the legendary advisor .
 Sun Tzu divided them into two units, commanded by the king’s two favorites . The king's two favorites were the king's favorites . Sun tzu divided the two units into two .
 Sun Tzu then had the two “officers’ executed on the spot and put the next most senior concubines in their places . The two "officers" were executed and put in their place by the next highest concubine .
 Military hierarchy and discipline make armed forces function as instruments of state power . Thus, military hierarchy makes armed forces operate at the price of brutality and loss of individual freedom .
 In actual battle conditions, controlling armed forces is especially difficult because of complex operations, rapid change, and the fog of war created by the gap between battlefield activity and command level information .
 They are called on to perform actions that may run against basic instincts as well as moral norms, killing people and risking death . "They are called to perform ... killing people, risking death," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "It is difficult to coordinate forces effectively in order to carry out overall plans of action," says President Obama . "I'm not going to be able to get around the world," says Obama .
 Insubordination, mutiny, or deserting are serious offenses punishable by prison or death . Insuborderination, Mutiny, is serious offense punishable by death .
 Discipline depends not only on punishment but also on patriotism and professionalism, soldiers say . But discipline depends on professionalism and professionalism on the part of soldiers, they say .
 Officers play to nationalist sentiments, reminding soldiers that they fight for their nation . Through a chain of command, states control the actions of millions of individual soldiers .
 Soldiers in Mali stage a coup that unwittingly sparked an Islamist takeover of half the country . The coup sparked a French military intervention that led to the French intervention .
 Combat, logistics, communication, and command all depend on individual performance; motivation matters . motivation matters in the military, and motivation matters.
 Loyal loyalty to the immediate group (along with a survival instinct) is a stronger motivator than loyalty to a group .
 Recent debates about participation of women in the U.S. armed forces revolve around whether their presence disrupts group solidarity . Women in the United States armed forces are required to serve in the military .
 Officers and political leaders need accurate intelligence to make good decisions . Finally, they need accurate information to make a decision, say experts .
 Of course, even the most advanced intelligence systems cannot stop human error, says CNN.com.com .
 In late 2001, United States special forces were traveling with Hamid Karzai, believed to be the only person who could lead a united, U.S.-allied Afghan government . Karzai was believed at the time to be a leader who could unite a united Afghan government.
 A U.S. soldier called in airstrikes on an enemy position, his GPS unit defaulted to its own position . The battery in the GPS unit needed changing, and the unit’s coordinates defaulted .
 A United States warplane dropped a bomb right on that target, killing three U.S. soldiers and five Afghan allies . Karzai was nearly killed by the bomb, nearly killing himself himself .
 State leaders sometimes must confront challenges from within their own military ranks as well . Civil-Military Relations: State leaders must overcome chaos and complexity in order to overcome challenges .
 This is the idea that civilian leaders are at the top of the chain of command . Civilian leaders are often seen as the most powerful leaders in the military .
 Civilians, not military officers, decide when and where the military fights . Civilians decide where and where military fights, not the military .
 The officers, by contrast, are supposed to control how the military fights . The officers' role is supposed to be a key part of the military .
 This division of labor between civilians and militaries inevitably leads to tensions . The division of work between civilian and military creates tensions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Civil-military relations are an important factor in how states use force, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The interaction of civilian with military leaders is important for states, he says . Civil-Military relations are important for state security, he adds .
 Military leaders may undermine the authority of civilian leaders in carrying out foreign policies . They may even threaten civilian supremacy if certain actions are taken in international conflicts .
 Military officers also want autonomy of decision once force is committed, in order to avoid the problems created in the Vietnam War when President Johnson sat in the White House situation room daily picking targets for bombing raids .
 NATO’s 1999 bombing of Serbia had to be approved by politicians in multiple countries . Specific targets had to have been approved by multiple countries, including Serbia, in the bombing .
 In 2010, the commanding American general in Afghanistan lost his job after publicly questioning President Obama’s Afghanistan policies . The commanding general in the country's war with the U.S. in Afghanistan was fired in 2010 .
 Differences between civilian and military leaders can lead to tensions . Even outside of the context of ongoing warfare, tensions can be seen in the military .
 Opinion surveys show that military officers maintain different opinions than civilians on issues such as the use of force as a tool of leverage . In the United States, opinion surveys consistently show that . Military officers maintain .
 In Turkey, tensions have grown between the Islamic government and its military . The country's government and the military have been at odds with the government .
 Historically, Turkey’s military has intervened numerous times to take control from elected leaders . Military officers felt the government was threatening the secular nature of Turkey .
 Recently, however, the civilian government has been aggressive at arresting officers who they believe were plotting a coup . Recently, the government has arrested officers who it believes were plotting to take over .
 In the 2011 Arab Spring, the Egyptian military refused to fire on protesters, whereas Syrian forces did use lethal fire . In Syria, the military used lethal fire against protesters .
 If tensions become too sharp between civilian leadership and their military forces, a coup d’etat can result . A coup d'etat could result if tensions between civilian leaders and military forces get too sharp .
 A coup is the seizure of political power by domestic military forces . A change of power outside the state’s constitutional order is a coup, says Julian Zelizer .
 If most or all of the military go along with the coup, civilian leaders are generally helpless to stop it . The coup is often a military coup, but civilian leaders can't stop it if most or most go along .
 If most of the military officers follow the chain of command, the coup is doomed . But if most of them follow the existing chain of . command, it is doomed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In the late 1980s, the top general, Fidel Ramos, remained loyal to the civilian president, Corazon Aquino, in seven coup attempts by subordinate officers . In the Philippines in the late 80s, he remained loyal in seven attempts by subordinates .
 In each case, the bulk of the Philippine military forces stayed loyal to Ramos, and the coups failed . Ramos' military forces were loyal to him .
 International pressures, such as sanctions, may also convince military leaders to step down . International pressure may also be mounting on military leaders in Syria .
 In late 2009, military leaders took power in Honduras after deposing its president .
 The international community, including the Organization of American States, pressured Honduras after the 2009 coup . Honduras was overthrown by a coup in 2009 .
 Elections were held in the fall of 2009, restoring a democratic government . Hondurans remain divided over the legitimacy of the new government .
 If a coup is successful, military forces themselves control the government . The coup is likely to take place in a coup .
 Military governments tend to be the most common in poor countries, where the military may be the only large modern institution in the country . These military governments are often common in poorer countries .
 The disciplined central command of military forces makes them effective as tools of state influence . Ironically, it also lets the state lose control of them to military officers . The state loses control of the military forces to officers, the state says .
 Soldiers are trained to follow the orders of their commanding officers, not to think about politics . Soldiers should follow orders of orders, not think of politics, not thinking about politics, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Several thousand such operations were mounted during the Cold War, when the CIA and its Soviet counterpart, the KGB, waged an ongoing secret war .
 CIA covert operations in the 1950s overthrew unfriendly foreign governments by organizing coups against them . CIA operations in Iran and Guatemala overthrew foreign governments in the 1960s .
 CIA covert activities were sharply scaled back after congressional hearings in the 1970s revealed scandals . CIA covert operations were sharply reduced in the wake of the Watergate scandal . CIA operations were scaled back in the 1960s after a series of scandals .
 After September 2001, the executive branch enjoyed greater authority in conducting covert operations with less congressional scrutiny . After 9/11, the White House was able to conduct covert operations without congressional approval .
 States face complex choices regarding the configuration of their military forces in the post-Cold War era . Overall, states face complex . choices .
 Not only have the immediate contingencies and threats changed drastically, but the nature of threats in the new era is unclear . The nature of the threats in this era is still unclear, officials say .
 World order itself is evolving even as military technologies do . The world order is evolving, and military technology is evolving rapidly .
 Next chapter discusses the evolving structures and norms governing international political relations . The next chapter discusses how they are changing the nature of world order .
 Conventional warfare requires different kinds of forces than those needed to threaten the use of nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons . The U.S. has not been able to use nuclear weapons in conventional warfare .
 The role of satellites is expanding in communications, navigation, and reconnaissance . Satellites are increasingly important in communications and navigation, navigation .
 The attacks prompted dramatic changes in U.S. and worldwide security arrangements . The attacks forced dramatic changes to the United States . They sparked United States military intervention .
 No state has ever attacked another with weapons of mass destruction mounted on ballistic missiles . But no state has attacked another in the world with such a weapon .
 Weapons deployments are guided by nuclear strategy based on the concept of deterrence . The U.S. has deployed nuclear weapons to protect itself and its allies .
 Arms control helped build confidence between the superpowers during the Cold War . Arms control was key to building confidence in the U.S.-led world of arms control .
 Military spending tends to stimulate economic growth in the short term but reduce growth over the long term . Military spending is thought to be a stimulant of economic growth but reduces it in the long-term .
 Iran is believed to have obtained three tactical nuclear warheads from the former Soviet arsenal . The warheads are believed to be in unknown locations in Iran .
 Imagine a world in which most of the states, rather than just a few, had nuclear weapons and long-range ballistic missiles . The U.S. is one of the most powerful states in the world, with nuclear weapons .
 Most of the great powers are reconfiguring their military forces in the post-Cold War era . Most of them are reconfigured to post-cold war era .
 For over a decade, North Korea has defied the international community and proceeded with its nuclear program . North Korea's nuclear program has been a source of tension with the U.S.
 Several times, North Korea has agreed to give up its nuclear program, only to renege on that promise . North Korea's nuclear program has been repeatedly reneged on its promise .
 North Korea clearly possesses the knowledge, resources, and ability to produce nuclear weapons . North Korea has the knowledge and resources to produce nukes, CNN's Tom Charity says .
 In 2007, North Korea agreed to halt its nuclear program in exchange for international aid . North Korea has been criticized for its actions in the past .
 North Korea restarted its nuclear program when the U.S. delayed removing North Korea from its list of terror-supporting states . It then destroyed part of its nuclear processing facilities, but restarted it when the United States delayed removing it from a list .
 North Korea was removed from the list in the fall of 2008 . It promised to allow inspectors to verify the stopping of its program . North Korea promised to let inspectors inspect its nuclear program .
 North Korea refused to formalize the agreement in writing when it came to formalizing it . North Korea has refused to sign the agreement, which was signed by North Korea .
 In 2010, North Korea sank a South Korean warship and shelled an island, killing four people . The incident greatly increased tensions between the two countries . Then, in 2010, the North Korea sunk a South Korea warship, killing 4 people .
 Some have suggested ending negotiations with North Korea over its nuclear program . North Korea has a long history of failed agreements and tense negotiations .
 Others point to the potential danger posed by a North Korean nuclear program . Others urge continuation of talks .
 The United States Should Continue to Pursue North Korean Talks, says U.S. allies favor negotiations . United States allies favor talks with North Korea, but North Korea is divided on the issue .
 South Korea and Japan want negotiations to continue with North Korea . They are concerned that North Korea not be rewarded for its bad behavior .
 Any conflict with North Korea would be exceedingly costly to one or both of them, says CNN's John Sutter . The U.S. allies would prefer a diplomatic solution to this problem, he says .
 North Korea's economy is crumbling, and it can no longer count on Russia or China for assistance . North Korea is no longer relying on Russia and China for help .
 North Korea uses its nuclear weapons development program as leverage to get U.S., Japanese, and South Korean aid . To preserve its bargaining position, North Korea has a nuclear weapons program .
 In exchange for an attractive aid package, North Korea may well give up its program . North Korea's program may well be in exchange for a package of attractive aid packages .
 The most likely scenario for North Korea to use their nuclear arsenal would be when they feel backed into a corner . North Korea's most likely use of nuclear weapons would be a time when they felt backed into corner, experts say .
 Walking away from negotiations to leave them in isolation would accomplish exactly that goal . The U.S. government has been in talks with Iran for more than a decade .
 They could lash out militarily at South Korea or Japan, two important U.S. allies . South Korea and Japan are two important United States allies .
 The United States should give up its quest for a North Korean deal . North Korea has never kept its promises. The U.S. should not try to win back control of the Korean peninsula .
 North Korea has not only refused to honor many of the commitments but also cheated on them to continue its nuclear weapons program . After its rejection of the NPT in the 1990s, North Korea rejected many of its NPT commitments .
 Even if an agreement were reached, there would be no guarantee North Korea would not cheat . North Korea has a history of cheating in the past .
 North Korean leaders do not care about the welfare of citizens and care even less about international reputation . North Korea's leaders care less about its international reputation than its welfare of its own citizens .
 North Korea could extract even more aid if it had a more successful nuclear program . North Korea may rely on international aid to stay afloat .
 As long as the current regime is in power, nothing will change in North Korea, says Kim Jong-won . North Korea is a state of war with the North Korean regime .
 Without fuel and food aid from the U.S. or nearby countries, the regime may collapse more quickly . The regime may also collapse if it doesn't receive fuel aid from other countries .
 U.S. unilateral steps could include more sanctions, war, or massive financial aid to pay North Korea for giving up its nuclear arsenal . Those unilateral steps may include war, sanctions, or financial aid .
 Most international conflicts are not settled by military force . Watch the video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction" at MyPoliSciLab .
 Despite the anarchic nature of the international system based on state sovereignty, the security dilemma does not usually lead to a breakdown in basic cooperation among states . Despite the anarchy of the system, the situation is not usually a problem .
 The day-to-day cooperative activities of international actors often are less newsworthy than their conflicts . Unfortunately, the day to-day cooperation activities often are not newsworthy, writes CNN.com .
 States work together by following rules they develop to govern their interactions . States follow rules they developed to govern interactions with each other .
 Over time, the rules become more firmly established and institutions grow up around them . The rules of the rules are becoming more established around the world .
 States then develop the habit of working through those institutions and within the rules . States then have to work within those institutions, states say, and within those rules .
 International norms are the expectations actors hold about normal international relations . The international norms are what actors expect to see when they meet international norms . International norms mean that international relations are normalised .
 The invasion of Kuwait by Iraq not only was illegal, but was widely viewed as immoral . It was beyond the acceptable range of behavior of states . The invasion was illegal and immoral .
 Political leaders in the U.S. and around the world drew on moral norms to generate support for a collective response to Iraq . The U.N. and the world's moral norms were used to draw support for the response to the Iraq crisis .
 Some norms, such as sovereignty and respect for treaties, are widely held . They shape expectations about state behavior and set standards that make deviations stand out .
 Constructivist scholars in IR emphasize the importance of these global norms and standards . Constructivist scholar argues that IR should be able to build on global norms of behavior .
 The attempt to define international norms follows a centuries-long philosophical tradition . It follows a long tradition of defining international norms .
 Philosophers such as Kant argued that it was natural for autonomous individuals to cooperate for mutual benefit . They could see that pursuing their narrow individual interests would end up hurting all .
 Kant's proposed world federation would respect each member’s autonomy, not create a world government over them . States could work together through structures and organizations that respect each other's autonomy, such as the world federation . The world federation is based on Kant's proposal .
 In the 19th century, such ideas were embodied in practical organizations in which states participated to manage specific issues such as postal service and control of traffic on European rivers .
 State leaders become used to behaving in a normal way and stop calculating, for each action, whether violating norms would pay off . State leaders stop calculating whether breaking norms will pay off after each action is rewarded .
 At the turn of the 19th century, U.S. war planners had active war plans for the possibility of a major naval conflict between the United States and Great Britain .
 Legitimacy and habit explain why international norms can be effective even when they are not codified and enforced . Legiticities and habit of international norms are key to international norms being effective, says David Frum .
 The power of international norms and standards of morality, however, may vary when different states or regions hold different expectations of what is normal . Different states or world regions may hold different standards of what's normal .
 To the U.S. it was a moral imperative to remove Saddam Hussein from power . To the United States, it was . The United States has a moral obligation to remove him from power, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 In cases of diverging norms, morality can be a factor for misunderstanding and conflict, rather than a force of stability . morality is a force for misunderstanding, conflict rather than stability, says Dr. Andrew Keen .
 Realists point out that many of the accepted norms were shaped by the powerful states in the system . These same powerful states are often responsible for their interpretation of these norms .
 Constructivist scholars point out that even if international norms are violated, states (even the United States) go to tremendous lengths to justify behaviors that violate the norms, they say . Yet constructivist scholars say even if norms are broken, the U.S. goes to great lengths .
 This suggests that strong norms do exist and are recognized by even the most powerful states, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Shared norms and habits may not suffice to solve international dilemmas and achieve mutual cooperation . Institutions play a key role in solving international issues such as climate change, experts say .
 "They are concrete, tangible structures with specific functions and missions," says President Obama . They are concrete and tangible structures that have specific functions, he says .
 These institutions have proliferated rapidly in recent decades, and continue to play an increasing role in international affairs . These institutions are proliferating rapidly, with many of the world's most important institutions .
 International organizations include intergovernmental organizations such as the UN, and nongovernmental organizations . Intergovernmental organizations include the UN and the International Committee of the Red Cross . International organizations are often involved in the conflict .
 Liberals point out that, contrary to realists or constructivists, it is the codification of international norms in institutions that gives norms their power . Liberals say norms are codified in international institutions .
 As discussed in Chapter 3, these institutions create incentives to reciprocate behavior encouraged by a norm . They also constrain the behavior of powerful states through rules that govern behavior .
 Liberals point to the large number of international institutions as evidence of their power and importance . Liberals say they are proud of the growing number of institutions in the world .
 International norms are evolving in such areas as humanitarian intervention and human rights . This weaving together of people across national boundaries through specialized groups reflects interdependence / NOT NORM .
 One of their areas of concern is the use of child soldiers, like this ten-year-old Libyan rebel .
 Another concern, the protection of civilians from slaughter, inspired NATO intervention in the Libya conflict . The Libyan conflict was triggered by the deaths of civilians .
 The Correlates of War 2 International Government . Organizations Data Version 2.0.0 . The data is based on World War 2 data from governments and organizations .
 Some are general in their purposes; others have specific functional purposes . Some are more functional than others are general . Some of the world's most famous photographs are taken in museums .
 IGOs hold together because they promote the national interests of their member states, not because of vague ideals . "IGOs" hold together in order to promote national interests, not vague ideals, says D.C. diplomat .
 Among regional IGOs, the European Union encompasses some of the most important organizations . The European Union is not the only example of regional organizations .
 Other important regional IGOs are the Association of South East Asian Nations, the Southern Cone Common Market, and the African Union .
 The functional roles of IOs are important to their overall effect on international relations, but those roles are taken up in Chapter 10 on international integration .
 This is a theoretical discussion of international institutions begun in Chapter 3 . Here we will rely on the more general theoretical discussion in Chapter 4 .
 Global IGOs usually have functional purposes involving coordinating actions of some set of states around the world . Global IGs are usually used to coordinate international actions of states .
 The IGO called Intelsat is a consortium of governments and private businesses that operates communications satellites . IGO is a group of governments, businesses that operate satellites .
 Members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries meet periodically in Vienna to set production quotas for members in an effort to keep world oil prices high and stable .
 The key members of IGOs are states, NGOs, businesses, or individuals can have important advisory and consulting roles . Note that although the key . members of the . key members . are states .
 The International Political Science Association is a forum for political scientists from around the world . Political scientists from other countries can join the association to meet each other .
 The International Air Transport Association coordinates the work of airline companies . The ITATA is the world's largest air transport network .
 Amnesty International for human rights and Planned Parenthood for reproductive rights and family planning . Other NGOs have global political purposes .
 Still others have cultural purposes, such as the International Olympic Committee, to use .
 A web of international organizations now connects people in all countries . The rapid growth of this network, and the increasingly intense communications and interactions that occur within it, indicate rising international interdependence .
 These organizations provide the institutional mesh to hold together some kind of world order, even when leaders and contexts come and go . These organizations in turn provide the . institutional mesh . Even when leaders come and leave, norms are undermined by sudden changes in power relations .
 At the center of that web of connection stands the most important international organization today, the United Nations . The U.N. is one of the world's most important organizations .
 The UN and other international organizations have both strengths and weaknesses in the anarchic international system . Watch the video ""UN Aid in Somalia"" at MyPoliSciLab .
 No central world government performs the function of coordinating the actions of states for mutual benefit . State sovereignty creates a real need for such organizations on a practical level, says David Cameron .
 State sovereignty also severely limits the power of the UN and other IOs . Governments reserve power to themselves and are stingy in delegating it to the UN or anyone else . State sovereignty is also severely limited by state sovereignty .
 The UN is a relatively new institution, just over 60 years old . The UN System is based in New York City and Washington, DC .
 UN has a prominent role in international security affairs since the end of the Cold War . The UN has played a key role in the world's most prominent security affairs . UN has been involved in the Middle East since the 1980s .
 The UN is the closest thing to a world government that has ever existed, but it is not a global government . The UN's purpose is to protect the people of the world from harm .
 Its members are sovereign states that have not empowered the UN to enforce its will within states’ territories except with the consent of those countries’ governments . The UN has not been able to enforce the UN's will in its territories .
 The UN's design acknowledges the realities of international anarchy and the unwillingness of states to surrender their sovereignty . Thus, although the UN strengthens world order, its design acknowledges that states are not willing to surrender sovereignty .
 The UN is to provide a global institutional structure through which states can sometimes settle conflicts with less reliance on the use of force . Within these limits, the basic purpose of the UN was to provide an institutional structure .
 The Charter lays out the structure of the UN and the methods by which it operates . It also lays out how the UN operates .
 The UN does not exist because it has power to force its will on the world’s states, it exists because states have created it to serve their needs . The UN was created to serve the needs of states, not to force their will, it was created by states .
 A state’s membership in the UN is essentially a form of indirect leverage . The UN is a powerful tool to influence foreign policy in the Middle East .
 It is also a forum where states promote their views and bring disputes to the international community .
 It is a mechanism for conflict resolution in international security affairs . And it is a way to resolve international conflicts, it is also a way for international peace .
 The UN promotes and coordinates development assistance and other programs of economic and social development in the global South . The UN also promotes and directs development assistance to the South .
 These programs reflect the belief that economic and social problems are an important source of international conflict and war . Poverty is a key factor in international conflict, says President Obama .
 UN is a coordinating system for information and planning by hundreds of internal and external agencies and programs . The UN is also coordinating systems for the publication of international data .
 Despite its heavy tasks, the UN is still a small and fragile institution . Despite its huge task, it is still an important part of the world's most powerful body .
 Every year, the world spends almost $2 trillion on the military, and about $2 billion on the UN regular budget . The UN is the largest body in the world, spending about $3 billion a year .
 The whole budget of UN operations, peacekeeping, programs, and agencies combined is less than 3 percent of world military spending . UN operations and peacekeeping programs combined are less than three percent of the world's military budget .
 Each U.S. citizen pays more than $2,000 a year for United States military spending but only about $15 for UN dues, assessments, and voluntary contributions to UN programs and agencies combined .
 The UN deals with the issues that are perhaps the most difficult in the world . The UN has a special mission to tackle the world's most difficult issues . It is the first time the UN has dealt with such a major problem .
 If groups of states could easily solve problems such as ethnic conflicts, human rights, refugees, and world hunger themselves, they most likely would have done so . If groups could solve problems like ethnic conflicts and refugees, they would most likely have done .
 States turn many of these difficult problems over to the UN and hope it can take care of them . Instead, states turn them over to them and hope they will be able to solve them .
 The United Nations has very limited powers and resources . The world places great hopes in the UN when national governments cannot solve problems . The General Assembly coordinates a variety of development programs and other autonomous agencies .
 The UN has been involved in the peace process in Western Sahara for many years . The peace process itself has been stuck for years in the region . The UN says it is working with the UN to try and improve the situation .
 Parallel to the General Assembly is the UN Security Council . Five great powers and ten rotating member states make decisions about international peace and security .
 They have diplomatic status in the United States, which as host country also assumes certain other obligations to facilitate the UN’s functioning . The U.S. is the host country of the UN's mission .
 A major strength of the UN structure is the universality of its membership, the UN says . The UN has been criticized for its membership in the past for being too small .
 Virtually every territory in the world is either UN member or formally a province or colony of a UN member . Virtually all of the world's territory is either a province, colony or province of a member of the UN .
 The Charter commits all states to a set of basic rules governing their relations . Formal agreement on the Charter, even if sometimes breached, commits states to basic rules .
 The old League of Nations, by contrast, was flawed by the absence of several important actors . The old league of Nations was flawed because of the lack of important actors, says David Cameron .
 One way the UN induced all the great powers to join was to reassure them that their participation in the UN would not harm their national interests . One way to get them to join the UN was to .
 UN Charter gave five great powers each a veto over substantive decisions of the Security Council . UN Charter recognized the role of power in world order, the UN Charter .
 The UN Charter establishes a mechanism for collective security, the banding together of the world’s states to stop an aggressor . The UN charter establishes a . mechanism for . collective security —the banded together of . world's states to . stop an . aggressor. The
 Chapter 7 of the Charter explicitly authorizes the Security Council to use military force against aggression if the nonviolent means called for in Chapter 6 have failed . Chapter 7 authorizes use of force if a nonviolent means call for nonviolent means fail .
 The 2011 authorization of a no-fly zone in Libya, for instance, was taken under Chapter 7 . Chapter 7 was taken into account of the 2011 authorization .
 The UN cannot effectively stop aggression by a great power, says the UN . However, because of the great power veto, the UN can't effectively prevent aggression . The UN has a veto of vetoing any action by any great power .
 As often happens with the dominance principle, this structure creates resentments by smaller powers . The dominance principle is often created by the dominance of the world's most powerful .
 The UN was founded in 1945 in San Francisco by 51 states . 51 states were involved in the founding of the UN .
 It was successor to the League of Nations, which failed to effectively counter aggression in the 1930s . It was the successor to a failed attempt to counter aggression .
 The UN was founded to increase international order and the rule of law to prevent another world war . Like the League, the UN aims to increase the rule and order of law .
 A certain tension has long existed between the UN and the United States as the world’s most powerful state . The UN and U.S. have been at odds for years .
 The UN in some ways constrains the United States by creating the one coalition that can rival U.S. power . The UN has created a coalition of all the states, which can rival United States power, the author says .
 A certain isolationist streak in U.S. foreign policy runs counter to the UN concept, says U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton .
 The UN amplifies United States power when the U.S. leads the global UN coalition . The United States leads a global coalition of nations .
 As a great trading nation, the United States benefits from the stability and order that the UN helps create . The U.S. benefits from UN's stability, order that it helps create, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In the 1950s and 1960s, the UN’s membership more than doubled as colonies in Asia and Africa won independence . In the 1960s and 1970s, membership of the UN increased as colonies won independence.
 This expansion changed the character of the General Assembly, which each state has one vote regardless of size . The expansion of the Assembly changed the way the state legislature is now .
 The new members had different concerns from those of the Western industrialized countries . Many of the new members resented having been colonized by Westerners .
 During the UN’s first two decades, the General Assembly had regularly sided with the United States . The Soviet Union was the main power to use its veto in the Security Council to counterbalance that tendency .
 By the 1970s and 1980s, the United States had become the main user of the veto . But as newly independent states began to predominate, the U.S. found itself in the minority on many issues .
 The exclusion of communist China was an exception to the UN principle of universal membership . In 1971, the Chinese seat was taken from the nationalists and given to the communist government .
 Throughout the Cold War, the UN had few successes in international security because the U.S.-Soviet conflict prevented consensus . The UN had little success in international peace talks because of the conflict, UN says .
 The UN appeared somewhat irrelevant in a world order structured by two opposing alliance blocs . The UN was seen as an important part of the world order, but appeared to be irrelevant in the world .
 The UN did not play a central role in solving international conflicts . A few notable exceptions exist, such as defending South Korea during the Korean War .
 States in the global South also used the UN as a forum to criticize rich countries in general and the United States in particular . The United States has been accused of using the UN to criticize the rich countries .
 By the 1980s, the U.S. government withheld United States dues to the UN (eventually more than $1 billion) The United States eventually paid up only years later after UN reforms .
 After the Cold War, the great powers could finally agree on measures regarding international security . After the 1980s, the world's greatest powers finally agreed on measures .
 In this context, the UN moved to center stage in international security affairs . The UN has become a key figure in the fight against terrorism .
 The UN had several major successes in ending violent regional conflicts in the late 1980s . Peacekeepers were introduced to monitor cease-fires in the 1980s, introducing peacekeepers .
 In Namibia, a UN force oversaw independence from South Africa and the nation’s first free elections . Namibia is now home to the first independent Namibia since independence from apartheid .
 By the 1990s, the UN had emerged as the world’s most important tool for settling international conflicts . The UN was a key part of the U.S. effort to settle international conflicts in the world .
 Between 1987 and 1993, Security Council resolutions increased from 15 to 78 . Peacekeeping missions increased from 5 to 17, peacekeepers from 12,000 to 78,000 . Nations sending troops from 26 to 76 troops were increased from 26 .
 Inadequate funding and management problems undermined peacekeeping efforts in Angola, Somalia, and Cambodia . The U.N. ended peacekeeping operations in Angola and Somalia in 2007 .
 The UN scaled back peacekeeping operations in 1995-1997 and carried out reductions and reforms in the UN Secretariat and UN programs . In response to these problems, the UN scaled down peacekeepers operations .
 For years the United States failed to pay its bills, even though a new secretary-general shrank budgets and jobs as the U.S. demanded . The United States had demanded that U.N. Secretary-General's budget and jobs shrank .
 After criticism from allies, the United States agreed to pay up, but under renegotiated terms for the future . The U.S. has been criticized by allies for not paying up to the U.K.
 Security Council split on whether to authorize force against Iraq . United States and Britain in favor; France, Russia, and China against . U.S. insisted on Iraqi disarmament .
 When France threatened to veto a UN resolution authorizing war, a U.S.-British coalition toppled the Iraqi government without explicit UN backing . The coalition toppled Iraq in Iraq in 2003 without explicitly UN backing.
 The UN sent a team to Iraq to help with reconstruction, but suicide truck bombers destroyed it . The chief of the mission and dozens of others were killed in the attack .
 UN withdrew its staff from Iraq in 2003 and found itself largely sidelined in the world's most prominent international conflict .
 Documents show UN, French, Chinese, and Russian officials illegally profited from UN’s $64 billion oil-for-food program for Iraq . The program was supposed to ease civilian suffering caused by economic sanctions in the 1990s .
 In 2005, an independent investigation cleared Annan of personal wrongdoing, but found the program corrupt . The investigation heavily criticized the UN for mismanagement and poor oversight of the program .
 Currently, the UN follows a principle of ‘three pillars’—security, economic development, and human rights . Security, economic . development, human rights are considered mutually necessary for any of them to succeed, says the UN .
 At the end of 2006, the outgoing and incoming secretaries-general both referred to this principle . The outgoing secretary-general and incoming secretary general both refer to the principle .
 In a postwar conflict situation, the three reinforce each other, says CNN's John Sutter . "In a post-conflict situation, especially in the post-war conflict situation," Sutter says .
 The UN is in some ways just beginning to work as it was originally intended to, through a concert of great powers and universal recognition of the Charter . The UN was founded in 1961 and is now the world's most powerful organisation .
 The UN's modest size and resources became seriously overburdened after the Cold War . However, as states turned increasingly to the UN, it became more difficult to control missions and funding .
 Today, the UN is more important than ever, yet still in danger of failing . The UN is still important, but still in a state of crisis in the world, writes David Cameron .
 In the coming few years the UN must continue to grapple with the challenges of its evolving role in a unipolar world, the limitations of its budget, and the continuing strength of state sovereignty .
 Since 1945, the Council has passed more than 2,000 resolutions, with new ones added every week . New ones added to the Council each week .
 These resolutions represent the great powers’ blueprints for resolving the world’s various security disputes, especially in regional conflicts . These resolutions are important for the world's security disputes .
 The five permanent members of the Council are the most important . The United States, Britain, France, Russia, China, Russia and China are the five .
 Kosovo declared independence from Serbia in 2008 after the Security Council failed to decide whether the Serbian province of Kosovo should be independent . Kosovars unilaterally declared their independence in 2008 . Kosovo is a former Serbian province that was part of the Kosovo region .
 Angry Serbians reject Kosovo’s declaration and blame the Western powers for encouraging it . Angry Serbians blame the West for encouraging the declaration of Kosovo .
 In 2010, the World Court held Kosovo’s declaration to be legal, but its substantive status remains bitterly disputed . Kosovo declared Kosovo in 2010, but the substantive status of its declaration remains bitterly contested .
 Security Council resolutions require 9 votes from among the 15 members of the U.N. Security Council . Security Council resolution requires 9 votes, nine votes from each member .
 A “no” vote by any permanent member defeats the resolution . A ‘no’ vote by a permanent member of the Senate defeats the veto power . The veto power can be used to veto a resolution .
 Many resolutions have been vetoed by the permanent members of the Senate . Many more have never been proposed because they would have faced certain vetoes .
 Since the mid-1990s the use of the veto has dropped abruptly, to just 27 vetoes . The United States has vetoes of just 13 vetoes, 13 by the U.S. and 7 each by Russia and China .
 The Council's ten nonpermanent members rotate onto the Council for two-year terms . The Council’s 10 nonpermanently members rotate on to the Council .
 Nonpermanent members are elected by the General Assembly from a list prepared by informal regional caucuses . Nonpersmanent members of the United States' House of Representatives are elected from nonpermanent member lists .
 Usually there is a mix of regions and country sizes, though not by any strict formula . Usually there are no strict formula for how many countries are in the country .
 Often, countries lobby vigorously for a seat on the Council, producing books, advertisements and memos to gain votes from other members of the regional caucuses .
 In 2006, Venezuela campaigned for the upcoming Latin American seat on the Council, seeking a platform to lead a growing, virulently anti-American coalition . Venezuela is seeking to lead an anti-U.S. coalition, seeking to be a platform for a growing anti-America coalition
 The United States president called the U.S. president “the devil” in a speech to the United Nations . The U.N. president said the room still smelled of sulfur from his speech the previous day . Its president, in his speech, called the room smelled of
 In the General Assembly, neither country could achieve the required two-thirds majority for election to the Council . Neither country was able to achieve enough votes to win the election .
 Panama finally gave the seat to Panama as a compromise . After voting 47 times, the Assembly voted 47 times to give Panama the seat . Panama is the only country to have a seat in Panama .
 In 2008, Iran campaigned for a seat, but gained only a handful of votes . Turkey was voted onto the Council for the first time in more than 45 years . Iran was voted into a seat in 2008, but only gained a few votes .
 The system of nomination by regional caucuses has worked to keep the regional balance on the Council fairly constant as individual states come and go .
 Major regional actors tend to rotate onto the Council more often than do less important states . The Council is based on the power of regional actors .
 Members can abstain on resolutions, an option that some permanent members use to register misgivings about a resolution without vetoing . Members can also use the option of abstaining on resolutions .
 China regularly abstains when its own security is not directly affected . U.S. has abstained several times to register a middle position on resolutions critical of Israel .
 The Security Council meets irregularly upon request of a UN member . Often a state with a grievance regarding another state’s actions, the Security Council met irregularly .
 International Security Council meets with members of the U.N. Security Council . Security Council meetings are frequent because international security continues to be troublesome .
 The Security Council’s power is limited in two major ways, both reflect the strength of state sovereignty in the international system . The Council's power is also limited in the way it reflects the strength in the world's international system, the author says .
 The ambassadors who represent those states cannot change a Council resolution without authorization from their governments . The ambassadors of those states can only change the resolution if they are authorized by their governments.
 Security Council resolutions in theory bind all UN members, but member states often try to evade or soften their effect . Second, although Security Council resolution in theory binds all members of the U.N. Security Council, member states in practice often try and soften effect .
 A Security Council resolution can be enforced only if enough powerful states care about it . A resolution can only be enforced in practice if enough power states care enough to enforce it . The resolution was adopted by the U.N. Security Council in 2007 .
 Military forces responding to aggression under the auspices of Security Council resolutions remain under national command . Military forces respond to aggression in response to the U.S. under the Security Council resolution .
 Neither U.S. forces in the Gulf War nor Somalia in late 1992 to restore humanitarian relief efforts disrupted by civil war .
 As global trading powers, Japan and Germany have huge stakes in the ground rules for international security affairs . Germany and Japan want seats at the table for talks on Syria .
 Japan and Germany as permanent Security Council members would not be easy to include . Germany and Japan are both members of the U.N. Security Council .
 If Germany joined, three of the seven permanent members would be European, giving that region unfair weight . Germany would be one of the only permanent members of the European Union .
 The three European seats could be combined into one but this would water down the power of Britain and France . France and Britain can veto any such change in the Charter of Europe .
 Possible new permanent members could include Germany, Japan, India, Brazil, Egypt, and either Nigeria or South Africa .
 Any overhaul of the Security Council would require a change in the UN Charter . A change in membership would reduce the power of the current five permanent members, any of which could veto the East Timor .
 The Security Council's resolutions shape the way disputes are seen and ultimately how they are resolved . Even when the Security Council cannot agree on means of enforcement, its resolutions shape how disputes are dealt with .
 Collective security rests with the UN Security Council, which has authorized such military interventions as the Gulf War and the 2001 campaign in Afghanistan . Security Council has authorized military interventions such as the 9/11 Gulf War .
 Military actions not approved by the Council tend to be controversial . The 1999 bombing of Serbia and 2003 U.S.-British invasion of Iraq have been controversial .
 Serbia's president objects to Kosovo's claim of independence from Serbia, 2008 . Kosovo's president has been critical of the Kosovo-Serbija's claim to be independent from Serbia since 2008 .
 Russia and China backed Serbia while the United States, Britain, and France recognized Kosovo . The Council did not take action because of the split on the issue . The U.S. and Britain did not recognize Kosovo .
 Problemia could be Kurdish Iraq in 1991 or Darfur, Sudan, in 2007 . Divergent Interests on the UN Security Council could be a problem .
 In late 2004, an expert panel appointed by Annan recommended expanding the Security Council to 24 members . The panel recommended either of two formulas, neither changing veto powers . Neither of the two formulas would change veto power .
 These proposals were debated in 2005 but no agreement was reached and the issue was put on hold . No agreement has been reached on the proposals since 2005 .
 Peacekeeping Forces are not mentioned in the UN Charter . Peacekeeping forces are not listed in the Charter .
 Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold in the 1960s joked that they were allowed under “Chapter Six and a Half” somewhere between the nonviolent dispute resolution called for in Chapter 6 of the Charter and the authorization of force provided for in . Chapter 7 .
 In practice, when the UN has authorized force to reverse aggression, the forces involved have been national forces not under UN command . In the Gulf War in 1990, the troops involved were not UN command, but were national forces .
 The UN’s own forces have been peacekeeping forces to calm regional conflicts . They have played a neutral role between warring forces . The UN's own forces are often used to calm conflicts in the region .
 The secretary-general assembles a peacekeeping force for each mission, usually from a few states totally uninvolved in the conflict, and puts it under a single commander . The force is usually under the command of a single command .
 Peacekeeping forces serve at the invitation of a host government and must leave if that government orders them out . Peacekeepers must leave at the request of the host government if they are ordered to leave .
 Authority for peacekeeping forces is granted by the Security Council . It's usually for a period of three to six months that may be renewed . Some peacekeepers have been granted for decades .
 In one early case, the General Assembly authorized the forces under the “Uniting for Peace” resolution . The resolution allows the UN to take up security matters when the Security Council is deadlocked . The Suez crisis in 1956 was the first time the U.N. Security
 Security Council firmly controls peacekeeping operations, says UN . UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Uwewe says peacekeeping is a key part of the UN system . The UN has been involved in more than 100 per cent of the world's most dangerous missions .
 Funds must be voted on by the General Assembly, and lack of funds is today the single greatest constraint on the use of peacekeeping forces . Funds must also be voted by the UN General Assembly .
 Special assessments against member states pay for peacekeeping operations . Special assessments pay for member state pay for operations .
 With the expansion of peacekeeping since 1988, the expenses of these forces are several times larger than the regular UN budget . Peacekeeping forces have expanded several times since 1988 . UN peacekeepers have been expanding since then .
 In the Congo mission, 20,000 peacekeepers monitored a ceasefire and protected civilians after a civil war . In Congo, the mission was called Operation Congo, which ended in 2007 .
 UN peacekeepers proved weak in 2012 when a rebel movement in the unstable east of the country went on the attack, displacing civilians . In 2012, these peacekeepers failed to protect civilians from the rebel movement .
 A decade after the main war ended, such recurrent attacks proved vexing for UN forces . UN forces still have a long way to go in Afghanistan .
 The secretary-general has called for thousands of additional troops for Democratic Congo . Security Council approved an intervention brigade prepared for combat with rebels in eastern Congo in 2013 .
 In 2007, the Security Council approved a nearly 20,000-troop peacekeeping force for the Darfur region in Sudan . The force was approved after several years of resistance from the Sudanese government .
 UN troops join an already-deployed (but small) African Union contingent . The UN troops joined an already deployed (but a small) contingent of African Union troops .
 It took several more years for all of the authorized troops to arrive, owing to numerous objections from Sudan . Attacks on civilians continued despite the presence of troops .
 Fighting between government and rebel forces drove 25,000 civilians out of one refugee camp in 2012 . In 2012, fighting between rebels and government forces drove the number of people out of the camp .
 The Darfur mission is in addition to 7,000 UN troops enforcing a cease-fire between Sudan and newly independent South Sudan . The mission is also focused on the disputed town of Abyei .
 The largest recent missions reflect the resurgence of UN peacekeeping after a shakeout in the mid-1990s . UN peacekeepers have been involved in more than 100 missions since then .
 In the 1990s, the UN had several spectacular failures in peacekeeping, in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Angola, and Somalia, among others . The UN had a disastrous peacekeeping failure in the past decade .
 In Cambodia, 15,000 peacekeepers worked with a large force of UN administrators . They largely took over the Cambodian government after a long and devastating civil war .
 The UN held elections in 1993 and helped stabilize Cambodia's politics . Despite many difficulties, the UN elections were held in 1993 . The UN helped stabilize Cambodian politics .
 The lessons learned in Cambodia helped the UN accomplish a similar mission in Mozambique . The UN says the lessons learned from Cambodia helped them achieve a similar success .
 A peace agreement ended a long and devastating civil war there, setting up mechanisms for disarmament, integration of military forces, and the holding of internationally supervised elections for a new government .
 Missions in El Salvador and Namibia were early successes for post-Cold War UN peacekeeping . Missions in Namibia and El Salvador were also early successes .
 These experiences helped the UN respond more effectively after civil wars in Sierra Leone, Ivory Coast, and Liberia in 2002-2003 .
 In 2005 the UN created a Peacebuilding Commission to coordinate reconstruction, institution building, and economic recovery efforts after peacekeeping missions end . The UN created the commission in 2005 .
 With the UN watching, the parties to a conflict are often less likely to break a cease-fire . The UN is often more likely to watch a conflict in Syria than any other country .
 Observers can monitor various aspects of a country’s situation—ceasefires, elections, respect for human rights, and other areas . The country's situation can be monitored by observers .
 UN peacekeepers often try to negotiate with military officers on both sides of the border . UN peacekeeper often tries to negotiate between the two sides .
 This channel of communication can bring about tactical actions and understandings that support a cease-fire, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 UN forces in a war zone cannot easily get from one side’s positions to those of the other to conduct negotiations . UN forces cannot easily easily get to one side's positions to one another's .
 Peacekeeping is much more difficult if one side sees the UN forces as being biased toward the other side . Peacekeeping will be difficult for one side to see UN forces biased toward other side, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Israel feels this way about UN forces in southern Lebanon, for example . Israel also feels about the presence of UN troops in the region .
 Israeli forces have broken through UN lines to attack enemies, according to reports . Israeli forces allegedly have targeted UN outposts on occasion .
 In Cambodia and the former Yugoslavia in the early 1990s, one party deliberately attacked UN forces many times, causing a number of deaths . UN forces were attacked by a party deliberately attacking UN forces in both countries .
 In general, when cease-fires break down, UN troops get caught in the middle . UN troops are often caught up in the conflict in Syria .
 Many countries contribute their national military forces to UN peacekeeping missions . Many nations contribute their country's military to the UN's peacekeeping operations .
 Some states feel that by contributing to a common good, they are advancing the interest of peace, while simultaneously projecting the image of a strong military power . Some states have said they are contributing to peace, but not military .
 Peacekeeping forces are paid by UN contributions . Alternatively, some states find contributing to these missions financially beneficial .
 In a few countries such as Nepal and Sierra Leone, sending military forces out of the country for peacekeeping is useful for domestic political stability after a civil war . In some cases, it is useful to domestic stability after civil war.
 In some conflicts, peacekeepers organized outside the UN framework have been used instead of UN-commanded forces . Peacekeepers are often used in some conflicts in the Middle East .
 3,500 French peacekeepers, not under UN command, serve in Ivory Coast . 11,000 UN peacekeepers monitor a 2003 cease-fire between Ivory Coast and the rest of the world .
 When government airstrikes killed nine French soldiers in 2004, the French forces retaliated robustly, destroying the government’s air force . The French forces destroyed the government's air force in 2004 .
 In 2011, after the incumbent president lost an election but refused to leave, UN and French troops helped the winner dislodge him by force . The winner of the 2011 election was forced to leave by force after losing the election .
 Peacekeepers have generally been unable to make peace, only to keep it . Peacekeeping forces have generally made peace, but have not been able to keep peace .
 To go into a shooting war and suppress hostilities requires military forces far beyond those of past UN peacekeeping missions . To suppress hostilities would require military forces more than those of previous UN missions .
 Peacekeepers are usually not sent until a cease-fire has been arranged, has taken effect, and has held up for some time . Peacekeepers usually don't send troops until the peace deal has been agreed and taken effect .
 Wars may simmer along for years, taking a terrible toll, before the UN gets its chance . Wars may take years to simmer along, but the UN has its chance to intervene .
 The secretary-general in 1992 proposed the creation of UN peace-making units that would monitor a cease-fire . Lindley, Dan. Lindley: The units would not only monitor a ceasefire, but also monitor a peace process .
 The secretary-general called for member states to make available, on a rapid deployment basis, 1,000 soldiers each—specially trained volunteers—to create a standby UN army that could respond quickly .
 Member states refuse the request for soldiers . They shot down the idea of peacemaking altogether .
 Since then, the UN has authorized member states to provide real military forces, not peacekeepers, when fighting may be required . The UN has now authorized members of the world's armed forces to provide military forces when necessary .
 Pakistani peacekeepers killed 50 militia fighters in 2005 after nine peacekeepers from Bangladesh were killed in an ambush . In 2005, Pakistani peacekeeping forces from Bangladesh killed nine of their troops .
 In the late 1990s, seven countries formed a 4,000-troop UN Standby High Readiness Brigade . Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Poland, the Netherlands, Austria, and Canada formed the brigade .
 The brigade is available to deploy to conflict areas in two to four weeks rather than months . Headquartered in Denmark, the brigade is controlled by the Security Council . The brigade has been deployed to conflict zones in less than four weeks .
 In early 2005, the brigade deployed to Sudan to support a peace agreement between northern and southern regions after a long civil war . The brigade was deployed in early 2005 to support an agreement between the north and south .
 The secretary-general of the UN is the closest thing to a “president of the world” that exists . The Secretariat is responsible for the UN’s most important mission .
 But the secretary-general represents member states, not the world’s 7 billion people . Secretary-general's position is important to the world, not just the world's 7 billion .
 Where the great powers do not have consensus, it is hard for the secretary-general to make anything happen, he says . "It's hard for [the world's] great powers to have consensus," he adds .
 The secretary-general is nominated by the Security Council—requiring the consent of all five permanent members . The Security Council must approve the nomination of the Secretary-General .
 Past secretaries-general have come from various regions of the world, but never from a great power . Past secretary-general has not been from a major power, but from Asia .
 His predecessor, Kofi Annan, served ten years and helped reinvigorate the UN, winning the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts .
 The UN secretary-general has a lofty mission but limited power and resources . The UN has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 Ban Ki-moon learned some dance moves from fellow South Korean PSY in 2012 . He faces daunting tasks, serving multiple bosses with a tight budget .
 It is a bureaucracy for administering UN policy and programs, just as the State Department is for U.S. foreign policy . It is also a bureaucracy that administers UN policy, just like the State Dept. State Department .
 In security matters, the secretary-general personally works with the Security Council . Development programs in poor countries are coordinated by a second-in-command, the director for Development and International Economic Co-operation .
 The Secretariat is divided into functional areas, with undersecretaries-general and assistant secretaries-general . The Secretaries-General is the most powerful body in the world .
 UN staff in these areas includes administrative personnel and technical experts . Technical experts and economic advisors working on various programs and projects .
 The staff numbers about 15,000 people, and the total number of employees in the UN system (including the World Bank and IMF) is 80,000 . The UN system has about 80,500 staff members .
 One purpose of the UN Secretariat is to develop an international civil service of diplomats and bureaucrats whose loyalties lie at the global level, not with their states of origin . The UN Secretary of State should be able to lead a global civil service, he says .
 The UN has been fairly successful in this regard . The secretary-general is most often seen as an independent diplomat thinking about the whole world’s interests .
 In the early 1990s the UN bureaucracy came under increasing criticism for inefficiency and corruption . The UN bureaucracy was criticized for both inefficiency or corruption .
 The U.S. saw itself as bearing an unfair share of the costs, leading to a reform program . These criticisms, coming especially from the United States, led to reform .
 By the late 1990s, UN staff was reduced by one-quarter compared to a decade earlier, and budgets were scaled back year by year . UN staff in the U.N. has been reduced by a quarter since the 1990s .
 Since then, the situation has improved, but money remains extremely tight . Money is still extremely tight in the United States .
 He (it's not yet been a she) is a visible public figure whose personal attention to a regional conflict can move it toward resolution . He is not yet a she, but he is an important figure in the region .
 The Charter allows the secretary-general to use the UN’s ‘good offices’ to serve as a neutral mediator in international conflicts . UN's "good offices" are used to bring hostile parties together in negotiations .
 The secretary-general also works to bring together the great power consensus on which Security Council action depends . Security Council is the body of the United Nations .
 The secretary-general has the power under the Charter to bring to the Security Council any matter that might threaten international peace and security . He has a major role in setting the agenda in international security affairs .
 The secretary-general experiences tensions with the Security Council . Still, he says, he experiences tensions .
 If the secretary-general asks for $10 million, he might get $5 million . The secretary of general's salary is $1 million . He might get more than $1.5 million if he asks for a $10million .
 The secretary-general remains, like the entire UN system, constrained by state sovereignty . The UN system is constrained by the power of state sovereignty, he says .
 It usually meets every year, from late September through January, for plenary session . The United Nations usually meets in late September to January .
 State leaders or foreign ministers come through one by one to address this assemblage . State leaders, including the U.S. president, come through the assemblance .
 This global town hall is a unique institution and provides a powerful medium for states to put forward their ideas and arguments . This global event is a global forum for nations to debate ideas and ideas . It is also a powerful platform for states in the world to debate their ideas .
 Presiding over it is a president elected by the Assembly—a post without much power . Presiding it is the President of the Assembly, elected by a majority of the assembly .
 The Assembly convenes for special sessions every few years on general topics such as economic cooperation . The assembly convenes in special sessions on special topics such a few years .
 The Assembly has met in emergency session in the past to deal with an immediate threat to international peace and security . But this has now become uncommon and haphas have become uncommon .
 In 1971, the delegation of the People's Republic of China was given China’s seat in the UN (including on the Security Council) in place of the nationalists in Taiwan . For instance, in 1971, in . 1971, . the delegation . of the . People’
 North Korea and South Korea finally took seats as separate delegations in 1991 . For decades, neither North Korea nor South Korea became members of the UN .
 The General Assembly’s main power lies in its control of finances for UN programs and operations, including peacekeeping . The U.N. is the only body to control the finances of UN programs or operations .
 It also can pass resolutions on various matters, but these are purely advisory and at times have served largely to vent frustrations of the majority of poor countries . The U.N. Security Council can also pass resolutions .
 Assembly coordinates UN programs and agencies through its own committees, commissions, councils, and so forth . UN has its own system of committees and commissions to coordinate its programs .
 The Economic and Social Council has 54 member states elected by the General Assembly for three-year terms . The Assembly coordinates UN programs and agencies through the Economic and social Council .
 ECOSOC manages the overlapping work of a large number of programs and agencies . ECOSOP is responsible for the work of many of the world's most powerful agencies .
 The universal membership of the United Nations is one of its strengths . Its regional commissions look at how UN programs work together in a particular region . Its functional commissions deal with global topics such as population growth, narcotics trafficking, human rights and the status of women .
 All member states have a voice and a vote in the General Assembly, where state leaders rotate through each autumn . The General Assembly is held in each member state of the EU .
 Palestine hopes to join the UN as soon as the Security Council allows it . President of Palestine addressed the UN Assembly in 2011 .
 Outside ECOSOC, the General Assembly operates many other specialized committees . The General Assembly has a wide range of committees .
 Standing committees ease the work of the Assembly in issue areas such as decolonization, legal matters, and disarmament . Standing committees include committees on issues such as legal matters and decolonizing .
 Many of the activities associated with the UN do not take place under tight control of either the General Assembly or the Security Council . The UN does not have tight control over many of its activities .
 UN agencies and programs have autonomy from UN control . They occur in functional agencies, programs that have various amounts of autonomy from the UN .
 Through the Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly oversees more than a dozen major programs to advance economic development and social stability in poor states of the global South . UN programs aim to advance social stability and economic development in the South .
 The programs are funded partly by General Assembly allocations and partly by contributions that the programs raise directly from member states, businesses, or private charitable contributors .
 The degree of General Assembly funding, and of operational autonomy from the Assembly, varies from one program to another .
 Each UN program has a staff, a headquarters, and various operations in the field, where it works with host governments in member states . UN programs have a staff of staff, headquarters, headquarters and operations .
 The U.N. provides technical assistance to member states, monitors environmental conditions globally, develops standards, and recommends alternative energy sources . It monitors global environmental conditions and develops standards .
 UNICEF is the UN Children’s Fund, which gives technical and financial assistance to poor countries for programs benefiting children .
 UNICEF is keeping busy with the needs of children in many countries . Unfortunately, the needs for children are still urgent, and the needs are urgent .
 UNICEF has for decades organized U.S. children in an annual Halloween fund drive on behalf of their counterparts in poorer countries . Financed by voluntary contributions, the fund drive is funded through voluntary contributions .
 UNHCR coordinates efforts to protect, assist, and eventually repatriate the many refugees who flee across international borders each year to escape war and political violence . UNHCR is responsible for protecting, assisting, and repatriating refugees .
 The UN Development Program coordinates all UN efforts related to development in poor countries . It is funded by voluntary contributions to voluntary contributions .
 UNDP is the world’s largest international agency for technical development assistance . With about 5,000 projects operating simultaneously around the world, UNDP operates simultaneously . UNDP provides technical assistance to the world's most vulnerable people .
 UN also runs several developmentrelated agencies for training and for promoting women’s role in development . The UN also ran several development related agencies .
 Many poor countries depend on export revenues to finance economic development, making them vulnerable to fluctuations in commodity prices and other international trade problems . Poor countries depend heavily on export revenue to finance development .
 UN Conference on Trade and Development negotiates international trade agreements to stabilize commodity prices and promote development . UN conference on trade and development negotiates global trade agreements .
 These programs play a crucial role in the international assistance after disasters and wars . These programs are crucial to international assistance following disasters .
 In 2006, the UN created a new Human Rights Council, replacing a Human Rights Commission notorious for including human rights abusers as members . The new council has expanded powers and more selective membership .
 UN programs manage problems such as disaster relief, food aid, housing, and population issues . Other UN programs run by the UN include disaster relief and food aid .
 Throughout poorer countries, the UN maintains an active presence in economic and social affairs . The UN maintains a strong presence in poorer countries .
 UN General Assembly maintains formal ties with about 20 autonomous international agencies not under its control . The UN has its own programs, including programs for children in developing countries .
 States pool efforts to address problems such as health care and labor conditions . Most are specialized technical organizations through which states pool efforts .
 The only agency in international security affairs is the International Atomic Energy Agency . The only such agency is based in Vienna, Austria .
 The IAEA was responsible for inspections in Iraq in 2002-2003, which found no evidence of a secret nuclear weapons program . The inspections were conducted in Iraq, which were completed in 2003 .
 It is involved in monitoring Iran’s nuclear program to the extent Iran allows . The U.N. has been monitoring Iran's nuclear program since 2009 .
 Geneva-based World Health Organization provides technical assistance to improve conditions and conduct major immunization campaigns in poor countries . In the area of health care, the WHO provides technical help improving conditions .
 WHO led one of the great public health victories of all time . WHO led the eradication of smallpox in the 1960s and 1970s . Smallpox eradication was a major public health victory .
 In agriculture, the Food and Agriculture Organization is the lead agency . The agency is responsible for food and agriculture .
 UNESCO —the UN Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization —facilitates international communication and scientific collaboration . UNESCO is the world's largest body of non-governmental organizations .
 The UN Industrial Development Organization promotes industrialization in the global South . The UN is promoting industrialization across the globe .
 IOs are specialized agencies dealing with technical aspects of international coordination such as aviation and postal exchange . The longest-established IOs, with some of the most successful records, are .
 International Telecommunications Union allocates radio frequencies . For instance, the ITC allocates frequencies .
 The International Civil Aviation Organization sets binding standards for international air traffic . The ICAO sets standards for air traffic in the world .
 The International Maritime Organization facilitates international cooperation on shipping at sea . International cooperation is a key part of maritime cooperation .
 The World Meteorological Organization oversees a world weather watch and promotes the exchange of weather information . The Organization also promotes the Exchange of Weather information .
 The density of connections across national borders, both in the UN system and through other IOs, is increasing year by year . Overall, connections between national borders are increasing year on the rise, says the UN .
 People are also becoming connected across international borders through the meshing of ideas, including norms and rules . In a less tangible way, people are becoming connected through meshing ideas, such as norms .
 International Law Watch the Video Global Governance and the ICC"" at MyPoliSciLab . International law, unlike national laws, derives not from actions of a legislative branch or other central authority, but from tradition and agreements signed by states .
 The difficulty of enforcement depends not on the power and authority of central government, but on reciprocity, collective action, and international norms, it says . It also differs in the difficulty of enforcing the law, which depends on cooperation and cooperation, not power .
 Laws within states come from central authorities—legislatures or dictators . Sources of International Law include international law and international law .
 Because states are sovereign and recognize no central authority, international law rests on a different basis . International law is based on the sovereignty of sovereign states, not central authority . States are sovereign, recognizing no central authorities .
 The declarations of the UN General Assembly are not laws, and most do not bind the members . The declarations are not law-making, but they are not binding .
 No body of international law has been passed by a national legislative body . International law has not been passed in any form of law .
 Treaties and other written conventions signed by states are the most important source of information . Treaties are often used to refer to treaties and conventions .
 States violate the terms of treaties they have signed only if the matter is very important or the penalties for such a violation seem very small . U.S. can only violate such a treaty only if it's very important, or the penalty is very small.
 In the United States, treaties duly ratified by the Senate are considered the highest law of the land . The treaties are equal with acts passed by Congress . In the U.S. treaties are considered to be the highest-law of the country .
 Treaties are binding on successor governments whether the new government takes power through an election, coup, or a revolution . Treaties and other international obligations such as debts can be binding .
 After the revolutions in Eastern Europe around 1990, newly democratic governments were held responsible for debts incurred by their communist predecessors . For example, after the revolution in 1990, new governments were responsible for debt incurred by previous governments .
 Even when the Soviet Union broke up, Russia as the successor state had to guarantee that Soviet debts would be paid and Soviet treaties honored . Even when it was broken up, the Russian government had to promise to guarantee Soviet debts were paid .
 Although revolution does not free a state from its obligations, some treaties have built-in escape clauses . Some treaties, such as the U.N. treaty, are built-up to a state's obligations .
 The United States invoked the six-month opt-out provision of the ABM treaty in 2001 . For example, the U.S. in 2001 invoked the 6-month option provision .
 The UN Charter is one of the world’s most important treaties . Because of the universal commitment by all states to respect certain basic principles of international law, the UN Charter has been described as the most important treaty .
 Its implications are broad and far-reaching, unlike more specific treaties such as fishery management agreements . The treaty's implications are far more broad than those of more specific treaty agreements .
 The specialized agreements are usually easier to interpret and more enforceable than broad treaties such as the Charter . However, they are usually more difficult to interpret .
 1949 Geneva Conventions (expanding an 1864 convention) defining the laws of war regarding the protection of civilians and prisoners, among related issues . Another key treaty in international law is the 1949 Geneva Convention . The 1949 Convention was expanded to include more than 100,000 people .
 If states behave toward each other in a certain way for long enough, their behavior may become generally accepted practice with the status of law . States behave in a similar way to each other for a long time .
 Western international law tends to be positivist in this regard . It draws on actual customs, the practical realities of self-interest, and the need for consent rather than on an abstract concept of divine law .
 Actions such as theft and assault recognized in most national legal systems as crimes tend to have the same meaning in an international context . Actions such a theft or assault are recognized as crimes in most countries .
 Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait was illegal under treaties signed by Iraq and under the custom Iraq and Kuwait had established of living in peace as sovereign states . The invasion of Iraq was illegal, but under the law the two countries had agreed to live in peace .
 The invasion violated international law because of the general principle that one state may not overrun its neighbor’s territory and annex it by force . Beyond treaty or custom, the invasion violates international law . It violates the principle that a nation may not invade its neighbor's territory .
 Only the writings of the most highly qualified and respected legal figures can be taken into account . Only then only to resolve points not resolved by the first three sources of international law . The world's most qualified legal figures should be taken to account .
 Often international law lags behind changes in norms; law is quite tradition-bound . International law is a matter of law, but it's not always changing . The U.S. has a long history of international law .
 Certain activities such as espionage are technically illegal but are so widely condoned that they cannot be said to violate international norms . Spy activities are so widespread that they can't be considered a violation of international norms.
 Other activities are still legal but have come to be frowned upon and seen as abnormal . Other activities, such as smoking, are still seen as 'normal'
 China’s shooting of student demonstrators in 1989 violated international norms, but not international law . For example, China's shooting of students in 1989 violation of international norms but not law . The shooting of protesters in China's Tian Tianjin massacre violated China's international norms .
 International law differs from national law to national law . The two types of law are used to enforce international sources of international law . International sources of law distinguish it from national laws .
 Enforcement of international law depends on the power of states themselves, individually or collectively, to punish transgressors . States must use their own power to punish those who break international law, the UN says .
 States follow international law most of the time because they want other states to do so, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 The reason neither side in World War II used chemical weapons was not that anyone could enforce the treaty banning use of such weapons . Neither side in WWII used such weapons in spite of treaty banning them .
 A state that breaks international law may face a collective response by a group of states, such as the imposition of sanctions . The sanctions could be imposed as punishment for the violation of international law .
 A sanctioned state can become a pariah in the community of nations, cut off from normal relations with others . Over time, a sanctioned state may become a virtual pariah . The U.S. has been sanctioned by the European Union since 2003 .
 This is very costly in today’s world, in which economic well-being everywhere depends on trade and economic exchange in world markets . This is a very costly mistake in today's world, which is dependent on trade, trade and exchange .
 Libya suffered for decades from its isolated status in the international community . Libya decided in 2003 to make a clean break and regain normal status in 2003 .
 Libya admitted responsibility for past terrorism, began to compensate victims . Libya agreed to disclose and dismantle its nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons programs . Libya also began to pay compensation for victims .
 Even the world’s superpower constrains its behavior, at least some of the time, to adhere to international law . Even the U.S. has its behavior constrained by international law, it says .
 In late 2002 a North Korean freighter was caught en route to Yemen with a hidden load of 15 Scud missiles .
 The United States, fighting the war on terrorism, had an evident national interest in preventing proliferation . The U.S. had the power to prevent such proliferation, and had the national interest to prevent it .
 The U.S. backed off and let the delivery of the shipment continue . The shipment did not violate international law, according to the United States government .
 International law enforcement through reciprocity and collective response has one great weakness, it depends entirely on national power, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Reciprocity works only if the aggrieved state has the power to inflict costs on the violator, says the judge . The judge ruled that the state had the right to impose costs on violators .
 Collective response works only if the collective cares enough about an issue to respond . Collective response can only work if it cares enough to respond to an issue . The collective must care enough to care enough about a problem to respond, it says .
 Without common expectations regarding the rules of the game and adherence to those rules most of the time by most actors, power alone would create great instability in the world .
 International law creates expectations about what constitutes legal behavior by states . International law, even without perfect enforcement, creates expectations of what is legal behavior .
 It's easier to identify and punish states that deviate from accepted rules, officials say . Because violations or divergences from those expectations stand out, it's harder to identify them .
 When states agree to the rules by signing treaties, violations become more visible and clearly illegitimate . Violations are often more visible when states sign treaties, such as the UN .
 International law establishes workable rules for those states to follow . In most cases, power continues to reside in states, but international law establishes rules for them .
 The resulting stability is so beneficial that usually the costs of breaking the rules outweigh the short-term benefits that could be gained from such violations, the author says . "The resulting stability of the system is so important that usually, usually, the costs outweigh the benefits," he says .
 A general world legal framework in which states can pursue grievances against each other has begun to take shape . As international law has developed, the World Court has become a legal framework .
 The rudiments of such a system now exist in the World Court (formally called the International Court of Justice), although its jurisdiction is limited and its caseload is light .
 Only states, not individuals or businesses, can sue or be sued in the World Court . The World Court is the only court in the world that has jurisdiction to sue .
 When a state has a grievance against another, it can take the case to the World Court for an impartial hearing . The case can be heard by an impartial judge in a hearing for impartiality .
 The 2010 Court ruling declaring Kosovo’s declaration of independence legal was an advisory opinion requested by the General Assembly . For example, the 2010 Court decision declaring Kosovo's independence legal .
 World Court is a panel of 15 judges elected for nine-year terms by a majority of both the Security Council and General Assembly . The World Court judges are elected by majority of either the Security council or the UN .
 It is customary for permanent members of the Security Council to have one of their nationals as a judge at all times .
 Ad hoc judges may be added to the 15 if a party to a case does not already have one of its nationals as a judge . The number of ad hoc judges will be added if the case is not already having a case involving a party .
 The great weakness of the World Court is that states have not agreed in a comprehensive way to subject themselves to its jurisdiction or obey its decisions . The World Court will not be able to impose itself on the jurisdiction of the world court, it says .
 Almost all states have signed the treaty creating the Court, but only about a third have signed an optional clause agreeing to give the Court jurisdiction in certain cases . Many of those signatories have added their own stipulations reserving their rights and limiting the degree to which the Court can infringe
 Colombia withdrew in 2012 after the Court awarded disputed territorial waters to Nicaragua . Colombia withdrew from the case in 2012 .
 Iran refused to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the Court when sued by the U.S. in 1979 over its seizure of the United States embassy in Iran . Similarly, Iran did not acknowledge the Court's jurisdiction in the case of the embassy seizure in 1979 .
 In such a case, the Court may hear the case anyway and usually rules in favor of the participating side . But it has no means to enforce the ruling . The Supreme Court has no way to enforce it .
 In 2007, the Court issued a ruling against Bosnia’s case accusing Serbia of genocide, after 14 years of preliminary maneuvering . The Court also ruled against Bosnia's case against Serbia in 2007 .
 In 1992, the World Court settled a complex border dispute between El Salvador and Honduras dating from 1861 . The World Court was one of its most notable successes in settling a dispute between the two countries .
 In 2002, the World Court settled a long-standing and sometimes violent dispute over an oil-rich peninsula on the Cameroon-Nigeria border . The peninsula is on the border between Cameroon and Nigeria .
 Nigeria pulled troops out of Cameroon in 2006 . It gave ownership to Cameroon, which is more powerful, to Cameroon .
 A main use of the World Court now is to arbitrate issues of secondary importance between countries with friendly relations overall . The World Court is now only used to deal with issues of minor importance between friendly countries .
 The U.S. has settled commercial disputes with Canada and with Italy through the Court .
 Security interests are not at stake, and because the overall friendly relations are more important than the particular issue, states have been willing to submit to the Court’s jurisdiction . The case is expected to last for more than a year .
 The World Court hears international disputes but with little power to enforce judgments . In 2004, the court ordered the U.S. to review death sentences of Mexican nationals to see if they are eligible for execution .
 Judges rule in favor of Mexico's complaint that the U.S. death penalty against Mexican citizens violated a 1963 treaty . The judges ruled in 2004 that the United States death penalty violated a treaty .
 Argentina and Uruguay signed a treaty in 1975 governing the river on their border . World Court Case of Argentina Uruguay was a World Court case of Argentina .
 The United States had often failed to do so despite demanding this right for Americans abroad . The U.S. has failed to act on the principle of free travel to the U.K.
 The World Court suggested that United States courts add relevant language to the Miranda warning for cases when police arrest foreign nationals . U.S. courts suggested that the language should be added to Miranda warning .
 Most legal cases concerning international matters remain within the legal systems of one or more states . International cases are brought by governments or by private individuals or companies .
 A party with a dispute that crosses national boundaries gains several advantages by pursuing the matter through the national courts of one or more of the relevant states, rather than through international channels . A party in a dispute crosses national borders gains advantages by taking the matter to the national court .
 The party that wins a lawsuit in a national court can collect from the other party’s assets within the state . Party that wins lawsuit in national court is able to collect from other party's assets within state .
 Individuals and companies can pursue legal complaints through national courts . Most areas of international law, states must themselves bring suits on behalf of citizens .
 Third, there is often a choice of more than one state within which a case could legally be heard . One can pick the legal system most favorable to one’s case .
 Each state’s court system must decide whether it has jurisdiction in a case . Courts tend to extend their own authority with a broad interpretation of the law .
 A national court may hear cases concerning any activity on its national territory, any actions of its own citizens anywhere in the world, and actions taken toward its citizens elsewhere . Traditionally, a national court can hear cases about any activity in its territory .
 Noncitizens can use the national courts to enforce damages against citizens . The national court has authority to impose fines and, if necessary, to seize bank accounts and property .
 The United States is a favorite jurisdiction within which to bring cases for two reasons . The U.S. is one of the world's favorite places to bring criminal cases .
 First, because many people and governments do business in the United States, it is often possible to collect damages awarded by a U.S. court . Second, because of the fact that many governments and businesses do business there, it can be a legal challenge .
 U.S. courts in recent years have ruled on human rights cases brought by Chinese dissidents over Tiananmen massacre, Cuban exiles against the Cuban government .
 In 2003, U.S. courts ordered large payments by Iraq and Iran to United States victims of terrorism and torture . In 2003 the United States paid large payments to victims of torture .
 Belgium's national courts are a favorite venue for international human rights cases . A 1993 law gives them jurisdiction over any violation of the Geneva Conventions . Belgium’s national courts have jurisdiction over violations of the Conventions.
 In 2001, four people accused of war crimes in Rwanda in 1994 were sent to prison by a Belgian jury . Four Rwandan war criminals were convicted in 2001 by Belgian court in Rwanda .
 In 2005, Belgium indicted a former leader of Chad accused of 40,000 political murders in Chad in the 1980s . Senegal (where he lived) asked the African Union to rule on whether it should extradite him .
 There are important limits to the use of national courts to resolve international disputes, however . There are also limits to use of international courts in international disputes .
 The authority of national courts stops at the state’s borders, where sovereignty ends . Most important is that the authority stops at borders, which is where sovereignty begins .
 A court in Zambia cannot compel a resident of Thailand to come and testify . It cannot authorize the seizure of a British bank account to pay damages . A court cannot arrest a criminal suspect except on Zambian soil . Zambian court cannot compel Thailand resident to come testify .
 To take such actions beyond national borders, states must persuade other states to cooperate . States must persuade others to cooperate in order to take action .
 In 2012, a U.S. hedge fund that had lost $370 million in Argentina’s 2002 debt default convinced Ghana to seize a visiting Argentinean ship to pay the debt . Ghana released the ship after a ruling by a UN maritime tribunal in 2012 .
 To bring a person outside a state’s territory to trial, the state must ask a second government to arrest the person . The second government must arrest a person on the second state's territory and hand him or her over for trial .
 Called extradition , this is a matter of international law because it is a legal treaty arrangement between states . Called extradition, it is an international treaty arrangement that involves extradition . The extradition process is known as extradition .
 If no such treaty exists, individual generally remains immune from a state’s courts by staying off its territory . Individual generally stays off state's territory by staying away from state's borders .
 Some U.S. allies do not usually extradite to the United States suspects who would face the death penalty . Some United States allies usually don't extradite suspects facing death penalty in the U.K.
 War on terrorism since 2001 has expanded international legal and law enforcement cooperation . The war on terrorism has also expanded international cooperation .
 Former Chilean military dictator Augusto Pinochet was arrested in England in 1999 on a Spanish warrant . The warrant was based on crimes committed against Spanish citizens in Chile during Pinochet’s rule .
 British courts held him on Spain’s request to extradite him . Supporters claimed that he should have immunity for acts taken as head of state . But because he was not an accredited diplomat in England (where he had gone for medical treatment) he was held .
 British government eventually let him return to Chile citing his medical condition . Chilean court suspended his case on health grounds . British government allowed him back to Chile, citing medical condition, but Chile suspended case .
 Gray areas exist in the jurisdiction of national courts over foreigners . Gray areas include areas of jurisdiction over foreigners in the U.S.
 If a government can lure a suspect onto the high seas, it can nab the person without violating another country’s territoriality . A government can nab a suspect without violating the country's territoriality, it says .
 Government obtains foreign citizen from foreign country for trial without going through extradition procedures . More troublesome are cases in which a government obtains a foreign citizen for trial in a foreign country .
 In the 1980s, a Mexican doctor was wanted by U.S. authorities for allegedly participating in the torture and murder of a United States drug agent in Mexico . In a famous case, the doctor allegedly participated in the murder of the agent . The case was a notorious case in the
 The United States government paid a group of bounty hunters to kidnap the doctor in 18 Liptak, Adam. The U.S. government paid the group to kidnap him in 18.
 The United States Supreme Court gave the United States courts jurisdiction in the case . International lawyers and Mexican officials objected strongly . The court gave the U.S. jurisdiction .
 The United States had to reassure the Mexican government that it would not kidnap Mexican citizens for trial in the United States in the future . The U.S. government had to . reassure the . Mexican government .
 The doctor returned home after the case was thrown out for lack of evidence . The doctor was sent home from prison after the charges were thrown out .
 In late 2004, Colombia arranged the abduction of a leading Colombian rebel living in Venezuela . The abduction provoked Venezuelan protests about the violation of sovereignty .
 When people cross a border into a new country, the decision about whether they can remain there is up to the new state . The decision is made by the state, which decides whether to allow them to stay .
 Many other legal issues raised by people traveling or living outside their own country . Passports and visas, babies born in foreign countries, marriages to foreign nationals, bank accounts, businesses, taxes, and so forth .
 Practices vary from country to country, but the general principle is that national laws prevail on the territory of a state . Practice varies from countries to countries, but it is common in some countries .
 Despite the lack of enforcement powers of the World Court, it would be wrong to conclude that state sovereignty is supreme and international law impotent . Despite the continued importance of national court systems in international legal affairs, the importance of international court systems remains .
 A balance of sovereignty and law exists in international interactions, rather than sovereignty, it says . Rather, it is a balance of law and sovereignty in international relations .
 The remainder of this chapter discusses particular areas of international law, from the most firmly rooted and widely respected to newer and less-established areas . Law and sovereignty are discussed in the remainder of the chapter .
 In each area, the influence of law and norms runs counter to the unimpeded exercise of state sovereignty . In each part of the country's sovereignty, it is said to be a matter of sovereignty .
 This struggle becomes more intense as one moves from long-standing traditions of diplomatic law to recent norms governing human rights . The struggle becomes even more intense when dealing with human rights laws .
 The bedrock of international law is respect for the rights of diplomats . Watch the video ""The Uncertain Status of Enemy Combatants"" at MyPoliSciLab .
 The standards of behavior in this area are spelled out in detail, applied universally, and taken very seriously . Standards of behavior are outlined in detail in detail and applied universally .
 The ability to conduct diplomacy is necessary for all other kinds of relations among states, except perhaps all-out war . Diplomacy is necessary in all other kind of relations, except war, the author says .
 Since the rise of the international system five centuries ago, it has been considered unjustifiable to harm an emissary sent from another state as a means of influencing the other state .
 It is natural in some ways to kill the messenger who brings an unpleasant message, or to use another state’s official as a hostage or bargaining chip . Such a norm has not always existed, it is natural to kill a messenger, or use a hostage as a bargaining chip,
 Today, this kind of behavior is universally condemned, though it still happens from time to time . But today, it's universally condemned . It's still not easy to say, but it's still a crime .
 The status of embassies and of an ambassador as an official state representative is explicitly defined in the process of diplomatic recognition . An ambassador is an official representative of the country .
 Diplomats are accredited to each other’s governments . Individuals so defined enjoy certain rights and protections as foreign diplomats in the host country . Diplomats in host countries are accredited by their governments .
 Diplomats have the right to occupy an embassy in a host country, within which the host country's laws may not be enforced without the consent of the embassy’s country . Diplomats should not be allowed to enforce the laws of their country's country without consent .
 embassies sometimes shelter dissidents who take refuge there from their own governments . For this reason, embassies occasionally shelter dissidents from their governments . The embassies have a reputation for sheltering dissidents .
 This fundamental principle, like others in international law, is ultimately enforced through reciprocity . This is the case of reciprocity, and it will be enforced by reciprocity in the future, says the UK .
 Wikileaks founder took refuge in Ecuadorian embassy in London to avoid extradition to Sweden . British government considered coming in and taking Wikileaks founder, but thought better of it .
 President Obama's first speech from the embassy balcony, 2012, was delivered from the balcony of the embassy .
 A flagrant violation of the sanctity of embassies occurred in Iran after Islamic revolutionaries took power in 1979 .
 Iranian students seized and occupied the U.S. embassy compound in 2009 . Iranian students occupied the compound for more than a year . The United States diplomats were held hostage by Iranian students .
 The Iranian government did not directly commit this act but did condone it and did refuse to force students out of the embassy . Iranian students were forced to leave the embassy in Tehran .
 Diplomats enjoy diplomatic immunity even when they leave the embassy grounds . Diplomats have diplomatic immunity when they are not in the embassy .
 The right to travel varies from one country to another . Diplomats may be restricted to one city or free to roam about the countryside .
 Diplomats are beyond enforcement of the host country’s national courts . Foreign diplomats are beyond the laws of their own country .
 If they commit crimes, from jaywalking to murder, they may be shielded from arrest . They may also be protected from arrest if they commit a crime .
 All the host country can do is take away a diplomat’s accreditation and expel the person from the country . The host country cannot expel a diplomat from a country that has a diplomatic immunity .
 Strong countries sometimes pressure weaker countries to lift immunity so that a diplomat may face trial for a crime . Strong countries often pressure weaker ones to lift their immunity . However, strong countries sometimes lift immunity for diplomats .
 This happened twice in 1997, when the U.S. and France were allowed to prosecute diplomats from Georgia and Zaire, respectively, for reckless driving that killed children . The United States and France prosecuted diplomats from Zaire and Georgia in 1997 .
 Given immunity, delegates simply tear up thousands of parking tickets each year . Delegates simply tear them up with parking tickets . The immunity means delegates are not required to report parking tickets to the convention .
 The parking ticket issue has become a sensitive political issue . State Department now reserves the right to revoke driver’s licenses, license plates, and even reduce foreign aid based on outstanding parking tickets .
 Because of diplomatic immunity, espionage activities are commonly conducted through the diplomatic corps, out of an embassy . Spies are most commonly conducted out of diplomatic positions .
 Spies are often posted to low-level positions in embassies, such as cultural attache, press liaison, or military attache . Spies can be found in low-ranking positions in diplomatic posts .
 If the host country catches them spying, it cannot prosecute them, so it merely expels them . The host country can't prosecute them because it can't be found guilty of spying .
 If a spy operates under cover of being a businessperson or tourist, no immunity applies . The person can be arrested and prosecuted under the host country’s laws . If a person is a tourist or businessperson, it is illegal to be a spy in a country .
 U.S. government arrested ten Russian spies who were leading lives as ordinary citizens in America . Ten Russian spies were arrested in 2010 after they were found living as ordinary Americans .
 Diplomatic pouch is a package sent between an embassy and its home country . A diplomatic pouch is sent between the embassy and the home country of the pouch .
 As the name implies, it started out historically as a small and occasional shipment, but today a large and steady volume of such shipments travel all over the world . The name of the shipment is the name of a shipment, and today it travels around the globe .
 To break diplomatic relations means to withdraw diplomats from a state and expel that state’s diplomats from one of its own state . The U.S. has been accused of breaking diplomatic relations with Russia .
 This tactic is used to show displeasure with another government; it is a refusal to do business as usual . It is used as a tactic used by the U.S. government to show its displeasure with the government .
 When a revolutionary government comes into power, some countries may withdraw recognition . Some countries will withdraw recognition of the revolutionary government .
 When small states recognize Taiwan diplomatically, China withdraws recognition of them . And when small countries recognize Taiwan, it withdraws diplomatic recognition of it . China is unhappy with Taiwan's growing influence in Taiwan .
 When two countries lack diplomatic relations, they often do business through a third country . A third country is willing to represent a country’s interests formally through its own embassy .
 The practical needs of diplomacy can overcome a formal lack of relations between states . Thus, diplomatic needs can overcome the formal need for diplomatic relations .
 U.S. interests in Cuba are represented by the Swiss embassy in Cuba . Swiss and Cuban interests are represented in the United States . For instance, United States interests is represented in Cuba by Swiss embassies .
 In practice, these interests sections are located in the former U.S. and Cuban embassies . They are staffed with United States and Cuban diplomats .
 Diplomatic norms call for a trip home “for consultations’’ even when everyone knows the purpose is to signal annoyance . States register lower levels of displeasure by recalling their ambassadors home for some period of time .
 Usually the complaining government does so in its own capital city, to the other’s ambassador . The other's ambassador is the ambassador to the United States .
 Terrorists are willing to break diplomatic norms and laws to target diplomats . Terrorist groups do not enjoy the benefits of diplomatic law . States care so much about the sanctity of diplomats, diplomats make a tempting target for terrorists .
 An attack on diplomats or embassies is an attack on the territory of the state itself, yet can be carried out far from the state’s home territory . The attack is not only carried out near the state's home territory, but it is carried out in a far from home territory
 In late 2004, terrorists stormed a U.S. consulate in Saudi Arabia, killing several guards . In 2012, they burned the United States consulate in Benghazi, Libya, killing the ambassador .
 International law regarding war is one of the most developed areas of international law . After the law of diplomacy, international law regarding the issue of war is considered a matter of law . Just War Doctrine is a form of law that can be applied in the future .
 Today, the legality of war is defined by the UN Charter, which outlaws aggression . The UN Charter bans aggression, but it also outlaws any aggression .
 Just war doctrine has become a strong international norm, not one that all states follow . It is an important part of the modern intellectual tradition governing matters of war and peace that evolved in Europe .
 Tanks swarming across the border constitute aggression, but so do tanks massing at the border if their state has threatened to invade . Tanks are massing in response to a threat of invasion, but not necessarily aggression . Tanks swarmed across the borders constitute aggression .
 For a threat to constitute aggression, it must be a clear threat of using force, not just a hostile policy or general rivalry . But for a threat that constitutes aggression, the threat must be clear threat to use force .
 States have the right to respond to aggression in the only manner thought to be reliable, military force . States should respond in only the only way they can respond, the U.S. should use military force.
 Responses include repelling the attack itself and punishing the aggressor . Responses can include both repelling an attack itself or punishing the attacker .
 Responses can be made by the victim of aggression or by other states not directly affected . Responses are made as a way of maintaining the norm of nonaggression in the international system .
 The collective actions of UN members against Iraq after its invasion of Kuwait are a classic case of such a response . UN members' collective actions against Iraq in the wake of its invasion were a classic example of the response .
 Response to aggression is the only allowable use of military force according to just war doctrine . The U.S. response to aggression can only be used against aggression, according to the doctrine .
 Just war rules out war as an instrument to change another state’s government or policies, or in ethnic and religious conflicts . The just war approach explicitly rules out using war as a weapon to change government policies .
 UN Charter makes no provision for ‘war’ but rather for “international police actions” against aggressors . UN Charter does not make mention of “war” but of ‘international police action’ against aggressor .
 The analogy is with law and order in a national society, enforced by police when necessary . The analogy was with law enforcement in the country, enforced when needed .
 If all states obeyed the law against aggression, there would be no international war . Only aggression justifies military force, only aggression justifies the use of military force .
 For a war to be morally just, it must be more than a response to aggression . War must be waged for the purpose of responding to aggression, says Julian Zelizer . War should be waged to respond to aggression rather than respond to it, he says .
 A state may not take advantage of another’s aggression to wage a war that is essentially aggressive . A state should not take advantages of another's aggression, the U.S. should not, it says .
 The U.S.-led war effort to oust Iraq from Kuwait in 1991 was certainly a response to aggression . Critics found the justness of the war to be compromised by the United States interest in obtaining cheap oil from the Mideast .
 It is harder to identify an aggressor in such situations, and harder to balance the relative merits of peace and justice . It is thus harder to find out who is the aggressor and who is responsible .
 One of the newest areas of international law concerns human rights . Rights of human 9 1 being against certain abuses of their own governments . Human 9 1 human rights are the rights of those 9 1 beings against some abuses .
 A consensus on what are the most important human rights is difficult to reach . Thus, a consensus on which is most important is not easy to reach, it's difficult to do .
 No matter where a person resides, no matter his or her ethnic nationality, that person has certain rights that must be respected . That person has no matter where he or her family live, they have certain rights to respect .
 According to this idea, local traditions and histories should be given due respect, even if this means limiting rights that others outside that local context find important . This is according to the idea of local traditions .
 This charge puts human rights law on shaky ground and reflects a more relativist stance . Human rights law should be taken to account for the fact that it is a matter of right to freedom of expression .
 The concept of human rights arises from at least three sources, including religion . The first is religion, and the first is a belief in human rights .
 Nearly every major world religion has at its foundation the idea that humans were created in an image of a higher power and that therefore all humans are to be afforded the dignity and respect that are due to that higher power . Nearly all religions have at their foundation the notion that humans should be afforded
 Political and legal philosophy for centuries has discussed the idea of natural law and natural rights . Second, political and legal history has discussed natural law, natural rights, for centuries .
 Political philosophers have developed the idea that a natural law exists that grants all humans the right to life, liberty, property, and happiness . From Aristotle, to John Locke, to Immanuel Kant, to Jean-Jacques Rousseau, the idea has been developed by political philosophers .
 Political revolutions in the 18th century translated the theory of natural law and natural rights into practice . Political revolutions such as the American and French Revolutions translated theory into law .
 International norms concerning human rights conflict with state sovereignty, causing friction in relationships such as that of Burma with the international community . In America, the Declaration of Independence, and in France, the . Declaration of the Rights .
 Buddhist monks in Burma's capital lead huge demonstrations against the repressive military government in 2008 . The military cracked down harshly within days, cracking down harshly .
 Western powers impose economic sanctions against Burma because of its human rights record . Western powers apply economic sanctions because of the country's human rights abuses . Burma is one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 Of course, criticisms of these ideas of human rights exist, on both a theoretical and practical level . Of course there are also criticisms of the idea of human human rights .
 Theoretically, relativists point out that much of the origin and development of human rights ideas are Western in origin . Relativists say that Western ideas are important to human rights in the world .
 Non-Western societies have different philosophical traditions and may choose to emphasize group or family rights, for example, over individual ones . Non-western societies may not want to emphasize individual rights as individuals .
 Even after the 18thcentury revolutions in Europe and America, rights were still not universal . At a practical level, many critics are quick to point out that even after the revolution in America and Europe, rights still were not universal.
 Women, children, and usually nonwhites were not assumed to enjoy the same rights as landholding white males . The very idea of universal rights was misleading, making it misleading .
 Civil-political rights are sometimes referred to as “negative rights” and include what are considered traditional Western rights such as free speech, freedom of religion, equal protection under the law, and freedom from arbitrary imprisonment .
 These are rights generally thought to be best guaranteed by limiting the power of governments over their people . These are thought to have been best protected by limiting governments' power .
 Economic-social rights are referred to as ‘positive rights’ and include rights to good living conditions, food, health care, social security, and education . These rights are often held to be best promoted by the expansion of governments .
 No state has a perfect record on any type of human rights, and states differ as to which areas they respect or violate . States differ as much as which areas are respected or violated in human rights .
 Communist states encouraged the development of the latter rights, while ignoring calls for the former . Likewise, communist states encouraged development of latter rights .
 Overall, despite the poor record of the world’s states on some points, progress has been made on others . Overall, the world's states have a poor record on some of these points .
 Horrified by Nazi Germany’s attempt to exterminate the Jewish population and by Japanese abuses of Chinese citizens, many scholars and practitioners began to suggest that there were limits to state sovereignty .
 States could not claim to be sovereign and above interference if they attempted to massacre their own people . States would not be sovereign if they tried to kill their own citizens . States were not sovereign and should not be above interference, states said .
 Some of the most significant international attempts to codify and enforce human rights began in the aftermath of World War II and the creation of the United Nations . Human rights have been codified and enforced in the past .
 In the next section, we examine some of these agreements and institutions . The next section will examine the agreements, institutions, and how they were made .
 The declaration roots itself in the principle that violations of human rights upset international order . The UN Charter commits states to respect fundamental freedoms, the declaration says .
 The declaration proclaims that “all human beings are born free and equal” without regard to race, sex, language, religion, political affiliation, or status of the territory in which they were born .
 It goes on to promote norms in a wide variety of areas, including banning torture, guaranteeing religious and political freedom, and ensuring the right of economic well-being .
 Unlike the UDHR, these treaties are legally binding contracts signed by states . Unlike the U.N. treaty, they are not a legally binding treaty .
 International law is only as good as the enforcement mechanisms behind it . Of course, international law must be followed by the enforcement of international law, says David Cameron .
 The seven treaties outline basic protections for individuals expected by the international community . Yet these seven treaties are important in outlining the basic protections .
 Two treaties entered into force in 1976, codifying the promises of the UDHR . The treaties divide the list of rights into civil-political and economic-social rights .
 The remaining treaties each deal with a particular group that the international community considers vulnerable . These two covenants, along with the UDHR, are often referred to as the International Bill of Human Rights .
 The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination was enacted in 1969 . The Convention bans discrimination against individuals based on race, ethnicity, religion, or national origin .
 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women bans discrimination against women . Convention also bans all forms of discrimination against men in order to prevent discrimination . Convention is the first form of discrimination to be banned in the United States .
 Convention against Torture bans dehumanizing, degrading, and inhumane treatment of individuals even in times of war . Convention against torture was instituted in 1987, banning dehumanizing and degrading of individuals .
 The most recent UN human rights treaty is the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families . It entered into force in 2003 .
 UN treaties themselves are the optional protocols attached to several of the treaties . Equally important as these UN treaties, these protocols are optional protocols that are attached to some of the treaty's treaties .
 Protocols can be thought of as addendums to the treaties as they contain additional protections not included in the original documents . Protocols are thought to be an addendum to the original treaties .
 In general, far fewer states sign these optional protocols since the protections contained in them were too controversial for the original document . The protocols are optional but not mandatory .
 Optional protocols contain stronger enforcement mechanisms, such as giving individuals in signatory states the right to go to the UN monitoring bodies without the approval of their governments . In addition, some of the optional protocols contain strong enforcement mechanisms .
 States that are not party to the original treaty may sign them . The United States has not signed the CRC, but has signed its two optional protocols . The U.S. does not sign the CRC .
 Regional IOs have promoted the protection of human rights . Besides UN-related human rights treaties, several regional IOs promote the rights of others .
 In Latin America, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights has had some success in promoting human rights, but it has also been limited by state refusal to abide by its decisions . The court's success has been limited to states who have not abide by the court's decisions .
 African Human Rights Commission hampered by lack of monetary and political support from African states . African Union helps support the commission, but the commission has been hampered by its lack of financial and political backing .
 In the past decade, developed states have begun to use other international organizations to pressure developing states to improve human rights conditions . Developed states have started using other international groups to pressure them to improve their human rights .
 Free trade agreements often condition trade benefits on respect for human rights, especially workers' rights . Because these treaties provide policies beneficial to the developing states, they create a ready mechanism to punish countries who abuse their citizens .
 Others argue that limiting economic benefits to countries harms their economic development . Others argue it will only make the human rights situation worse .
 Today, NGOs play a key role in efforts to win basic political rights in authoritarian countries . NGOs are key to efforts to halt torture, execution, and imprisonment of those expressing political or religious beliefs .
 Amnesty International has a reputation for impartiality and has criticized abuses in many countries, including the United States . The leading organization pressing this struggle is Amnesty International, an NGO that operates globally .
 Such measures keep those suffering from human rights abuses in the global spotlight, drawing more attention to their plight . Yet, such measures keep them from being put under the spotlight, making them more visible .
 The most effective method yet discovered is a combination of publicity and pressure . "The most effective way to get publicity is to use pressure and publicity," the author says .
 Publicity involves digging up information about human rights abuses, as Amnesty International does . Publicity entails digging up info about human abuses, such as those in the UK .
 Supporters of human rights hope publicity will embarrass the regime and change its behavior . Through a process some scholars have dubbed “naming and shaming,” some scholars hope to embarrass the government .
 The publicity also serves to alert those traveling to or doing business with offending regimes to the conditions in those countries .
 Human rights activists hope negative attention will convince individuals to stop their interactions with the state in question . They hope this will put further economic pressure on the state .
 The pressure of other governments, as well as private individuals and businesses, consists of threats to punish the offender in some way through nonviolent means . The pressure on other governments and businesses to punish offenders is to be nonviolent .
 Most governments seek to maintain normal relations with each other most of the time . This kind of intrusive punishment by one government of another’s human rights violations is rare . But it is not reliably successful .
 Rare are humanitarian interventions using military force to overcome armed resistance by local authorities or warlords and bring help to civilian victims of wars and disasters . Also rare are military intervention to overcome resistance by warlords or local authorities .
 International norms have increasingly shifted against sovereignty and toward protecting endangered civilians . However, international norms are increasingly shifting against sovereignty against sovereignty, especially in the U.S.
 The UN-authorized NATO campaign in Libya in 2011 followed from the R2P concept . The UN authorized NATO operations in Libya follow from the concept .
 People of Syria did not get protection in 2011-2013 as tens of thousands were slaughtered by their government . Yet, the people of Syria didn't get protection from the government .
 The United States State Department has actively pursued human rights since the late 1970s . The U.S. State Department is actively pursuing human rights in Venezuela .
 An annual United States government report assesses human rights in states around the world . An annual U.S. government report on human rights is released every year .
 In states where abuses are severe or becoming worse, U.S. foreign aid has been withheld . The United States has withheld aid in some of the world's most violent states .
 Since the Nazi murders of civilians did not violate German law, the Nuremberg tribunal treated them as crimes against humanity . The tribunal was conceived as inhumane acts against civilians on a vast scale in the pursuit of unjust ends .
 International system based on sovereignty has historically treated serious human rights abuses as domestic problems of no concern to outside countries . Human rights abuses have historically been treated as domestic issues that outside countries are not concerned .
 Over the years, a norm has developed that treats the most serious atrocities as matters of concern for all of humanity . Over the past few years, it has become a norm that treats such atrocities as a matter of concern .
 After the horrors of the Nazi Holocaust during World War II, the world’s countries signed the Genocide Convention in 1948 . The Convention was created after the Holocaust in 1945 .
 Signatories pledge to “prevent and punish’s genocide in both war and peacetime . Signatories pledged to ‘prevent’ and ‘punish’ genocide in peacetime and war .
 Many scholars interpret this as a commitment by states to intervene in recognized cases of genocide to stop the killing . Many scholars of international law interpret this .
 The concept that the international community must stop abuses by governments against their own people has gained momentum over the years since then, with various treaties and practices moving in this direction .
 The International Criminal Court and several international war crimes tribunals have tried individuals accused of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide . Several war crimes cases have been tried in the past .
 The international community should try prevention and diplomacy first, but ultimately must use military intervention as a last resort if necessary to stop mass atrocities . The International community must use prevention first, diplomacy first and last resort, writes CNN.
 Everyone agrees that the world would be better off without atrocities, which degrade humanity and undermine norms of peaceful politics . The U.S. should not tolerate atrocities in the Middle East, the author says .
 These ideals, however, are a collective good, enjoyed by all countries regardless of which ones put money and lives on the line . These ideals are the collective good .
 Mass atrocities continue to occur despite the Genocide Convention, the human rights treaties, the tribunals, and the R2P concept . Mass atrocities are still occurring despite the genocide Convention and human rights treaty .
 In 1994 in Rwanda, ultranationalists seized power and slaughtered more than half a million ethnic minority members and political opponents . In 1994, Rwanda's government was overthrown and killed thousands of people .
 Similar tribunals were later established for genocide in Rwanda and Sierra Leone . Similar tribunal was later established in Sierra Leone and Rwanda .
 The tribunal on the former Yugoslavia issued indictments against the top Bosnian Serb leaders and other Serbian and Croatian officers . It also indicted Serbian strongman Slobodan Milosevic in 1999 for his expulsion of Albanians from Kosovo .
 The tribunal was hampered by lack of funding and by its lack of power to arrest suspects who enjoyed the sanctity of Serbia and Croatia . The tribunal has been hampered by a lack of funds and by being unable to arrest anyone in Serbia or Croatia .
 Milosevic was turned over to the tribunal in 2001 . He died in custody in 2006, and he died in prison in 2006 .
 In 2008 and 2011, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs and their top military commander were arrested after more than a decade in hiding . In 2011, they were arrested in a bid to find their way back into power .
 They are accused of massacring and shelling civilians and destroying property, including places of worship . They are currently on trial, charged with massacring, shelling civilians, destroying property .
 By 2011, no Bosnia war criminals remained at large, and at the end of 2012 the Rwanda tribunal also completed all of its 71 cases . No Bosnia war criminal remains at large .
 In 2003, it indicted the sitting state leader in next-door Liberia, Charles Taylor, for his role in the war’s extreme brutality . Charles Taylor was indicted by the U.S. government in 2003 .
 He fled to Nigeria shortly afterward but was captured there, captured there and turned over to the tribunal in 2006 . He was convicted in 2012 and sentenced to life in prison in prison .
 In these and other cases, no states intervened effectively to stop the atrocities . No states have intervened effectively in these cases, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In 2011, outsiders did halt an imminent slaughter by Libya’s dictator . The Libyan dictator was overthrown in 2011, but the U.S. intervened .
 Human rights organizations rely on the identity principle to try to spur action by the international community . The identity principle is used by human rights organizations to try and spur action .
 They publicize crises and goad governments to act in the name of humanity, they say . They goad the governments of democracies to act on the people of humanity .
 A wellfunded campaign with plentiful popular support called for strong action to stop the Sudanese government . In the case of Darfur, a wellfunded and popular campaign with plenty of popular support is called for action .
 Western governments do not want to spend blood and treasure to intervene in messy foreign conflicts . These appeals, however, have brought meager results, as Western governments don't want to intervene . The U.S. has not intervened in any of the world's most violent conflicts .
 ICC has been unable to arrest the president of Sudan after indicting him for war crimes . The reciprocity principle has also come up short, as the world's countries are supposed to mutually support the ICC .
 Rwandan survivor visits memorial on tenth anniversary of 1994 genocide . Great powers see action when it is in their national interest, they act . Rwandan survivors visit memorial on 10th anniversary of Rwanda genocide .
 Until the world’s strong military powers decide to act against mass atrocities, the provision of the collective good embodied by R2P will continue to fall short . The world will not be able to act on mass atrocities until it takes military action .
 ICC began its first trial in 2008, of a militia leader from Democratic Congo accused of drafting children under 15 and killing civilians . In 2008, the ICC began the first trial, of the militia leader .
 The United States has refused to ratify the ICC agreement and shows little interest in doing so . The U.S. has shown no interest in ratifying the agreement .
 The United States has pressured many ICC member states to sign immunity agreements to protect American soldiers serving in those countries from prosecution . In addition, the U.S. has pressured members of the ICC to sign such agreements .
 In 2005, after several ICC members refused to sign a BIA, Congress voted to cut foreign aid to those states . Congress voted in 2005 to cut aid to several of the ICC members .
 United States leaders are concerned that American soldiers, serving in peacekeeping missions or in NATO allies, will fall under the jurisdiction of the ICC rather than under the American military’s own justice system . U.S. leaders are also concerned that U.N. troops, in peace
 In 2009, the ICC indicted the sitting Sudanese president, Omar al-Bashir, on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity, and issued a warrant for his arrest . The ICC has issued an arrest warrant for the president of Sudan .
 The indictment angered the Sudanese government, which then expelled humanitarian organizations from Darfur . The government has since expelled humanitarian groups from the region .
 Libya’s dictator was killed before facing justice in 2011 . In 2011, he was indicted by the ICC, but was quickly killed before being indicted .
 ICC says it has the ability to prosecute individuals of any nation . ICC is based on the idea of universal jurisdiction, which means it has universal jurisdiction . ICC has the power to prosecute people of any country .
 ICC has only states as complainants and defendants . This distinguishes the ICC from the World Court, which has no state complainants or defendants .
 ICC can prosecute individuals for their roles in violations of human rights . Individuals can be prosecuted for their role in human rights violations . Under the ICC, individuals can also be prosecuted . The ICC is based in Geneva, Switzerland .
 Most notorious war crime in Europe in recent decades was the massacre of more than 7,000 men and boys by Serbian forces who overran the UN ""safe area"" of Srebrenica, Bosnia, in 1995 .
 Schabas, William A An Introduction to the International Criminal Court.nd ed. William A . An Introduction . to the . International Criminal . Court.
 The UN Security Council can begin proceedings even against individuals from nonsignatory states . Third, the UN Security . Council can start proceedings even if it is not a member of a nonignatory .
 It is not illegal, however, to target military forces knowing civilians will be killed . The U.S. military says it's not illegal for targeting military forces to protect civilians .
 The amount of force used must be proportional to the military gain, the author says . Only the necessary amount of use can be used, and only the necessary amounts of force are used .
 To separate combatants from civilians, soldiers must wear uniforms and insignia, such as a shoulder patch with a national flag . Soldiers must also wear insignia to help separate them from civilians .
 This provision is frequently violated in guerrilla warfare, making that form of warfare particularly brutal and destructive of civilian life . The provision is often violated by guerrillas, making guerrilla warfare particularly harsh and destructive to civilians .
 If one cannot tell the difference between a bystander and a combatant, one is likely to kill both when in doubt . If one can't tell the truth, one will likely kill both in doubt, he says .
 In a large-scale conventional war it is much easier to distinguish civilians from soldiers, although the effort is never completely successful . By contrast, in a large scale conventional war, civilians are often more likely to be civilians .
 U.S. special forces in Afghanistan made friends with local fighters by operating out of uniform and with bushy beards . Humanitarian-aid agencies complained and the Pentagon ordered soldiers back into uniform .
 In the Iraq War, insurgents have repeatedly targeted civilians and attacked in civilian clothes, from hospitals and schools, and after feigning surrender . This is all against the laws of war .
 A 2007 report from Human Rights Watch accused the presidential guard unit in the Central African Republic of dozens of summary executions of civilians . The report also accused the president guard unit of killing civilians .
 In recent years, the rise in the use of private military forces in wars, especially in Iraq, has challenged the laws of war . Private military forces have challenged the law of war in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 In Iraq, the U.S. government had granted a waiver to these companies to ensure that they could not be prosecuted for violations of international law, only local law . The waiver was granted in Iraq to ensure they couldn't be prosecuted .
 Because there is no formal Iraqi government, no one could enforce violations of domestic law committed by these companies . Because of no formal government, there was no way to enforce violations by companies .
 Several high-profile incidents (including abuses at the Abu Ghraib prison) led Congress, the UN, and Iraq to hold private forces accountable .
 A 2008 IraqiU.S. agreement on the status of American military forces ended the legal waiver for private contractors beginning in 2009 . The 2008 IraqiUnited States agreement ended the waiver .
 They give up their weapons and their right to fight, and earn instead the right not to be targeted . They earn instead of being targeted, they earn the right to not be targeted, says CNN.com .
 POWs may not be killed, mistreated, or forced to disclose information beyond their name, rank, and serial number . POWs are not killed or mistreated; they are not forced to reveal more information .
 ICRC provides practical support to civilians caught in wars and to POWs . The ICRC also provides medical care, food, and letters from home .
 In the war on terrorism, the U.S. does not consider “enemy combatants” to be POWs . The ICRC has granted the ICRC access to most of the detainees .
 More controversial is the U.S. policy called “extraordinary rendition,” which lets terrorist suspects captured overseas be transferred to other countries, including some that use torture, for questioning .
 The laws of warfare impose moral responsibility on individuals in wartime, as well as on states . The law of warfare imposes moral responsibility for individuals in war, states .
 The Nuremberg Tribunal established that participants can be held accountable for war crimes they commit . Participants can be found guilty of war crimes if they commit, the tribunal said .
 German officers defended their actions as “just following orders,” but this was rejected . Some officers were punished, and some executed, for their war crimes .
 Laws of war limit the use of force against civilians to what is necessary and proportional to military objectives . For example, laws of war can only limit use of violence against civilians in war .
 In World War II, the German army besieged the Russian city of Leningrad for two years, and civilians in the city were starving . The city was occupied by the Germans during the two-year siege of the city .
 Sieges of this kind are permitted under international law if an army cannot easily capture a city . Sieges are permitted in international law under international rules .
 The laws of warfare have been undermined by the changing nature of war . Changing Context has undermined the laws of war, says John Defterios .
 Conventional wars by defined armed forces on defined battlegrounds are giving way to irregular and “low-intensity” wars fought by guerrillas and death squads in cities or jungles .
 The lines between civilians and soldiers blur in these situations, and war crimes become more commonplace . War crimes are becoming more commonplace, and the lines between soldiers and civilians blur .
 In the Vietnam War, one of the largest problems faced by the U.S. was an enemy that seemed to be everywhere and nowhere . The Vietnam War was one of America's biggest problems .
 This led frustrated U.S. forces to attack civilian villages seen as supporting the guerrillas . The United States has attacked civilian villages in Afghanistan .
 In today’s irregular warfare, frequently inflamed by ethnic and religious conflicts, the laws of war are increasingly difficult to uphold . In today's irregular warfare it is difficult to keep the law of war .
 States rarely issue a declaration of war setting out whom they are warring against and the cause of their action . Another factor undermining the laws of war is that states rarely issue such a declaration . The U.S. should not have to declare itself at all, it says .
 Ironically, such declarations are historically the exception, not the rule . Ironically, they are historically not the exception to such declarations .
 Declarations of war bring little benefit to the state declaring war and incur obligations under international law . This trend continues today because declarations of war have little benefit . Declaration of war has little effect on the state and its international obligations . This continues to be a problem in the world .
 In many cases, such as revolutionary and counterrevolutionary civil wars, a declaration would not even be appropriate, because wars are declared only against states, not internal groups . War is declared against states only against state, not against internal groups, says historian .
 For six years, fighting has raged in the western Sudanese province of Darfur .
 It is estimated that 2. million people have been forced from their homes and perhaps 300,000 have died . It's estimated 2 million people were forced out of their homes in Syria .
 Some of the violence in Darfur is between warring rebel groups . The Sudanese government has been accused of arming militias and encouraging the violence .
 Sudan is not a member of the ICC, but the Security Council referred the Darfur case to the ICC . The case could be started against anyone in the Sudan, although Sudan does not have a membership .
 ICC has issued two arrest warrants for war crimes related to Darfur . ICC has already issued two war crimes warrants for Darfur war crimes suspects .
 In 2009, your predecessor obtained an indictment and arrest warrant against Sudan's president, Omar al-Bashir, on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity . The Sudanese president was charged with war crimes in 2009, but was never arrested .
 Such a move to prosecute a sitting president of a country in the middle of a civil war was unprecedented . The move was unprecedented for the president to be prosecuted in such a country .
 Human rights groups applauded the decision to pursue criminal charges against Sudanese president . Many countries opposed the move, including the Sudanese government .
 China and Russia, both of which maintain diplomatic ties with Sudan, have expressed disapproval and pressed the ICC to stop prosecutions . Sudan has been accused of human rights violations in the past .
 Many African Union countries have opposed the move, warning that it could lead to a breakdown of the peace process . Many African countries currently deploy peacekeepers in Darfur have opposed it .
 Sudan expelled humanitarian NGOs from Darfur after al-Bashir's indictment was announced . Violence did increase in Darfur, including attacks against AU peacekeepers . Violence increased after the ICC announced plans to indict al Bashir .
 The AU has called for the ICC to suspend all ICC proceedings relating to Darfur . The Arab League has condemned the indictment of al-Bashir .
 The United States and major European countries support efforts to bring members of the Sudanese government to justice . Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Ahsan has been accused of genocide in the past .
 Russia and China have suggested revoking ICC authority to prosecute cases related to Darfur . The United States, France, or Britain could use their Security Council vetoes to stop such an effort .
 Supporters of the ICC have argued that Darfur represents a crucial case for the future of the legitimacy of the Court . Supporters say Darfur is a vital case for its legitimacy .
 "This case will set important precedents as to the power of this relatively new body," the judge says .
 Chinese government approaches you and asks you to suspend the indictment of al-Bashir . The Chinese government says it is investigating the case .
 China agrees to press Sudan to end violence in Darfur and allow more peacekeepers to be deployed there . In return, China will press the Sudanese government to end Darfur violence . China also agrees to push Sudan to both end violence and allow peacekeeping to be stationed there .
 China has no direct control over Sudan, however, so China's promises may bring little change in behavior on the part of Sudan . Sudan has been hit hard by a wave of anti-S Sudanese violence .
 China does have some pull with the Sudanese leadership, but has some pull . Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Ahmed al-Hamid el el el-Ahmad el-Khadi says .
 The United States and its allies would be likely to support such a move if it resulted in a stable cease-fire . The U.S. and allies would likely support such an agreement .
 The principle of free passage on the open seas is now formally established in international law . For example, it is now formal established in the world of freedom of passage .
 At one time, warships from one state did not hesitate to seize the ships of other states and make off with their cargoes . But at one time warships from another state did .
 This practice was profitable to the state that pulled off such raids, but of course, their own ships could be raided in return . The raids were profitable to those who pulled them off, but also profitable to others .
 Such behavior made long-distance trade itself more dangerous, less predictable, and less profitable, the author says . Such behavior makes long distance trade more dangerous and less predictable .
 Over time, a norm developed around the concept of freedom of navigation on the high seas . So, over time, the norm developed .
 The Dutch legal scholar Hugo Grotius developed the law in the mid-1600s, when the Dutch dominated world trade and could benefit most from free navigation . It became one of the first areas of international law .
 Dutch power provided the backbone for the international legal concept of freedom of the seas . Dutch power, then, provided the . backbone for . the international . legal concept .
 Britain enforced the principle of free seas through the cannons of its warships . Later, when Britain was dominant, it enforced the idea through its naval cannons .
 As the world’s main trading state, Britain benefited from a worldwide norm of free shipping and trade . Britain was one of the world's main trading states during the 1930s .
 With the world's most powerful navy, it was in a position to define and enforce the rules for the world’s oceans . And with the . world‘most powerful navy , it was . in a place to define . and enforce . the rules of the oceans .
 The world is too large for any single state, even a hegemon, to police effectively . But in truth, the world is far more complex than any single nation can police effectively, writes David Frum .
 The world’s states usually go along with the rules established by the most powerful state without constant policing . Rather, the world”s states often go along . with the . rules set by the . most powerful states, rather than constant policing, they say .
 Although states do not yield their sovereignty, they vest some power and authority in international institutions and laws, they generally work within that framework . In this way, although states don't yield sovereignty, their sovereignty is tied to international institutions .
 New expectations are emerging in such areas as human rights, UN peacekeeping, humanitarian interventions, Russia and China’s roles as great powers, and the U.S. role as a superpower . New expectations also emerging in areas of human rights .
 Core norms and stable institutions shape international political economy with more stability than in international security . However, core norms are more stable than in security than in economic stability .
 We return to the pinnacle of international organization, the EU, in Chapter 10 . The EU is one of the world's most powerful institutions .
 These rules operate through institutions, with the UN at the center of the institutional network . The UN is one of the most powerful institutions in the world .
 In part because of its deference to state sovereignty, the UN has attracted virtually universal membership of the world’s states, including all the great powers .
 The five permanent members of the Security Council are the United States, France, Great Britain, China, and Russia . The U.S. is the only permanent member of the United Nations .
 Their main role is to monitor compliance with agreements such as cease-fires, disarmament plans, and fair election rules . They are also monitoring compliance with peace agreements .
 They were scaled back dramatically in 1995— 1997, then grew rapidly since 1998 . They scaled back significantly in 1995- 1997, and since 1998, they have grown rapidly .
 Sometimes national troops operate under their own flag and command to carry out UN resolutions . Sometimes national forces operate under the own flag . Sometimes they carry out the UN resolution .
 It is an increasingly useful avenue for arbitrating relatively minor conflicts . It is increasingly useful for arbitrators to arbitrate relatively minor disputes .
 Taking over from two UN tribunals, it hears cases of genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity . The tribunal is based in New York City, New York .
 Human rights law is problematic because it involves interference by one state in another’s internal affairs . Human rights laws are problematic because they involve interference by another state in its internal affairs, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 This would reduce state sovereignty a bit and increase supranational authority . This would be a bit less of a state's sovereignty .
 Collective security against aggression depends on states’ willingness to bear the costs of fighting wars to repel and punish aggressors . Collective security depends on the willingness of states' willingness to fight wars against aggressors, experts say .
 Sometimes great powers have been willing to bear such costs, but sometimes they have not . Sometimes great power has not been able to bear the costs of such things, says the author .
 Give examples of situations (actual or potential) that would and would not merit the intervention of great powers to reverse aggression .
 China and many other states still consider human rights an internal affair over which the state has sovereignty within its territory . Human rights are becoming stronger but China and other countries still consider them an internal matter . China has been accused of human rights violations in violation of international norms .
 Since the adoption of the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights over 60 years ago, states have been committed to advancing human rights . The UN Declaration was adopted by states around the world to promote human rights in 1950s .
 UN treaties guarantee the protection and advancement of human rights in several areas including the rights of women, children and migrant workers . Seven different UN treaties, signed by the majority of the world's states, guarantee human rights . UN treaties are signed by majority of world's countries .
 Regional treaties and protocols promote economic well-being, protect dueprocess rights, and endorse self-determination .
 State leaders consistently tout the importance of human rights in promoting fairness, justice, and equality . State leaders regularly tout human rights as promoting fairness .
 In rhetoric, the importance of promoting and protecting human rights does seem universal . The importance of protecting and promoting human rights seems universal, but not universal .
 Yet, violations of all these treaties still occur and indeed, at times, seem commonplace . Violations of these treaties are still commonplace .
 No matter the scale of the violations, all show a brazen disregard for the importance of human rights . No matterthe scale ofthe violations, the violations are unacceptable .
 States Make Few Efforts to Promote and Protect Human Rights . UN treaties concerning human rights not enforced . States make few efforts to promote and protect human rights .
 The core UN human rights treaties have little, if any, enforcement attached to them . The UN has little power to enforce its human rights obligations .
 Some of the worst violators of human rights are often the first to sign these documents because they know there will be no enforcement of the rules . The worst violator of human human rights often signs these documents knowing there will not be enforced .
 When push comes to shove, states will ignore human rights abuses to achieve other political goals, says Amnesty International . Human rights abuses are often ignored by states to achieve political goals .
 States will turn a blind eye to human rights abuses if it serves their purposes . The U.S. is ignoring political repression in China, China ignoring genocide in Sudan . South Africa ignored a crackdown in Zimbabwe .
 When attention is paid to human rights violations, it's done so unevenly, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: Human rights violations are done unevenly in the United States . Mandela says human rights should be a priority in the future .
 More often than not, violations are brought to light only against states that are considered enemies or politically unimportant . More often, violations only come to light against states considered enemies .
 Similar violations ignored in allied or politically powerful states . Meanwhile, similar violations are ignored in politically powerful countries . The U.S. has been accused of human rights violations .
 Emerging norms of democracy are promoting human rights, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Obama says the United States is helping to promote human rights .
 Growing number of democratic countries around the globe is serving to increase respect for human rights . The growing number of democracies around the world is increasing respect for the rights of the people .
 Many Western countries have expanded their support for young democracies, which will help human rights worldwide . Western countries will support young democracies in the future, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 NGOs such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch continue to provide information to states and their citizens concerning human rights abuses . NGOs such a human rights group are providing information to state and citizens .
 States do not act on some of these grassroots efforts to improve global respect for human rights . While states do not always act on all of these instances, they do respond to some grassroots efforts .
 NGOs are important agents for states wanting to advance the cause of human rights . NGOs are also important agents in advance of advancing human rights in countries such as Russia and China .
 Many states are beginning to condition foreign aid and free trade policies on human rights behavior . The U.S. has been criticized for its human rights policies on the issue .
 The European Union requires all signatories to trade agreements to abide by certain human rights standards . The U.S. requires all free trade partners to acknowledge workers' and children's rights .
 These requirements, embedded in economically important treaties, are more likely to be enforced . These requirements are embedded in economic important treaties such as NAFTA .
 About $19 trillion of goods and services cross international borders each year each year . The world's largest trade group is the largest in the world .
 The great volume of international trade reflects the fact that trade is profitable . Trade is profitable, says the president of the United States .
 The role of trade in the economy varies somewhat from one nation to another . Trade is at least as important in the global South as in the industrialized North . Trade has been a major factor in economic growth in the South .
 Trade crosses state borders, is regulated by states that are pressured by interest groups . It occurs within trade regimes maintained by and negotiated among states .
 Most scholars of IPE focus on industrialized regions of the world, where most of world’s economic activity occurs . Most of the IPE scholars focus on the industrialized regions, such as industrialized regions .
 IPE is broadly defined and deals primarily with political bargaining over economic issues . IPE issues include international security matters and political bargaining issues .
 States are most important actors in IPE, but not as important as in international security . States are the most important actor in the world's most important security, says CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 Actors in IPE, as in security affairs, tend to act in their own interests . IPE: "Actors in the IPE tend to be in the interests of their own interest"
 Craig Murphy, Craig N International Organization and Industrial Change, Global Governance Since 1850. Murphy: Global governance has changed since 1850 . Murphy: "Global Governance since 1850"
 MyPoliSciLab create a framework for mutual gains. You Are a Trade Expert? You are a trade expert. You are an expert .
 Mercantilism holds that the importance of economic transactions lies in their implications for the military . In addition, mercantilists hold that economic transactions have implications for military .
 States worry about relative wealth and trade because these can be translated directly into military power . States worry that relative wealth, trade and trade can translate directly to military power, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Mercantilists believe that the outcome of economic negotiations matters for military power . Thus, although military power is generally not useful in economic negotiations, mercantilistists believe it matters .
 It matters little to liberals whether one state gains more or less than another, just whether the state’s wealth is increasing in absolute terms . Liberals want to see how much each state gains, but it matters little whether one gains more .
 Liberalism and mercantilism are theories of economics and ideologies that shape state policies . Liberalism is also an ideology that shapes state policies, says Julian Zelizer .
 Marxist approaches are attuned to economic exploitation as a force that shapes political relations . Marxist approaches include economic exploitation and economic exploitation . The Marxist approach to class warfare is a form of economic exploitation that shapes relations .
 We will explore Marxist theories in depth in Chapter 12, as they find their greatest explanatory power in North-South relations . We will also explore Marxist theory in Chapter 11 .
 Most international economic exchanges contain some element of mutual interests, mutual interests and conflicting interests . Most of the world's economic exchanges involve cooperation, mutual interest . The United States is one of the most successful nations in the world .
 In the game of Chicken, two drivers share an interest in avoiding a head-on collision, yet their interests diverge in that one can be a hero only if the other is a chicken . For example, in the game, the two drivers are trying to avoid a collision .
 Liberalism emphasizes the shared interests in economic exchanges, while mercantilism emphasizes conflicting interests . Liberalism is based on the shared interest of the two nations .
 The terms of an exchange are defined by the price at which goods are traded . The terms are defined in terms of the price of goods traded .
 Often the bargaining space —the difference between the lowest price a seller would accept and the highest price a buyer would pay—is quite large . The bargaining space is often the difference between seller and buyer would accept .
 Saudi Arabia would be willing to sell a barrel of oil (if it had no better option) for as little as $10 a barrel . industrialized countries are willing to pay more than $100 for oil .
 Joint benefits are maximized at the Pareto-optimal frontier, but distribution of those benefits, as between points B and C, is a matter of bargaining . Joint benefits can be maximized, but the distribution of the benefits is a key factor .
 Liberalism is more concerned with joint benefits, mercantilism more with the relative distribution . Liberalism was more concerned about the joint benefits of the two countries, not the relative benefits .
 When there are multiple buyers and sellers of a good (or equivalent goods that can be substituted for it), prices are determined by market competition . In practice, free markets produce stable patterns of buying and selling at a fairly uniform price .
 At this market price, sellers know that an effort to raise the price would drive the buyer to seek another seller . Buyers know that a price hike would drive them to seek a new buyer .
 In liberal economics, bilateral relations between states are less important than they are in security affairs . The U.S. should focus on security, not bilateral relations, in a liberal economy .
 U.S. sanctions on Iran, a major oil exporter, invited European companies to fill the void in recent years . For example, European companies have stepped in to fill a void .
 In IPE, power is more diffuse and involves more actors at once than in international security . IPE is a more diffuse form of power than international security, says Peter Bergen .
 Buyers vary in the value they place on an item . If the price rises, fewer people are willing to buy it, and if the price drops, more people will buy it . Buyers place more value in an item that they place in value .
 If price rises, more sellers are willing to supply the item to buyers . If price drops, fewer sellers will be willing to sell the item . If the price drops more sellers will supply it .
 In a free market, the price at which the supply and demand curves cross is the equilibrium price . The price at that price is the price of the curve that crosses is equilibrium price in the free market .
 At this price, sellers are willing to supply the same number of units as buyers . At this time, sellers would be willing to sell the same amount of units that buyers would purchase . The market is set to be a record-breaking year for the first time .
 The supply and demand system does not always produce stability, however, however . Supply and demand systems do not produce stability in the world .
 The price of a barrel of oil has fluctuated radically over recent years . Oil prices have fluctuated wildly over the past few years .
 Each time world economic growth accelerates, demand for oil rises and so does its price . Each time the world's economic growth increases, demand will rise, so will the price .
 Each time oil prices spike up, Western economies go into recession . High prices for this key commodity undermine the whole economy . Western economies suffer from high oil prices each time they spike .
 The amount of economic activity may vary by only 5 or 10 percent, but the price of oil doubles or triples, then drops in half . Oil prices drop in half, then drop by half, depending on the price .
 The most recent case of this cycle, in 2007-2008, saw spectacular, unprecedented (and unsustainable) increases in oil prices from around $70 a barrel to $140 a barrel . Oil prices are driven by new demand in fast-growing Asian economies, among other factors .
 The world economy entered a spectacular, unprecedented recession, and oil prices dropped in just a few months back to $40 a barrel . Oil prices then dropped to $50 a barrel, and the world economy then entered an unprecedented recession . The world now enters a spectacular recession .
 This kind of instability in the price of a key commodity is terrible for the world economy . It creates a big incentive for governments to take political actions rather than rely entirely on market forces . The world economy suffers from instability in key commodity prices .
 Politics, this view, should serve the interests of economic efficiency, says David Frum . Politics, he says, should be seen as a matter of efficiency and efficiency . Politics should serve interests of efficiency, he argues .
 Liberals disdain realists’ obsession with international borders, because borders constrain the maximum efficiency of exchange . Because of the benefits of free trade among countries, liberals disdain free trade . Realists' obsession with borders constains the maximum efficient exchange, liberals say .
 Trade-based wealth depends on international political cooperation . Violence usually does not work well in pursuing such wealth . Violence is not a good way to pursue such wealth, says U.S. diplomat .
 Trade is desirable only when the distribution of benefits favors one’s own state over rivals . Because power is relative, trade is relative and trade is desirable for one state to trade .
 The terms of exchange shape the relative rates at which states accumulate power and thus shape the way power distributions in the international system change over time . The terms-exchange rates are important for states to accumulate power .
 Mercantilism achieved prominence several hundred years ago, and Britain used trade to rise in relative power in the international system around the 18th century .
 At that time mercantilism meant specifically the creation of a trade surplus in order to stockpile money in the form of precious metal . The money could then be used to buy military capabilities in time of war .
 It returned as a major approach in the period between World War I and World War II, when liberal global trading relations broke down . It returned in the 1930s and 1940s .
 With the global recession in 2009, world leaders eyed each other warily to see if mercantilism would again make a comeback . The global recession was the worst year in history .
 Mercantilists’ preferred means of making trade serve a state’s political interests is to create a favorable balance of trade . Free markets might have created some lost wealth that free markets may have created, but that's not the case .
 Balance of trade is the value of a state’s imports relative to its exports . The balance of trade in a country is a balance of imports and exports . It is a measure of the state's trade balance .
 A state that exports more than it imports has a positive balance of trade, or a trade surplus . A state exporting more than its imports has an export surplus . The surplus is a state that has a net worth of more than $1 billion .
 China has run a large trade surplus for years, passing $250 billion per year . China's trade surplus has grown to more than $300 billion a year . The country has run large trade sur sur surplies for years .
 Since the late 1990s, the U.S. trade deficit has grown steadily to hundreds of billions of dollars per year, approaching $1 trillion . About a quarter accounted for by China and another quarter by oil imports .
 In the short term, a state can trade for a few years at a deficit and then a surplus . It is tracked financially through the system of national accounts . State can trade between deficits and surpluses in the short and long term .
 In recent years, to balance its trade deficit, the U.S. has “exported’s currency to China, Japan, Europe, and other countries . Countries use the dollars to buy such things as shares of United States companies, Treasury bills, real estate .
 Economists worry that if foreigners lose their taste for investments in the United States, the U.S. economy could suffer . The United States economy could also suffer, they say .
 This is one reason why mercantilists favor national economic policies to create a trade surplus . This is why they favor national policies to increase trade surpliability .
 With a crisis or fight a war, the state sits on a pile of money representing potential power . Reserves with the state sit in a position that represents potential power in the country . The state has a stockpile of more than $1 billion in reserves .
 Such a strategy is attuned to realism’s emphasis on relative power and is an example of the dominance principle . The dominance principle is based on the relative power of a ruler .
 States differ in their ability to produce certain goods because of differences in natural resources, labor force characteristics, technology, and other factors . States are different from each other because of natural resources and labor force .
 Each state should specialize in producing the goods for which it has a comparative advantage and then trade for goods that another state produces best . In order to maximize the overall creation of wealth, each state should be able to maximize its comparative advantage .
 Of course, transportation and of processing the information in the trade must be included in the costs of producing an item . The costs of transporting, processing and processing must also be included .
 The cost of producing items in different locations is low relative to the differences in the cost of making them in different countries . But increasingly, as globalization proceeds, these are low relative relative to differences in production costs .
 It is much cheaper to produce oil in Saudi Arabia than in Japan, and to produce cars in Japan than Saudi Arabia . It is also cheaper to make cars and produce oil from Saudi Arabia rather than Japan .
 A state need not have an absolute advantage (that is, that is, be the most efficient producer in the world) in producing one kind of good in order to make specialization pay . State must not have absolute advantage in production of one good to make it pay for specialization pay, says
 It need only specialize in producing goods that are relatively lower in cost than other goods . It needs to specialize in making low-cost goods that can be produced at lower prices .
 Imagine if Japan discovered a way to produce synthetic oil using the same mix of labor and capital that it now uses to produce cars . This synthetic oil could be produced more cheaply than what it costs Saudi Arabia to produce oil, but that Japan could still produce cars much more cheaply .
 It might seem intuitive that Japan should produce synthetic oil rather than pay extra for Saudi oil . Japan should pay more for synthetic oil than Saudi oil, but should not pay more to Saudi Arabia, experts say .
 The extra profits Japan would make from exporting more cars would more than compensate for the slightly higher price it would pay to import oil . It would be more than compensating for the higher cost of importing oil .
 Free trade allocates global resources to states that have the greatest comparative advantage in producing each kind of commodity . The United States is one of the world's most successful nations .
 Prices are both lower overall and more consistent worldwide. As a result, prices are lower overall . Prices are more consistent and lower overall worldwide .
 The economic benefits of trade, however, come with some political drawbacks . The benefits of free trade come with the political risks of a trade war .
 When a state begins to import goods that it had been producing domestically, its economy may be disrupted . Workers may need to retrain and find new jobs, and capital may not be easy to convert to new uses .
 If a U.S. manufacturing company moves its factory to Mexico to take advantage of cheaper labor there and exports its goods back to the United States, the workers at the old United States factory lose their jobs . United States consumers enjoy cheaper goods, but United States workers lose jobs .
 The costs of such a move fall heavily on a few workers, but the benefits are spread thinly across many consumers . The benefits of the move will be spread thinly over many consumers, the government says .
 Protectionist measures benefit a few people greatly, and cost many people a bit . By the same logic, protectionist measures cost many more than a few, and hurt a few .
 By one estimate, a 20 percent steel tariff enacted by the Bush administration in 2002-2003 cost consumers $7 billion and saved 7,300 U.S. jobs . The roughly $20 cost per United States citizen goes unnoticed . iJ
 This kind of unequal distribution of costs and benefits often creates political problems for free trade . The overall economic benefits outweigh the costs of free trade, even when the benefits outweigh costs . Free trade is a form of democracy in the United States .
 A free and efficient market requires many buyers and sellers with fairly complete information about the market . Political Interference in Markets is the result of political interference in the market, says President Obama .
 The willingness of participants to deal with each other should not be distorted by personal preferences but should only be governed only by price and quality considerations . Also, the willingness of . participants to . deal with others should not . be distorted . by personal . preferences . The willingness to deal should not
 Market imperfections are called market imperfections . Deviations from these conditions reduce efficiency . Markets imperfections reduce efficiency, say experts . Markets are imperfections that reduce efficiency of markets .
 Most political intrusions into economic transactions are market imperfections . Most economic intrusions are imperfections of the market . Most of the world's economic institutions are open to free markets .
 United States Trade Panel Backs Putting Hefty Duties on Imported Steel . United States trade panel backs putting hefty duties on imported steel .
 No world government owns industries, provides subsidies, or regulates prices . World government does not own industries, provide subsidies or regulate prices . No government owns or regulates industries .
 When states are the principal actors in international economic affairs, the number of participants is often small . The United States is one of the most powerful states in the world, writes Andrew Hammond .
 When there is just one supplier of an item — a monopoly — the supplier can set the price quite high . The price is set to be set by the supplier of the item .
 South African company De Beers produces 40 percent of the world supply of uncut diamonds . It controls two-thirds of the market for uncut diamond diamonds .
 An oligopoly is a monopoly shared by just a few large sellers, often allowing for tacit or explicit coordination to force the price up . An oligopolopolopolopoly is an oligopoly shared by a handful of large sellers .
 OPEC members agree to limit oil production to keep prices up . OPEC members agreed to limit production of oil production in order to keep up prices .
 To the extent that companies band together along national lines, monopolies and oligopolies are more likely to occur, experts say . In the U.S., monopolies are likely to be more likely .
 Another common market imperfection in international trade is corruption . Individuals may receive payoffs to trade at nonmarket prices .
 Politics provides a legal framework for markets, ensuring that participants keep their commitments, contracts are binding, buyers pay for goods they purchase, counterfeit money is not used, and so forth . Politics provides the legal framework to markets, making sure participants keep commitments and keep commitments .
 In the international economy, lacking a central government authority, rules are less easily enforced . In the world, rules can be easily enforced in the absence of a central authority .
 Taxes are used both to generate revenue for the government and to regulate economic activity by incentives . Taxes are also used to regulate the economy by regulating economic activity .
 A government may keep taxes low on foreign companies in hopes of attracting them to locate and invest in the country . For instance, a government may be keeping taxes low to attract companies .
 Political interference in free markets is most explicit when governments apply sanctions against economic interactions of certain kinds or between certain actors . Sanctions are the result of sanctions against certain kinds of economic interactions .
 Political power prohibits an economic exchange that would otherwise have been mutually beneficial . Political power then prohibits an exchange between political power and economic interests . The exchange would otherwise be mutually beneficial.
 In 2011, the U.S. had trade restrictions on 15 states in response to those states’ political actions, such as human rights violations . The restrictions were imposed in 2011 after those states' political actions .
 Enforcing sanctions is always a difficult task, because participants have a financial incentive to break the sanctions through black markets or other means . Enforces sanctions are difficult to enforce, as participants have financial incentives to break them .
 Without broad support for international sanctions, they generally fail . Without broad, multilateral support, sanctions generally fail, they often fail, experts say .
 India, Iran’s top oil customer, sent a trade delegation to Iran in 2012 to take advantage of Western sanctions . In 2012, India sent a delegation to Tehran, taking advantage of openings created by sanctions .
 The difficulty of applying sanctions reflects a more general point made earlier—that power in IPE is more diffused among states than it is in security affairs . The difficulty in applying sanctions is due to the fact that IPE powers are diffused more than security affairs, says Peter Bergen
 It took a few years to get European and other major powers on board with the U.S. to apply sanctions that hurt Iran’s economy . In the case of Iran, it took several years for major powers to apply the sanctions .
 A self-reliant state pays a very high cost to produce goods for which it does not have a comparative advantage . Self-reliance state pays very high costs to produce products for which they do not have comparative advantage, says the government .
 As other states cooperate among themselves to maximize their joint creation of wealth, the relative power of the autarkic state tends to fall . Autarkic states tend to be less powerful in the international system .
 States that have relied on a policy of autarky have lagged behind others . States that rely heavily on autarksy have indeed lagged back behind others, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Albania is the smallest state in southeast Europe . Albania has been the site of a number of human trafficking problems in recent decades .
 Albania for decades did not participate in world markets but relied on a centrally planned economy designed for self-sufficiency . A communist state that split from both the Soviet Union and China, Albania was a communist state .
 Albania pursued autarky to prevent outsiders gaining power over it . Few foreigners could visit, little trade took place, and little outsiders gained power .
 Albania was as poor as decades earlier and had missed out on the prosperity that came to the rest of Europe . When this curtain of isolation finally fell in 1991, Albania was still poor as it had been decades earlier .
 China’s economic isolation in the 1950s and 1960s resulted from an economic embargo imposed by the United States and its allies . The embargo deepened during its Cultural Revolution in the late 1960s when it broke ties with the Soviet Union as well .
 When China opened up to the world economy in the 1980s, the pattern reversed . The pattern reversed when the country began to open up to world economies .
 The rapid expansion of trade, along with some market-oriented reforms in its domestic economy, resulted in rapid economic growth . China has seen rapid growth in recent years .
 North Korea maintained a policy of self-reliance and isolation even after the Cold War . North Korea experienced mass starvation in the 1990s, when it suffered mass starvation .
 International restrictions on trade and business with Iran are among the most obvious ways that politics interferes in markets . Economic sanctions, such as the current international restrictions on Iran, are one of the ways to interfere in the markets .
 Sanctions are hard to enforce, especially when not all countries participate, because doing business is profitable . Sanctions against countries involved in the trade deal are difficult to enforce because of the nature of doing business .
 Once Europe and the U.S. coordinated tough sanctions on Iran, they caused major economic disruption there . The sanctions triggered a decline in Iran's currency by about half . Iran's economy has been hit hard by the sanctions .
 Many states try to manipulate international trade to strengthen one or more domestic industries and shelter them from world markets . Few states pursue strategies of autarky, but many countries do it .
 Such policies are broadly known as protectionism—protection of domestic industries from international competition . Such policies include protectionism, protectionism .
 Trade policies seek to distort free markets to gain an advantage for the state, generally by discouraging imports of competing goods or services . The term encompasses a variety of trade policies arising from various motivations, all are contrary to liberalism .
 Governments simply cater to the political demands of important domestic industries and interests, regardless of the overall national interest . Often governments simply cater for the political needs of important interests, writes Andrew Hammond .
 States often attempt to protect an infant industry as it starts up in the state for the first time, until it can compete on world markets . States often try to protect the infant industry until it is ready to compete in the world market .
 When South Korea first developed an automobile industry, it was not yet competitive with imports, so the government gave consumers incentives to buy Korean cars .
 Eventually the industry developed and could compete with foreign producers and even export cars profitably . Eventually the car industry developed enough to compete with other foreign producers .
 In a number of poor states, the textile trade has been a favored infant industry (add value without heavy capital requirements) that governments have protected . Governments have protected textile trade in many poor states .
 Protection of infant industry is considered a relatively legitimate reason for protectionism . Protection of the infant industry seen as a reason for the country to protect itself .
 Another motivation for protection is to give domestic industry breathing room when market conditions shift or new competitors arrive on the scene .
 Domestic industry requires time to adapt and can emerge a few years later in a healthy condition . Sometimes domestic industry requires patience and patience to adapt .
 When gas prices jumped in the 1970s, U.S. auto producers were slow to shift to smaller cars . Smaller Japanese cars gained a great advantage in the United States market .
 The United States government used a variety of measures, including import quotas and loan guarantees, to help the United States industry through this transition .
 Government protects industries considered vital to national security . Government also protects industries seen as vital to the nation .
 In the 1980s, U.S. officials sought to protect electronics and computer industries against being driven out of business by Japanese competitors . Those industries were considered crucial to military production, officials say .
 Autarky may not pay in most economic activities, but for military goods, states will sacrifice some economic efficiency for the sake of self-sufficiency . States will sacrifice efficiency to reduce vulnerability in the event of war .
 Protectionism uses various means to keep foreign imports from competing with domestic products . Protectionism is a form of protectionism in the United States .
 Agricultural producers in the global South complain that subsidies and other protectionist measures in Europe and the United States prevent poor farmers from exporting to world markets . Agricultural producers complain that they are not allowed to export to the world market .
 Most often these efforts involve dumping products in foreign markets at prices below the minimum level necessary to make a profit . Most often this effort involves dumping products at the minimum price needed to make profit .
 The government can use antitrust laws to break up an impending monopoly, but because no such mechanism exists in IR, governments try to restrict imports in such situations to protect their state's industries .
 Great disagreements exist about whether a given price level is predatory or merely competitive . Such restrictions are recognized as legitimate, but great disagreements exist .
 Dumping complaints are usually lodged by industries that feel they have been harmed by foreign competitors . Dumping claims are usually made by particular industries that want to protect themselves .
 They must convince their own governments that they have been unfairly targeted . They must first convince themselves that they are unfairly targeted. They must also convince themselves of their innocence, they say .
 In 2007, the WTO ruled against the United States in a complaint brought by Japanese manufacturers . Japanese manufacturers claimed they had been unfairly accused of dumping industrial goods on the American market .
 The WTO criticized how the United States had computed the tariff on Japanese goods, ruling that it was set too high to create a level playing field . Instead of denying that Japan had dumped goods on the American market, the WTO criticized the U.S.
 The United States was forced to review how it proceeds with dumping complaints because of the WTO ruling . The U.S. was then forced to reviews how it responds to the ruling .
 There are several motivations for protectionism, so too governments use several tools to implement this policy . Just as there are several reasons for protectionistism, there are also several tools for it .
 The simplest is a tariff or duty —a tax imposed on certain types of imported goods as they enter the country . The simple act is to impose a tax or duty on certain products as they entered the country.
 Tariffs not only restrict imports but also can be an important source of state revenues . Tariffs are a key source of revenue for many states .
 Most states maintain a long and complex schedule of tariffs based on thousands of categories and subcategories of goods . The tariffs are organized by industry .
 Quotas are ceilings on how many goods of a certain kind can be imported . They are imposed to restrict the growth of such imports . Quots is ceilings on what kind of goods you can import .
 The United States used quotas to restrict the number of Japanese-made cars that could enter the United States in the 1980s . The U.S. automobile industry was losing ground rapidly to Japanese imports .
 Most of the quotas were voluntary in that Japan and the U.S. negotiated a level that both could live with . Most of those quotas are voluntary . The United States and Japan negotiated a deal that both agreed with each other .
 The two nontariff barriers that are the most fought about in the WTO are subsidies and regulation . Subsidies and regulation are the biggest issues of the WTO, the WTO says .
 Subsidies are payments by a government to a domestic industry that allow it to lower its prices without losing money . Subsidy payments are payments to a government that allow the industry to lower prices without a loss of money .
 Such subsidies are extensive in, but not limited to, state-owned industries . Such subsidies include subsidies to state-run industries .
 Subsidies to an industry struggling to get established or facing strong foreign competition include tax breaks, loans, loans on favorable terms, and high guaranteed prices paid by governments . Government subsidies are often paid to industries struggling to establish or facing competition .
 Subsidies to farmers have been the major sticking point between rich and poor countries in the Doha Round trade talks . Subsidy to farmers has been a key sticking point in the talks . The talks are set to begin in Qatar next week .
 In 2010, the U.S. and Brazil settled a WTO case over American subsidies to cotton growers . The case stemmed from a dispute over American cotton subsidies .
 Brazil was set to begin imposing nearly $830 million in sanctions against the U.S. Prior to the settlement, Brazil had been set to impose $830M in sanctions .
 Subsidies outside the agricultural sector can also be sensitive politically . Subsides outside of agricultural sector are also sensitive politically. Subssidies are often sensitive politically to politicians .
 Subsidies have moved from an issue in trade policy to the security area as well . Thus, subsidies have also moved from a trade policy issue to a security issue as well, the government says .
 Imports can also be restricted by restrictions and regulations that make it hard to distribute and market a product even when it can be imported . Imports are also restricted by regulations and restrictions .
 U.S. manufacturers complain of complex bureaucratic regulations and a tight system of corporate alliances funneling the supply of parts from Japanese suppliers to Japanese manufacturers .
 Environmental and labor regulations can function as nontariff barriers as well as other regulations as well .
 This has caused great controversy in the WTO , such as when Europe banned genetically modified crops that happened to come mostly from the U.S.
 When a state nationalizes an entire industry, such as oil production or banking, foreign competition is shut out . Foreign competition is also shut out when an industry is nationalized, the author says .
 Sometimes a country’s culture, rather than state action, discourages imports . Sometimes culture discourages importing, sometimes culture also discourages it .
 U.S. citizens ignore advice of liberal economists to buy the best products at the best price, and instead “buy American” even if it means paying more for an equivalent product . For example, United States citizens sometimes ignore advice from liberal economists .
 Although such a bias reduces the overall efficiency of world production, it does benefit U.S. workers, it benefits the United States .
 Protectionism has both positive and negative effects on the economy . Most often helping producers but hurting consumers . Protectionism often helps producers but hurts consumers .
 Domestic industry may use protection to avoid needed improvements and may therefore remain inefficient and uncompetitive . Another problem with protectionism is that domestic industry may avoid needed improvement . Protectionism may also be harmful if protection continues over many years .
 Temporary protectionism can have a stabilizing effect under certain conditions, experts say . Still, temporary protectionism will have an impact on the economy, they say .
 Harley-Davidson lost half its U.S. market share in just four years . The United States government imposed tariffs on imported Japanese motorcycles . The tariffs were imposed in the United States in response to the increased demand .
 The tariffs started at 45 percent in 1983 and were to decline each year for five years before being eliminated . The tariffs were to be eliminated each year and then be eliminated .
 Harley scrambled to improve efficiency and raise quality . Harley says it is working to raise quality and improve efficiency . Harley has been criticized for being too slow to make changes to its products .
 Harley regained its market share, and the tariffs were lifted a year early . As a result, Harley regained market share . Harley's market share was increased .
 Harley expanded its market share and began exporting to Japan in the late 1980s . Harley has been a major success story for Harley in the world for decades . Harley says it is now a global success story in motorcycle racing .
 Protectionism worked in this case because it was short term and straightforward . Protectionism was short-term and straightforward, but it worked in the end .
 The World Trade Organization promotes, monitors, and adjudicates international trade . The IGO is a global, multilateral IGO that promotes and monitors trade .
 The WTO is the successor organization to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . The organization was created in 1947 to facilitate freer trade on a multilateral basis . The WTO was created to facilitate free trade in the United States .
 The GATT was more of a negotiating framework than an administrative institution, says the GATT . GATT is more of an agreement framework than a negotiation framework, he says . He says it was a "negotiating framework" rather than a legal framework .
 Before the GATT, proposals for a stronger institutional agency had been rejected because of U.S. fears that overregulation would stifle free trade . The GATT is the world's largest free trade treaty .
 The GATT helped arbitrate trade disputes, clarifying the rules and helping states observe them . In addition to its main role as a negotiating forum, the GATT was also a key arbitrator of disputes .
 In 1995, the GATT became the WTO, which incorporated GATT agreements on manufactured goods . The WTO extended the agenda to include trade in services and intellectual property .
 The WTO monitors trade policies and practices in each member state . It adjudicates disputes among disputes among members . The WTO has some powers of enforcement .
 The WTO wields some power over states, but as with most international institutions, this power is limited . The WTO has some power but this is limited, with most of it limited, the WTO says .
 An ongoing public backlash against free trade reflects uneasiness about the potential power of a foreign and secretive organization to force changes in democratically enacted national laws .
 The WTO is the central international institution governing trade and therefore one that almost all countries want to participate in and develop . But the WTO is also a powerful international institution that is important to its members .
 More than 25 states are seeking admission, the most important are Iran and Iraq . Iran is seeking admission to the U.S.
 The United States and other countries usually demand liberalization of the trading practices of would-be members . The U.S. usually demands that as a condition of membership, it liberalizes trade practices .
 The WTO framework rests on the principle of reciprocity, matching states’ lowering of trade barriers to one another . The WTO has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 Trade restrictions imposed by a WTO member on its most-favored trading partner must be applied equally to all WTO members . It also uses the concept of nondiscrimination, embodied in the most-Favored nation concept, in which trade restrictions imposed on a member must be equally applied to
 If Australia applies a 20 percent tariff on auto parts imported from France, it must not apply a 40 percent tariff . The same tariff applies to the U.S. if it applies to France .
 The WTO does not get rid of barriers to trade altogether but equalizes them in a global framework to create a level playing field for all member states . The WTO aims to equalize trade barriers to all members of the world .
 States are not prevented from protecting their own industries but cannot play favorites among their trading partners . States must not play favorites in order to protect their own industry . States will not be able to play favorites with trading partners, but not with each other's industries .
 An exception to the MFN system is the Generalized System of Preferences, dating from the 1970s . Rich states give trade concessions to poor ones to help their economic development .
 These detailed and complex agreements specify commitments to lower certain trade barriers by certain countries . The agreements were signed by Hoekman, Bernard and Michel Kostecki .
 Almost every commitment entails domestic political costs, because domestic industries lose protection against foreign competition . Almost all commitments involve domestic political risks, including protection from foreign competition, political costs .
 Even when other states agree to make similar commitments in other areas, lowering trade barriers is often hard for national governments to do so .
 The Kennedy Round in the 1960s paid special attention to the growing role of European integration, which the U.S. found somewhat threatening . The five rounds of GATT negotiations took place between 1947 and 1995 .
 The Tokyo Round in the 1970s had to adjust rules to new conditions of world interdependence when, for instance, OPEC raised oil prices and Japan began to dominate the automobile export business .
 A successful conclusion to the round would add more than $100 billion to the world economy annually, a successful conclusion would add $100billion to the global economy annually .
 The money was a collective good, to be enjoyed both by states that made concessions in the final negotiations . But that money was enjoyed both in both states and out of states that did not . States that didn't make concessions were able to enjoy the money .
 The U.S. pressured Europe to reduce agricultural subsidies and states in the global South to protect intellectual property rights . Agreement was finally reached in late 1994 .
 In the end, the United States got some, but not all, what it wanted . The U.S. got some of the things it wanted. But not all of it was wanted.
 France held out adamantly and won the right to protect its film industry against U.S. films . For example, France fought to protect itself from the United States films .
 From 1947, the GATT encouraged states to use import tariffs rather than nontariff barriers to protect industries . States must lower those tariffs over time to lower them over time, GATT says .
 Agricultural trade is politically more sensitive than trade in manufactured goods . Agricultural trade came into play only in Uruguay Round of Uruguay Round .
 Such trade exceeded onefifth of the total value of world trade in 2012, according to World Trade Organisation .
 In 1997, 70 states negotiating through the WTO agreed on a treaty to allow telecommunications companies to enter each other’s markets . 70 states agreed on the treaty in 1997, allowing telecommunications firms to enter other markets .
 The problems in expanding into sensitive areas became obvious at a 1999 Seattle WTO conference . Trade ministers had hoped to launch a new, post Uruguay round of trade negotiations .
 Environmental and labor activists, joined by window-smashing anarchists, staged street protests . The protests delayed the conference opening by a day .
 In 2001 trade ministers meeting in Doha, Qatar, agreed to launch a new round of trade negotiations . The Doha Round was launched by trade ministers in 2001 .
 At 2003 meeting in Cancun, Mexico, states from the global South walked out after the shutting out poor countries’ agricultural exports . At the 2003 meeting, Mexico’s leaders shut out poor nations’ exports .
 At the 2005 Hong Kong meeting, wealthy states agreed to end the export subsidies . Tough negotiations continued over tariffs on manufactured goods, protection of intellectual property .
 The main obstacle remains the resistance of the industrialized West to cut agricultural subsidies as demanded by countries in the global South . The game theorists might look to the game of Chicken as an explanatory model .
 In most trade disputes, each state would rather get to a deal, even on terms that somewhat favor the other state if need be . In most cases, the state of California would rather than get to an agreement with the other .
 In a game of Chicken, each player wants to avoid a head-on collision . Being a hero or a chicken is a secondary consideration in the game .
 In trade negotiations, both states hold out for their own terms for as long as possible, then come to an agreement only when faced with an imminent collision . This is the case of a deadline beyond which there will be no deal at all . Both states are seeking to avoid a trade deal
 In Chicken, there is no incentive to give ground before the last minute . Chicken is not the first time the team has lost a game in a row .
 The Doha Round of WTO negotiations stretched from 2001 to 2013 without conclusion . The negotiations were held in Doha between 2001 and 2013 without a conclusion .
 In 2007, participants tried to use a key deadline—expiration of the United States Congress’s fast-track authorization, after which U.S. approval of a new WTO agreement would become difficult—to inspire a final agreement .
 Some leaders suggested wrapping up the Doha Round over the weekend, before the change in U.S. administrations . Others suggested wrapping it up before the November 2008 summit in Washington, D.C., before a growing financial crisis .
 As each such deadline passed, it became harder to believe that the next deadline was real, that the head-on collision loomed if states did not “swerve” in time . The deadline has passed, but it has become more and more difficult to believe .
 One drawback of the model, however, is that it does not predict the outcomes, because the game is inherently unstable . One drawback is that the model is not able to predict the outcome .
 A conference of trade ministers in December 2005 tried to regain momentum for the stalled Doha Round, with mixed success . The conference was held in Doha, Qatar, in 2005 .
 WTO head Pascal Lamy opens the conference with the tool he hopes will bring success . Lamy: "It's not a magic wand. It's a big step up"
 States try to change the rules in their favor during negotiations . Between rounds they may evade the rules by changing them in minor ways . States may try to evade rules in order to get around the rules during the negotiations .
 The overall benefits are too great to jeopardize by nonparticipation or frequent trade wars . But the overall benefits of participating in the U.S. are not jeopardized by the trade wars, the authors say .
 Most international trade also takes place under more specific international political agreements . Bilateral and regional free trade agreements also take place in the world .
 Bilateral treaties covering trade are reciprocal arrangements to lower barriers to trade between two states . Bilateral Agreements are reciprocal agreements to lower trade barriers between two countries .
 A sweeping agreement, such as that between Canada and India in 2007, generally contains mind-numbing levels of detail concerning specific industries and products . The agreement was signed in 2007 in an effort to reach an agreement between Canada, India .
 Trade treaties involve great complexity and constant monitoring . As with most agreements based on reciprocity principle, trade treaties are complex .
 United States free trade deals with South Korea, Panama, and Colombia took effect in 2011 . Free trade deals between the U.S. and South Korea also took effect .
 World has substantially lowered trade barriers and enjoyed rising prosperity as a result of trade . A Doha Round WTO Agreement is a trade-free zone between the U.S. and China .
 Negotiating through the World Trade Organization, countries have concluded successive “rounds” of trade agreements . Each state reciprocates the concessions of other states, in which they reciprocate .
 Almost all the world's major trading powers must agree before any can enjoy the benefits of an agreement . These negotiations require every single member of the world’s major trade powers to agree .
 A new WTO agreement is a collective good because all the member states profit from relaxing trade restrictions regardless of which of them made the concessions needed to reach a deal . A new deal is a good collective good for all the members of the world's trade group .
 France and the United States fought over restrictions on U.S. films in the previous Uruguay Round . The deal was held up while the two countries fought about restrictions on United States films .
 France and the U.S. would benefit overall from the deal, both would benefit from it . Whether France or the United States hung tough to win on this issue, both countries would benefit .
 If both hung tough, the entire deal would break down and the collective good would not be provided . But if both hang tough, it would break up and not provide a collective good .
 When WTO negotiations bog down, bilateral agreements can keep trade momentum going . They have advantages of reducing the collective goods problem inherent in mub 'l 1 tilateral negotiations and facilitating reciprocity .
 Most states do most of their trading with a few partners . A few bilateral agreements can go a long way in structuring a state’s trade relations .
 The number of bilateral agreements has grown substantially in the past decade . Bilateral agreements far overwhelm all other types of agreements combined .
 Regional free trade areas also matter in the structure of world trade . Free trade areas are important in the world's economic structure .
 Groups of neighboring states agree to remove most or all trade barriers within their area . In such areas, groups of states have to remove trade barriers in order to reach agreement .
 Beyond free trade areas, states may reduce trade barriers and adopt a common tariff toward states that are not members of the agreement . States may also adopt a similar tariff to states that aren't in free trade agreement .
 If members of a customs union decide to coordinate other policies such as monetary exchange, the union becomes a common market . Members of the customs union can also coordinate monetary exchange policies if they agree .
 The creation of a regional trade agreement allows a group of states to cooperate in increasing their wealth without waiting for the rest of the world to do so .
 The most important free trade area is in Europe; it is connected with the European Union but has a somewhat larger membership . Europe has a larger membership than the U.S.
 Until the participants find agreement on these pesky remaining issues, nobody can enjoy the economic boost that a new WTO agreement will bring . Only reciprocity can solve this dilemma, says the World Trade Council .
 The entire structure of world trade relies on the formal equality of all participants, so dominance does not play a major role . And the entire structure relies on formal equality for all participants .
 Certainly, military force cannot resolve trade disputes as it might have done centuries ago . The U.S. might not be able to do so again .
 Trade agreements have great complexity, fine-level detail, and considerable effort to monitor compliance . Consistent with reciprocity solutions generally, trade agreements are complex and complex .
 The United States, Canada, and Mexico signed the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1994 . The agreement follows a U.S.-Canadian free trade agreement signed in 1988 .
 Initially, Mexico’s currency dropped drastically relative to the dollar in 1994-1995 . The currency dropped significantly relative to dollar in the early 1990s .
 United States opponents of NAFTA criticized the low wages and poor labor laws in Mexico . They feared it would drag down U.S. labor standards . The United States labor unions opposed it .
 NAFTA supporters and opponents predicted the benefits of NAFTA would have materialized . But over 15 years, neither the great benefits predicted by NAFTA supporters nor the disasters predicted by opponents materialized. NAFTA supporters say the benefits should have been realized .
 President Clinton asked Congress in 1997 to reinstate fast-track legislation . Fast-tracking legislation was reinstated by President Clinton .
 Democrats in Congress defeated the measure, demanding that free trade agreements include requirements for labor and environmental standards for other countries . They found NAFTA’s record wanting . Democrats found NAFTA's record wanting.
 President Bush had more success winning fast-track authority from Congress . FTAA negotiations began in 2003 with a target date of 2005 . President Bush won more success .
 The 2001 recession and post-September 11 security measures reduced trade . China provided U.S. companies with a better source of cheap labor . Left-leaning governments came to power in most of the Latin American countries .
 Those countries cared most about tariff-free trade, while the U.S. emphasized services, intellectual property, and financial openness . The United States position emphasized a range of other issues .
 In late 2005, trade talks failed at a summit meeting in Argentina, where one participant, Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez, led a 25,000-person anti-American rally in the streets .
 Currently, the FTAA talks remain in hibernation, and the weight of trade negotiations fall to the Doha Round . The weight of the negotiations now falls to Doha round .
 The United States reached free trade agreements with several Latin American countries . Meanwhile, the U.S. reached free deals with some Latin America countries .
 Efforts to create a free trade area in Asia began in the late 1980s but moved slowly . Efforts have been slow to reach an agreement in the region .
 Unlike European and North American arrangements, an Asian bloc would include very different kinds of states . Rich ones such as Japan; poor ones such the Philippines; and democracies, dictatorships, and communist states . The Asian bloc includes rich ones like Japan, poor ones like the Philippines .
 In 2007 the ten ASEAN countries met with China, Japan, India, Australia, and New Zealand to begin negotiating an East Asian free trade area . Despite these problems, the ten countries met in 2007 .
 The group, unlike some other Asia-Pacific IGOs, does not include the United States . The group does include half the world’s population and some of its most dynamic economies .
 You were recently elected and are expected to continue the policies of your predecessor . You're expected to be expected to carry on with your predecessor's policies .
 Brazil is now the tenth-largest economy in the world . In 2010, growth was around 5 percent, up from -0. percent in 2003 . Brazil is the world's tenth largest economy .
 Your country's export-led growth strategy is an important piece of this economic picture . Export-led strategy is a key part of your country's economic growth strategy, says IMF .
 In 2005, you ran a current account surplus for the first time since 1992 . Exports to industrialized countries are at an all-time high, and in 2005, the country ran a surplus .
 The United States, Argentina, China, the Netherlands, and Germany are your key export partners . The Netherlands, Argentina and the Netherlands are your main export partners.
 The United States alone accounts for 11 percent of your exports and 16 percent of imports . The U.S. accounts for about 11 percent exports and about 16 percent imports .
 EU states account for 23 percent of your exports, but far less of your imports . EU states combine to account for more than 23 percent export of your products .
 You have been pressured extensively by the U.S. to join a Free Trade Area of the Americas . You have refused to do so. The United States has repeatedly pressured you to join .
 FTAA aims to lower agricultural subsidies and increase quotas for Brazilian farm products . Developed countries should lower their agricultural subsidies, the FTAA leader says . Brazil is seeking to lower its agricultural subsidies .
 To date, America has largely turned down your demands in the agricultural realm . America has turned down the demands of your demands .
 Given U.S. bargaining power, this may be a difficult concession to extract in future negotiations . Given United States bargaining power .
 Domestically, you are being pressured to ensure continued market access for your industrial and agricultural products in international markets . You are being . pressured to . ensure continued . access to your industrial, agricultural and . agricultural products .
 You recently pushed to bring several other Latin American states into Mercosur as associate members to hedge your bets against a collapse in the FTAA negotiations . You also pushed for the inclusion of several more Latin American countries as associate states .
 "You cannot rely on your Mercosur partners alone to absorb your export production. Unfortunately, you can't rely on them alone," says the president .
 Mercosur's three full partners have a combined total GDP smaller than Canada's . Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Uruguay have a total total GDP less than Canada .
 Imagine that the EU offers a free trade agreement with better terms (especially concerning agricultural goods) than a potential FTAA agreement . Now imagine that a deal with the EU would offer better terms than the FTAA .
 Several EU states are key trading partners, this is an attractive offer . Because several EU countries are key trade partners, it is attractive to invest in the region, analysts say .
 In order for your exports to continue to grow, your market opportunities must expand . In order to grow your exports, your exports must continue to expand, say experts .
 This would provide such an opportunity while satisfying those exportoriented industries . This would also provide an opportunity for those export oriented industries .
 If the U.S. completed an FTAA without you, this would be costly to your economy . Any similar goods produced by your neighbors would have preferential access to the United States markets, making them more attractive than Brazilian goods to United States .
 After the Soviet Union collapsed, the members scrambled to join up with the world economy .
 It was previously a free trade zone by virtue of being part of a single state with integrated transportation, communication, and other infrastructure links . The zone is now a state of one state .
 The Southern Cone Common Market began in the early 1990s with Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, and Paraguay, which opposed letting Venezuela in . Venezuela is the only member of the group of countries that have allowed it in .
 Brazil engineered Paraguay’s suspension from Mercosur for ten months, during which Venezuela was admitted . Venezuela was then allowed to enter the bloc . Paraguay's president was hastily impeached in 2012, Brazil engineered the suspension .
 Chile, Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Ecuador and Peru have joined as associate members of the group . Peru, Peru, Bolivia and Ecuador have also joined the group in the past .
 Mercosur members trade more with the U.S. than they do with each other . The group blocked a proposed free trade area of North and South America . The United States is the only major trading partner in the region .
 A Caribbean common market was created in 1973, but the area is neither large nor rich enough to make regional free trade a very important accelerator of economic growth . Free trade is a key economic growth accelerator in the Caribbean .
 In 1969, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia created a group now known as the Andean Community of Nations . The group had modest successes and counts the Mercosur members as associate members . The Andean community of Nations was formed in 1969 .
 In 2008, a single continent-wide Union of South American Nations began taking shape . Mercosur and the Andean Community merged in an effort to follow the example of the European Union .
 If regional free trade areas such as now exist in Europe and in North America gain strength and new ones arise, the WTO may be weakened .
 The overlap of WTO rules and regional agreements can create confusion . For example, in 2006, a WTO panel upheld United States duties on Canadian softwood lumber while a NAFTA panel overturned the duties .
 Regional agreements might divide the world into three competing trading blocs, each internally integrated but not very open to the other two blocs . Ultimately, the world might be divided into three different regions, each internal integrated .
 Regional free trade areas in Europe and the Americas could practice liberalism inwardly and mercantilism outwardly . Asia's free trade zones may practice liberalism outwardly and inwardly .
 A cartel is an association of producers or consumers, or both, of a certain product . It is formed to manipulate its price on the world market . Cartels are an association that manipulates the price of certain products .
 Most often producers and not consumers form cartels . There are usually fewer producers than consumers, and it seems possible to coordinate to keep prices high .
 Cartels can use a variety of means to affect prices . Most effective is to coordinate limits on production by each member so as to lower the supply, relative to demand, of the good .
 At OPEC’s peak of strength in the 1970s, the proportion was even higher . The proportion of OPEC's oil output was higher than at OPEC's peak in the 1980s .
 OPEC maintains a headquarters in Vienna, Austria, and holds negotiations several times a year to set quotas for each country’s production of oil in order to keep world oil prices in a target range . OPEC is based in Vienna and holds talks with each member of the world's largest oil
 OPEC illustrates potential that a cartel creates for collective goods problems . OPEC illustrates the potential of a cartel to solve collective goods issues .
 OPEC can cheat by exceeding their production quotas while still enjoying the collective good of high oil prices . Individual members of OPEC can exceed their quotas by exceeding production quotas . Individual OPEC members can also cheat by over-exceeding their quotas .
 OPEC may work as well as it does only because one member, Saudi Arabia, has enough oil to unilaterally manipulate supply enough to drive prices up or down . Saudi Arabia is a form of hegemonic stability within the cartel . OPEC may not work well as well because Saudi Arabia has enough
 Saudi Arabia can take up the slack from some cheating in OPEC and keep prices up . Saudi Arabia has been accused of cheating in the world's largest oil markets .
 OPEC can punish members if they are cheating on their quotas by flooding the market with oil and driving prices down . OPEC can also punish members who cheat on quotas . OPEC members collectively come to their senses if too many are cheating .
 OPEC Members and Oil Production, December 2012 Member State Member State Millions of Barrels/Day Saudi Arabia 9.6 million barrels/day . Saudi Arabia is the only OPEC member state to produce millions of barrels a day .
 Ecuador re-joined OPEC in 2007 after suspending its membership in 1992 . Ecuador is now 40% of the world's population .
 Major oil exporters not in OPEC include Russia, Kazakhstan, Mexico, China, Britain, and Norway . Russia and Kazakhstan are major exporters of oil .
 The United States, until several decades ago, is now a major importer of crude oil . The U.S. is now an oil importer .
 OPEC is an oil-importing cartel, but it has been criticized for being a cartel . In response to OPEC, major oil importing states formed their own organization, the International Energy Agency . The IEA partly functions as a cartel.
 The IEA coordinates the energy policies of major industrialized states in order to keep world oil prices low and stable . Oil stockpiles in case of a shortage on world markets are kept in place to prevent a shortage .
 Oil prices fluctuated from about $20 per barrel in 1998 to over $140 and back to $40 in 2008 . The price of oil has been surprisingly unstable, with prices fluctuating between $20 and $40 per barrel .
 For a few commodities that are subject to large price fluctuations on world markets, joint producer-consumer cartels have been formed . The cartels are meant to protect producers and consumers .
 Producing and consuming states use the cartel to coordinate the overall supply and demand globally . In order to keep prices stable, the cartel keeps prices stable .
 Such cartels exist for coffee, several minerals, and some other products, such as coffee and minerals .
 NGOs introduced Fair Trade Certified coffee, and later chocolate and other products, to guarantee farmers a price above their production costs through the price booms and busts . NGOs say it guarantees farmers a higher price above production costs .
 More than a million farmers in 70 countries benefit from these arrangements . More than one million farmers worldwide benefit from such arrangements .
 In general, the idea of cartels runs counter to liberal economics because cartels deliberately distort free markets . The idea of cartel cartels is counter to free markets, according to the Cato Institute .
 Industries that are advanced and competitive in world markets try to influence their governments to adopt free trade policies . Free trade policies are key to success in the world markets .
 This strategy promotes a global free trade system in which such industries can prosper . The strategy promotes free trade in the global market, it says .
 Industry that lag behind its global competitors tend to seek protection . By contrast, industries that lag lag behind their global competitors often seek protection.
 Means to influence foreign economic policy include lobbying, forming interest groups, paying bribes, and even encouraging coups . Means include paying bribes and lobbying to influence economic policy .
 Actors include industry-sponsored groups, companies, labor unions, unions, and individuals . Actors in the U.S. range from actors to actors . The U.N. agency says the agency is investigating the situation .
 Despite competition among companies and between management and labor, all share common interests regarding trade policies . Within an industry, such efforts usually work in a common direction . Despite competition, the efforts work in the common direction because of common interests .
 Some U.S. industries supported the North American Free Trade Agreement . Others opposed it . Some industries supported it .
 In many countries, government not only responds to industry influence, but works actively with industries to promote their growth and tailor trade policy to their needs . Government not only works with industry, but also works actively to promote growth .
 United States labor unions do not want companies to use NAFTA to avoid paying high wages . U.S. labor unions want companies not to use the trade deal to avoid high wages in the United States .
 Mexican American citizens’ groups in the United States tend to support NAFTA because it strengthens ties to relatives in Mexico . The U.S. citizen’s groups tend to back NAFTA because they support it .
 Several industries are particularly important in trade negotiations currently . Several industries, including agriculture, have been key to negotiations .
 Farmers are wellorganized and powerful domestic political actors in Europe, the U.S., Japan, and other countries . Although such security concerns have now faded somewhat, farmers are well organized and powerful .
 Japanese farmers argue that Japan’s rice-centered culture demands self-sufficiency in rice production . For instance, Japanese farmers say they are self-sustainable .
 In the Doha Round of WTO negotiations, agricultural subsidies were a key sticking point . Agricultural subsidies are a key point in the negotiations of the World Economic Forum .
 The talks collapsed in 2003 in Cancun, Mexico, over farm subsidies, but were revived the next year by U.S. promises to cut farm subsidies 20 percent . The talks were revived by the United States next year .
 At the 2005 Hong Kong talks, wealthy countries agreed to end all farm export subsidies by 2013 . Wealthy countries agreed in 2005 that all farm exports should be cut off by end of subsidies .
 A second important focus in recent years has been the textile and garment sector . The textile sector has also been a focus of recent years .
 As of 2005, textile quotas worldwide were dropped as a part of previously negotiated WTO deals . Textile quotas worldwide have been dropped as of 2005 .
 China began dominating world clothing exports, with whole cities specializing in one type of garment produced for mass export to giant retailers/ With vast pools of cheap and disciplined labor, China threatened to drive United States textile and clothing producers out of business .
 The European Union and the United States each reached bilateral agreements with China to reimpose textile quotas for a few years . Later in 2005, the EU and the U.S. each agreed to re-establish textile quotas with China .
 Vietnam has begun to take textile business away from China by providing even lower production costs . Now, countries such as Vietnam have begun taking textile business from China .
 Intellectual property rights are a third contentious area of trade negotiations . Intellectual property right is a key part of the negotiations .
 Intellectual property rights are the rights of creators of books, films, computer software, and similar products to receive royalties when their products are sold . Creators of books and films receive royalties from their products when sold .
 The United States has a major conflict with some states over piracy of computer software, music, films, and other creative works . The U.S. has a strong comparative advantage globally .
 Agriculture is at the top of the agenda of international trade negotiations, as developing countries push richer onesto end farm subsidies . It is technically easy and cheap to copy such works and sell them in violation of the laws .
 Mexican farmers protest the full opening of Mexico's markets to imported U.S. corn under NAFTA, 2008 . Farmers protest the opening of the markets under NAFTA .
 The U.S. government wants foreign governments to prevent and punish violations of its laws in foreign countries . The United States cannot enforce its laws because laws cannot be enforced in other countries .
 Countries that reportedly pirate large amounts of computer software and music and entertainment products include China, Taiwan, India, Thailand, Brazil, and the former Soviet republics .
 The Russian government estimated in 2002 that more than 80 percent of films sold in Russia on video and DVD were produced illegally . The government estimated that 80 percent were made illegally .
 Infringement of intellectual property rights is widespread in many third world countries, on products such as DVDs and prescription drugs . Infringment of copyright in third world products is widespread on DVDs .
 Most states have signed an important 1994 patent treaty and a 1996 copyright treaty . Most states signed the 1994 patent and 1996 copyright treaties . Most of the world's most important patent treaty was signed in 1996 .
 TRIPS rules are stronger than WIPO safeguards and can be relaxed only if all WTO members agree . Most industrialized countries prefer to use TRIPS because these rules are strong enough to withstand international pressure . TRIPS is a trade treaty system that allows countries to work together in the world .
 The 2001 WTO meeting at Doha led to a declaration that states could exempt certain drugs from TRIPS rules to deal with serious domestic health crises, such as an HIV/AIDS epidemic . The 2001 meeting led to the declaration that certain drugs were exempt .
 Only a few developing countries have used these exceptions, only a few have used them .
 Disputes have slowed the effective distribution of medicines to millions of Africans with AIDS . Progress picked up after 2004, though progress picked up in 2004, after 2004 .
 Companies trying to protect intellectual property in an international context cannot rely on the same enforcement of rules as in domestic contexts . Companies can't rely on enforcement of laws in international contexts, say experts .
 They need to bring their own state’s government to bear, as well as use their own resources . Instead, they need to use the resources of the state to help them .
 International economic conflicts easily become gov27 ernment-to-government issues . Because of state sovereignty in legal matters, state sovereignty is key to state sovereignty . Private international economic conflicts can easily become government issues .
 Intellectual property rights have been an important focus of recent trade negotiations . Intellectual intellectual property rights are an important part of the trade deal . Trade talks are expected to begin in the next few weeks .
 Pirated copies of videos, music, and software sell on the street with no royalty payments . In many countries, pirated copies are sold on the streets with no royalties .
 U.S. Trade Representative holds a pirated DVD from China as she filed a copyright complaint against China in the World Trade Organization .
 The key focus in international trade negotiations is on banking, insurance, and related financial services . This sector includes many services, especially those concerning information, especially .
 United States companies enjoy a comparative advantage in these areas because of their information-processing technologies and experience in financial management . U.S. companies, and some in Asia, enjoy comparative advantage .
 As telecommunications becomes cheaper and more pervasive, services offered by companies in one country can be efficiently used by consumers in other countries . In general, as telecommunications become cheaper, companies can offer services to consumers in another country .
 United States consumers phoning customer service at United States companies and connecting to India or another English-speaking developing country engage in a longdistance trade .
 Arms trade is an especially important industry in international trade . Arms trade operates outside the framework of normal commercial transactions because of its national security implications . The arms trade is a particularly important industry .
 Governments want to protect their domestic arms industries rather than rely on imports to meet their weapons needs . Governments in industrialized countries want to . protect domestic arms industry .
 Governments participate actively in the military-industrial sector of the economy, even in countries such as the U.S. that lack industrial policy in other economic sectors . Governments usually participate actively .
 For example, fighter jets are a product in which the U.S. enjoys a global comparative advantage . The United States has a global advantage in fighter jets .
 In the 1990s, the U.S. arms industry looked overseas for new customers to offset declining demand at home . The United States arms industry, like the tobacco industry, looked overseas .
 The Middle East has been the leading arms-importing region of the global South, with India and China increasing recently . The region has been a major arms-imporporation source in the past .
 A different problem is presented by the ‘industry’ of illicit trade, or smuggling . A different . problem is present by the . “industry of illicit . trade,’s ‘smuggling’ is a different problem . A . different problem
 Someone is usually willing to risk punishment to make a profit in such trade . No matter what restrictions governments put on trading certain goods, someone will risk a profit .
 Illegal goods, and legal goods imported illegally, often sold in black markets . Illegal goods are sold in unofficial, sometimes secret, black markets, sometimes illegal markets .
 The extent of illicit trade varies from one country and industry to another, depending on profitability and enforcement . It is unclear how much illicit trade takes place in the world .
 Drugs and weapons are most profitable, and worldwide illegal trade networks exist for both . Drug and weapons trade networks are most lucrative in the world .
 International black markets for weapons trade, beyond government controls, are notorious . International black market is notorious for black market activity .
 A state with enough money can buy — although at premium prices — most kinds of weapons . A state can buy— although at . premium prices—most kinds of . weapons . It is not the first time a state has been able to buy a weapon .
 If one state protects its industries, or puts tariffs on the goods of other states, or violates the copyright on works produced in other countries, the main resort that other states have is to apply similar measures against the offending state .
 Use of reciprocity to enforce equal terms of exchange is especially important in international trade . States often negotiate complex agreements based on reciprocity, such as commodity by commodity .
 Large bureaucracies monitor international economic transactions and develop detailed policies to reciprocate any other state’s deviation from cooperation . Large bureaucracy monitors international transactions and develops detailed policies for reciprocity .
 States generally decide which practices of other states they consider unfair and then take retaliatory actions to punish those practices . States generally consider which practices they believe unfair and retaliate .
 If the other state does not agree that its practices are unfair, retaliatory actions may themselves seem unfair and call for retaliation . The other state may not agree with the state's practices, but may retaliate against it .
 States often negotiate agreements regarding what practices they consider unfair . To prevent this, states often negotiate with agreements regarding unfair practices .
 In some cases, third-party arbitration can also be used to resolve trade disputes . Third party arbitration can be used in some cases of disputes .
 Regional trade agreements establish mechanisms to hear and resolve complaints as well . Some regional trade agreements have mechanisms to resolve complaints .
 Retaliation for unfair trade practices usually tries to match the violation in type and extent . Retaliation is usually matched in type of and extent of the violation, such as type of violation .
 The retaliatory measures do not necessarily need to stay in the same sector . But they do need to be followed by the same sectors of the economy .
 In 2013, Antigua and Barbuda received permission to punish the U.S. for blocking its online gambling sites, costing the tiny Caribbean country $21 million a year . Antiguans also received permission for punishing the United States for blocking online gambling .
 Antigua and Barbuda could steal $21 million annually in U.S. intellectual property, WTO says . Antiguans could put movies and TV shows online without paying for United States copyrights . WTO: Antiguan and Barbudans could steal millions annually .
 The political strategy seemed to be to provoke the United States entertainment industry to lobby the government to allow online gambling . The U.S. entertainment industry is lobbying the government .
 In cases of dumping, retaliation aims to offset the advantage enjoyed from goods imported at prices below the world market . In such cases, retaliation is aimed at offseting the advantage of the Chinese market .
 In 2001, the weakened U.S. steel industry pleaded for United States government protection from cheap foreign steel, under antidumping rationale . The weakened United States steel industry has pleaded for protection from foreign steel .
 Before such tariffs are imposed, the International Trade Commission decides whether the low-priced imports have actually hurt the U.S. industry . The commission will decide whether the imports have hurt the United States industry .
 The ITC ruled that United States steelmakers had indeed been hurt, and the United States government imposed 30 percent tariffs in 2002 . The U.S. government imposed the tariffs .
 The WTO ruled against the United States in 2003, and gave other countries the right to impose $2 billion in retaliatory tariffs . The WTO gave the U.S. a right to retaliate, but it was later ruled against .
 By making the cost of tariffs higher than the benefits, the WTO effectively changed U.S. policy . This is an indication of the WTO’s growing power, the U.N. says .
 This example shows how closely international trade connects with domestic politics . This example also shows how close international trade links with domestic issues .
 The efficient operation of markets depends on a stable political framework such as hegemony can provide, says David Frum . Frum says . He says it is essential that a stable government can provide a stable economic framework .
 Political power can protect economic exchange from the distorting influences of violent leverage, of unfair or fraudulent trade practices, and of uncertainties of international currency rates . Political power is needed to protect trade from violent leverage and unfair trade practices .
 A hegemon can provide a world currency in which value can be universally calculated . A world currency can be used to provide value for all of the world's nations .
 The International Trade Commission can punish the use of violence and can punish violence, says Wendy Hansen . Wendy Hansen, Wendy L. Hansen and Wendy L .
 The hegemon can threaten to break off trade ties even without resorting to military force . Because its economy is so large and dominating, it can threaten trade ties with the U.S.
 U.S. hegemony helped create the major norms and institutions of international trade in the post-1945 era . For example, to be denied access to the markets today would seriously hurt export industries in many states . The United States hegemony thus helped create some of the world's major norms of
 U.S. hegemony seems to be giving way to a more multipolar world . Institutions are even more important for the success of the world trading system .
 States have found it worthwhile to expand trade steadily, using a variety of regimes and institutions to do so . The WTO, free trade areas, bilateral agreements, and bilateral agreements are among them . States have used the WTO and free-trade areas to expand their trade .
 Despite some loss of state sovereignty as a result of growing interdependence, these efforts have benefited participating states . Overall, despite some . loss of . state sovereignty .
 Political rules governing trade allow states to realize the great economic gains that can result from international exchange . Stable political rules govern trade allow countries to realize economic gains .
 We introduced the process of globalization in Chapter 1 in general terms . We will now consider some specifically economic aspects of globalization .
 The expansion of trade is a central aspect of globalization in the international political economy, but hardly the only one . Trade is an important part of the global political economy .
 Globalization is transforming not only trade but money, business, integration, communication, and environmental management . The economic development of poor countries is the subject of the remaining chapters of this book .
 Today’s accelerating pace of economic activity grows out of a long history of world economic o 1 expansion, which serves as the foundation for globalization . The world's economic growth has grown out of the long tradition of global economic expansion, economist says .
 Industrialization is the use of energy to drive machinery and the accumulation of such machinery along with the products created by it . This accomplishment is due to industrialization .
 The wooden sailing ships of earlier centuries had given way to larger and faster coal-powered iron steamships .
 Coal-fueled steam engines also drove factories producing textiles and other commodities . Coal was also used to power factories in the 1800s .
 These developments increased the volume of world production and trade, but also tied distant locations more closely together economically .
 The day trip across France by railroad contrasted with the same route a hundred years earlier, which took three weeks to complete . The same route was completed by the same time 100 years earlier .
 Factory conditions were extremely harsh, especially for women and children operating machines . In this period of mechanization, the conditions were very harsh .
 Britain’s economy was the most technologically advanced in the world, its products were competitive worldwide . Because Britain was technologically advanced, it was competitive worldwide, the economy was competitive .
 Britain served as the financial capital of the world in the 19th century . It managed an increasingly complex world market in goods and services in the world .
 The British currency, pounds sterling (silver) became the world standard . It was the first British currency to be set up .
 International monetary relations were still based on the value of precious metals, as they had been in the 16th century . Spain bought its armies with Mexican silver and gold .
 By the outset of the 20th century, the world’s largest and most advanced economy was no longer Britain but the United States . The U.S. became the world's most advanced country in terms of economic terms .
 The industrialization of the U.S. economy was fueled by territorial expansion throughout the 19th century, adding vast natural resources .
 The United States economy attracted huge pools of immigrant labor from Europe as well . The U.S. economy attracted pools of labor from both Europe and Japan .
 The United States led the world in converting from coal to oil and from horse-drawn transportation to motor vehicles . The U.S. also converted from coal-to-oil to oil .
 New technical innovations helped push the U.S. economy into a dominant world position . Electricity, airplanes, electricity and airplanes were among the innovations .
 In the 1930s, the United States and world economies suffered a severe setback in the Great Depression . The U.S. economy suffered from a severe recession in 1930s and 1930s .
 The protectionist Smoot-Hawley Act adopted by the U.S. in 1930, which imposed tariffs on imports, contributed to the severity of the depression . The act provoked retaliation and reduced world trade by provoking retaliation .
 Following World War II, the capitalist world economy was restructured under U.S. leadership . Following the war, the world economy restructured in the United States . The U.N. led the world in the post-war era .
 Today’s international economic institutions, such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, date from this period . The World Bank is one of the most important institutions in the world .
 The U.S. provided massive assistance to resuscitate Western European economies (through the Marshall Plan) as well as Japan’s economy . The United States helped resuscitate the Western European economy through the Marshall plan .
 World trade greatly expanded, and the world market became ever more closely woven together through air transportation and telecommunications . World trade became ever closer to each other through air travel, telecommunications and air travel .
 Electronics emerged as a new leading sector, and technological progress accelerated throughout the 20th century . Electronics became a leading sector of technology in the 1950s .
 The economies of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe followed communist principles of central planning and state ownership . Standing apart from this world capitalist economy, Eastern Europe's economies were communist .
 In a centrally planned economy, political authorities set prices and decide on quotas for production and consumption of each commodity according to a long-term plan . International trade occurs at government-controlled prices .
 The proponents of central planning claimed that it would make economies both more rational and more just . Central planning is a form of government planning . The proponents claimed that central planning made economies more rational .
 By controlling the economy, governments could guarantee the basic needs of citizens . They could mobilize the state fully for war if necessary . Governments could guarantee basic needs and mobilize for war .
 Soviet economy had some notable successes in rapidly industrializing the country in the 1930s, surviving the German assault in the 1940s, and developing world-class aerospace and military production capability in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Soviet Union launched the world’s first satellite in 1957, and in the early 1960s its leaders used it to launch satellites .
 The Soviet-bloc economies stagnated under the weight of bureaucracy, ideological rigidity, environmental destruction, corruption, and high military spending . Instead, they stagnated in the Soviet-Bloc economies . The Soviet bloc economies stagnate under the burden of bureaucracy .
 Former Soviet republics and Eastern Europe are transitional economies, changing over to a market-based economy connected to the world capitalist economy . Eastern Europe is changing to a more open-minded world economy, says President Obama .
 In the first half of the 1990s, the total GDP of the region shrank by about 35 percent . It was a depression worse than the Great Depression the U.S. experienced in the 1930s .
 In Boris Yeltsin's administration, Russia’s economy remained dysfunctional, owing to depression, corruption, tax delinquency, and the vast differences between the old communist and new capitalist models . In Yeltsins' administration, the economy remains dysfunctional, with depression and corruption .
 President Vladimir Putin brought new energy to economic reform, and high prices for crude oil, a major Russian export, buoyed its economy in the new century . Putin’s centralization of political power could choke off capitalist growth .
 China, whose government continues to follow a Marxist political line, has shifted substantially toward a market economy . China's government still has central control by the Communist party .
 This transition has dramatically increased China’s economic growth ever since the 1980s . The transition has increased China's economic growth in the past 30 years .
 The world’s economic activity follows the principles of free markets more than central planning . Central planning often falls somewhere between the extremes . The world's economic activity often falls between free markets and central planning.
 Many states own industries thought to be vital for the national economy . State-owned industries such as oil production companies or national airlines are important to the economy .
 Government sector of the economy makes up a substantial fraction of the industrialized countries’ economies . Military spending, road building, Social Security, and so on, make up a large fraction of industrialized economies .
 Today there is a single integrated world economy that almost no country can resist joining . Because they contain both some government control and some private ownership, the economies of the industrialized West are often called mixed economies .
 The imperfections and problems of that world economy are evident in periodic crises and recessions . At the same time, the sharpening of disparities between the richest and poorest world regions are evident .
 At no time have these imperfections were more glaring than during the 2008-2009 global financial crisis and ensuing world recession . The world's financial crisis was particularly acute during the financial crisis .
 Economic troubles quickly spread to Europe as major banks and investment companies lost hundreds of billions of dollars . Starting with the sub-prime mortgage collapse in the U.S. in the United States, economic troubles spread to the continent .
 A global slowdown in consumer spending and production led to large job losses in countries like the United States, China, and India . These losses led to a global slowdown of consumer spending .
 Material dislocations caused by globalization directly affect the self-interests of certain segments of countries’ populations . In addition, the material dislocation of globalization directly affects the self interest of some segments of the population .
 Workers in industrialized countries in industries that face competition from low-wage countries in the global South are among the most adversely affected by free trade . Free trade affects workers in industries such as steel, automobiles, electronics, and clothing .
 Competition from low-wage countries holds down wages in industrialized countries . Inevitably, the competition from low wage countries will hold down wages of those industries .
 It also creates pressures to relax standards of labor regulation, such as those protecting worker safety . It can lead to job losses if manufacturers close down plants in high-wage countries and move operations .
 Labor unions are among the strongest opponents of unfettered trade expansion . Not surprisingly, labor unions have been among the strong political opponents of the idea .
 Human rights NGOs have joined labor unions in pushing for trade agreements to include requirements for low-wage countries to improve working conditions such as minimum wages .
 The United States bans imports of goods made by South Asia’s 15 million indentured child laborers . The U.S. has banned imports of products made by the 15 million child laborers in South Asia . South Asia is home to millions of child laborers, many of the world's
 Companies stung by criticism of conditions in their Asian factories have adopted voluntary measures to end the worst abuses . Apple Computer did in 2012 after its Chinese supplier Foxconn faced worker protests and media attention over working conditions .
 About 5 percent of 5-to 14-year-olds in Latin America, 20 percent in Asia, and 25 percent in Africa . They are about 5 to 14-years-olds .
 Ivory Coast is world’s largest exporter of cocoa . Tens of thousands of children work for low wages or even as slaves on cocoa plantations .
 U.S. regulations require commercial shrimp boats to use devices that prevent endangered species of sea turtles from drowning in shrimp nets .
 Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and Pakistan, whose shrimp exports to the United States were blocked, filed a complaint with the World Trade Organization . They say the U.S. regulation unfairly discriminates against them .
 In 1996, Brazil and Venezuela took the United States to the WTO and forced a change in U.S. environmental rules regarding CHEAP LABOR . Labor, environmental, and human rights organizations have all criticized unrestricted free trade .
 Free trade agreements encourage MNCs to produce goods under unfair and unhealthy conditions, including the use of child labor . They argue that free trade agreements are unfair .
 In general, unrestricted trade tends to force countries to equalize their regulations in a variety of areas, not limited to labor and environmental rules .
 WTO ruled in 1997 that Europeans’ fears about the use of growth hormones in beef were not scientifically warranted . EU regulations could not be used to exclude United States beef containing hormones, WTO ruled .
 U.S. allowed to retaliate by imposing high tariffs on a list of EU exports such as French cheeses . The European Union persisted, the United States allowed to impose high tariffs .
 In 2006 the WTO ruled that European restrictions on imports of genetically modified food from the U.S. violated trade rules . The WTO also ruled that in 2006 the EU had imposed restrictions on genetically modified foods from the United States .
 These examples illustrate the variety of sources of backlash against free trade agreements . Free trade agreements are often met with criticism .
 Labor, environmental, and consumer groups all portray the WTO as a secretive bureaucracy outside democratic control . The WTO serves the interests of big corporations at the expense of ordinary people .
 Critics distrust the corporate-driven globalization , of which is just one aspect . More fundamentally, these critics distrust the globalization . The WTO is one aspect of the problem .
 Recent U.S. surveys show a drop in the belief that trade is good for the economy . Recent United States surveys show that belief is dropping .
 According to a June 2008 survey, 34 percent believe free trade is good for the U.S., 36 percent say it is not . That's down from 59 percent just two years earlier .
 Support was especially high in export-dependent economies— above 90 percent in China, India, South Korea, and Lebanon, for example . Support was also high in countries like India, India and Lebanon .
 The United O O States ranked near the bottom in the survey, with 65 percent supporting free trade . The benefits of free trade, as noted earlier, are much more diffuse than the costs of trade .
 United States consumers enjoy lower prices on goods imported from low-wage countries . The U.S. enjoys lower prices than other countries . Low-wage workers in the United States enjoy lower wages and lower prices .
 Consumers may spend more money on other products and services, eventually employing more U.S. workers . Consumers may also spend more on products that are produced in the United States . The consumers may also be able to buy more American products .
 This is small comfort, however, if you are the one who just lost your job . This is a small comfort for you, however .
 In the era of globalization, a significant amount of international trade is conducted through multinational corporations . A number of multinational corporations are used to conduct international trade .
 Next chapter takes up these two issues in the context of the global economy . The next chapter will focus on these issues .
 This may make them more peaceful, but can also introduce new insecurities and sources of conflict . This may also bring in new security, but may also introduce insecurity and conflict .
 The worldwide economic turmoil starting in 2008 sharpened some trade conflicts, while WTO negotiations remained stalled . WTO negotiations remain stalled .
 The ship that ran aground off New Zealand in 2011 seemed to embody the precarious state of trade relations . This ship was the first ship to run aground in New Zealand .
 Mercantilists favor trade policies that produce a trade surplus for their own state . Mercantillists favor a policy that produces a surplus for the state .
 Such a positive trade balance generates money that can be used to enhance state power . The UK is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 Sanctions are difficult to enforce unless all major economic actors agree to abide by them . However, sanctions are hard to enforce if they are not agreed to by all major actors .
 Selfreliance, like central planning, has been largely discredited as a viable economic strategy . Self-reliance has been discredited as an economic strategy in the U.S.
 Such policies tend to slow down the global creation of wealth, but do help the particular industry in question . Such policies do not slow down global wealth creation, but help the industry .
 Protectionism can be pursued through various means, including import tariffs (the favored method) and quotas, subsidies, and other nontariff barriers .
 The GATT was institutionalized in 1995 with the creation of the WTO, which expanded the focus on manufactured goods to consider agriculture and services . The WTO was created in 1995 to focus on manufacturing and agriculture .
 The Uruguay Round of the GATT, completed in 1994, added hundreds of billions of dollars to the global creation of wealth . The Uruguay round of GATT was created in 1994 in Uruguay, Uruguay .
 OPEC members control more than half the world’s exports of a vital commodity, oil . The most visible example in recent decades has been the oil producers’ cartel, OPEC .
 Governments in many states develop industrial policies to guide their efforts to strengthen domestic industries in the context of global markets . Governments develop policies to help strengthen domestic industry in context of international markets .
 Political conflicts among states concerning trade in these sectors are frequent . Political conflicts are frequent in the Middle East and beyond .
 Although it leads to trade wars on occasion, reciprocity has achieved substantial cooperation in trade . reciprocity is a form of cooperation in the world's largest economies, the US says .
 Almost all states are now in transition toward market-based economies, which more efficiently generate wealth . Almost all these states are in transition to market-driven economies .
 A trade agreement is a chance to reach a major trade agreement by making substantial concessions . The U.S. State of the State of Columbia says it has made substantial concessions to the deal .
 China seems to be making a successful transition to market economics and is growing rapidly . China's economy is booming, but it is still struggling to cope with its rapid growth .
 The Free Trade Area of the Americas would join Canada and the U.S. with Latin American countries, where wages are lower and technology is less developed . It would join the United States and Canada and Latin America with Latin America countries .
 In the past two decades, the number of bilateral and multilateral free trade agreements has skyrocketed . The number of free trade deals has also skyrocketed in the last two decades .
 There are several reasons offered for the recent explosion of these arrangements . There are also several reasons for the explosion of such arrangements .
 Some attribute the popularity of the neoliberal economic model and its emphasis on free trade as a source of motivation for these agreements .
 Others point to the near-collapse of the Doha Round of the WTO negotiations . The Doha round was held in Doha, a year before it began .
 Under an FTA, an MNC with factories in multiple states can ship goods between those factories tariff free . Some point to business pressure to join these arrangements because of the FTA .
 As discussed in this chapter, because free trade brings diffuse benefits but concentrated costs, there are always opponents to these agreements within member states . Free trade brings benefits but also concentrated costs .
 Economists are divided on whether FTAs are beneficial, since states may be less likely to cooperate to achieve global free trade . FTAs may be the best outcome for economists if they are happy with free trade among their key trading partners . States may not be happy with FTAs if they
 Others contend they are acceptable ""stepping stones" to a world of global free trade . Yet others say they're acceptable to be part of the free trade world .
 Free trade areas do increase the amount of trade between countries, studies show . Free trade zones have been shown to increase trade between the U.S.
 This trade trade can be beneficial to consumers and producers, and helps increase economic growth . This trade can also be beneficial for consumers, producers and producers .
 Given the slow rate of progress at the WTO talks, other solutions are needed to increase trade . The WTO talks are expected to take place in the next few weeks .
 Once tariffs removed from goods, these goods may be sold at a cheaper price . Once tariffs are removed, they may be able to sell them at a lower price .
 FTAs can lower tariffs that effectively exclude goods from entering a market, giving consumers more choice in the products they buy . In extreme cases, FTAs lower tariffs effectively exclude products from entering the market . FTAs give consumers more choices in what they buy.
 FTAs eliminate or lower trade barriers, they encourage companies located in states outside of FTAs to locate new factories in order to take advantage of lower tariffs . FTAs also encourage companies to locate factories within the FTAs .
 Some research has shown that FTAs lure increased foreign investment to member states . FTAs are an important way to increase economic growth, especially in poor countries .
 FTAs hinder the advancement of global free trade, argue authors argue . FTAs are harmful to the global economy, authors say .
 Once states have secured their best trading partners in an FTA, they have no incentive to advance the WTO process . Once states secure their best trade partners, there is no incentive for progress in the process .
 By definition, FTAs provide lower tariffs for only a small number of states . FTAs are designed to reduce tariffs for small numbers of countries .
 States may have incentives to increase tariffs against nonmembers to encourage trade within the FTA . They do not address tariffs levied against nonmember .
 FTAs make it easier for goods to cross borders, companies can locate in other member states where labor costs or environmental standards are lower . FTAs allow companies to locate in countries with lower labor costs, environmental standards .
 This means fewer jobs in some member states and can lead to further degradation of the natural environment . It can also lead to fewer jobs and more degradation of natural environment, experts say .
 So far, we have discussed how globalization has influenced global security and international trade relations . We have also discussed how global security has influenced international relations .
 Globalization has had its most profound influence in the way states, businesses, and individuals deal with financial markets . Globalization is having a profound influence on how states and businesses deal with the markets .
 Today, global financial markets are as integrated as they have ever been . Global financial markets have become more integrated than ever before .
 Investors in one country can buy and sell assets or exchange currency with a few clicks of a mouse . Investors can buy assets or sell assets in the country with the click of a click .
 Banks’ investment portfolios often contain millions of dollars in assets (real estate, land, stocks, stocks) located in other countries . Banks' investment portfolios contain millions in assets located in foreign countries .
 Nearly a trillion and a half dollars a day is exchanged on currency markets . Investors need various currencies to do business in other countries, but also to bet on the rise and fall of currencies .
 It offers investors and businesses access to overseas markets to spur economic growth . It also offers businesses and investors access to the world's biggest markets .
 It allows for the possibility of better returns on investment for individuals investing for college tuition or retirement . Investing in college tuition and retirement allows for better returns for individuals .
 Financial integration also carries risks, but as we have witnessed in the past two years, financial integration also has risks . Financial integration is a key part of the European Union's success in recent years .
 An economic crisis in one state can quickly spread to another, then another . The state's economic crisis can spread quickly, experts say . It can be traced back to Washington, D.C.
 The spread of economic difficulties can quickly lead to a global economic crisis affecting small and large economies alike, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Americans who had taken out loans on their homes found themselves unable to pay them back . Many Americans were unable to afford to pay back their loans back .
 At the same time, the value of their homes began to fall, so that even if banks were to reclaim them, the banks could not recover the money they had loaned . The value of the homes has also fallen, so banks cannot recover the loans they lent them .
 The loans had been resold by the banks to other businesses as investments, often in other countries . Moreover, these loans were resold to other companies as investments .
 Several large U.S. banks announced they were on the verge of failing because they had too much money tied up in bad home loans . Several large banks then announced that they were too much dependent on bad home loan money .
 This was a problem not only for the banks and the individuals who could not pay for their homes, but also for those businesses who had purchased these loans as investments . This was also a problem for businesses who bought the loans as an investment, the author says .
 Given the global integration of financial markets, this housing crisis led quickly to a global banking crisis . The housing crisis in 2008 led to the collapse of the global financial system .
 The United States government responded with a rescue package of $800 billion to help shore up failing banks . The U.S. government responded to the crisis with a bailout of more than $1 billion .
 Iceland needed a loan from the International Monetary Fund to rescue the government from bankruptcy . The entire banking sector of Iceland was taken over by the government . Iceland, a prosperous country, was taken into account by the IMF .
 Global stock markets tumbled dramatically as a result of this financial crisis, by a third, a half, and even two-thirds in the case of China . China's stock markets fell by more than a third and a half of a half in China .
 What began as trouble in the U.S. housing market ended as a global financial meltdown . The collapse of the housing market led to a worldwide financial meltdown.
 The world economy recovered in the years after 2008, but soon faced the ripple effects of a debt crisis in Europe . The European debt crisis has seen a sharp decline in the global economy .
 Financial problems began in Greece and spread to Spain, Portugal, and even giant Italy . The financial problems threaten the European Union as a whole . They also hold back growth in the United States and China .
 Nearly every state in the world prints its own money . The ability to print one’s own currency is one of the hallmarks of state sovereignty .
 Businesses and individuals often need other states’ currencies to do business . Yet, in a globalized system of trade and finance, businesses and individuals need other countries’ currency .
 The international economy is based on national currencies, not a world currency . Because of the nature of state sovereignty, the world economy is not based on a single currency .
 A national government can create its own currency as the sole legal currency in the territory it controls . One of the main powers of a national government is to create a national currency .
 National currencies are of no inherent value in another country, but can be exchanged one for another . The national currencies of another country are not of inherent value, but of value in other countries .
 Traditionally, for centuries, the European state system used precious metals as a global currency, valued in all countries . Traditionally it used precious metal as the global currency .
 These metals had inherent value because they looked pretty and were easily molded into jewelry or similar objects . These metals were used to make jewelry or other jewelry .
 They were relatively rare, and the mining of new gold and silver was relatively slow . The discovery of the first gold or silver in the 19th century was a relatively slow process .
 These metals lasted a long time, and they were difficult to dilute or counterfeit . These metals were very valuable, and difficult to counterfeit or dilute . They are now being used in the U.S.
 Gold and silver became valuable because they were a world currency . People around the world trusted that the metals could be exchanged for future goods . Over time, this overshadowed any inherent functional value of gold or silver .
 Bars of gold and silver were held by states as a kind of bank account denominated in an international currency . Bars were held in bars of gold, silver and silver held in a bank account in the form of an international bank account . Bars of bars were held as a sort of bank
 Gold has long been a key power resource with which states could buy armies or other means of leverage . Gold is a key source of power to buy armies and other leverage .
 The world has developed an international monetary system divorced from any tangible medium such as precious metals . In recent years the world has not used such a gold standard but has developed a system of international monetary systems .
 Even today, some private investors buy stocks of gold or silver at times of political instability, as a haven that would reliably have future value . Some private investors have bought stocks of silver or gold or gold as a safe haven .
 Gold and silver have now become basically like other commodities, with unpredictable fluctuations in price . But gold and silver are now basically like commodity commodities, they have become more like commodities .
 The change in the world economy away from bars of gold to purely abstract money makes international economics more efficient . The only drawback is that without tangible backing in gold, currencies may seem less worthy of people’s confidence .
 Today's national currencies are valued against each other, not against gold or silver . Today's currency exchange is based on the value of national currencies . International Currency Exchange is based in the United States .
 Each state's currency can be exchanged for a different state’s currency according to an exchange rate . The exchange rate determines how many Canadian dollars are equivalent to one U.S. dollar .
 Most exchange rates are expressed in terms of the world’s most important currencies— the U.S. dollar, the Japanese yen, and the EU's euro . These exchange rates affect almost every international economic transaction— trade .
 The rate for exchanging Danish kroner for Brazilian reals depends on the value of each relative to these world currencies . Thus, the exchange rate for each country's currency depends on its value .
 Exchange rates that most affect the world economy are those within the largest economies . U.S. dollars, euros, yen, British pounds, and Canadian dollars are among the most important currencies .
 Relative values of currencies at a given point in time are arbitrary; only the changes in values over time are meaningful . Relative value of currencies is arbitrary; changes in value over time is meaningful .
 For instance, the euro happens to be fairly close to the United States dollar in value . The Japanese yen is denominated in units closer to the U.S. penny .
 In itself this disparity says nothing about the desirability of these currencies or the financial positions of their states . In itself, the disparity is not about the state's economic position .
 A strong currency makes imports more affordable, while a weak currency makes exports more competitive . A weak currency is a good way to boost exports, especially in the United States .
 The holder of such money has no guarantee of being able to trade it for another currency . Holders of such currency have no guarantee they can trade it with other currencies .
 Such is the case in states cut off from the world capitalist economy, such as the former Soviet Union . Russia is one of the most isolated countries in the world, with the exception of Western Europe .
 In practice, even nonconvertible currency can often be sold, in black markets or by dealing directly with the government issuing the currency . The price may be extremely low, but the price is often very low .
 Some currencies are practically nonconvertible because they are inflating so rapidly that holding them for even a short period means losing money . Holding them for a short time means holding them is losing money, experts say .
 Inflation reduces a currency’s value relative to more stable (more slowly inflating) currencies . In inflation reduces the value of a currency relative to a currency that is stable .
 The industrialized West has kept inflation relatively low— mostly below 5 percent annually— since 1980 . Inflation in the West has been relatively low since 1980, inflation has remained relatively low .
 In Russia and other former Soviet republics, inflation rates of more than 1,000 percent came down to 8 percent . Inflation rates in Russia and former Soviet Republics came down as high as 8 percent in 1990s .
 Extremely high, uncontrolled inflation—more than 50 percent per month, or 13,000 percent per year—is called hyperinflation . Extremely . high . uncontrolled inflation . is more than 50% per month .
 Even just moderately high inflation causes money to lose value weekly, making it hard to conduct business . Even just moderate high inflation can make it hard for business owners to keep up with inflation .
 A Chinese computer producer can export its products and receive payment in dollars, euros, or another hard currency, which it can use to pay for components it needs to import from abroad .
 Chinese farmer paid in Chinese currency for rice could not use that currency to buy imported goods . Farmer could not simply use currency to pay for imported goods, but could use it to buy rice .
 The exchange for foreign currency would be controlled by the Chinese government at rates the government set . Exchange rates would be set at rates set by the government .
 Money has value only because people trust its worth . In a few countries, such as Cuba, two versions of currency circulate, one convertible to foreign currency .
 Inflation erodes a currency's value if governments print too much money or if political instability erodes public confidence . In inflation erodes the value of a currency if a currency is printed too much or too soon .
 Russian exchange in 2006 offers 0.01 rubles less per U.S. dollar than one in the background . Constant minor adjustments set currencies' values .
 Cubans complain that needed goods are only available only at stores taking the hard version . They complain that their salaries are paid in the soft version .
 As economies develop and join the global marketplace, their currencies also develop, from the shaky versions based on beer cans or prone to hyperinflation, to the much more stable versions such as China’s today . China's currency is now a fully convertible model, and eventually to the
 National currencies are now backed by hard-currency reserves, not gold . National currencies now back by hard currency reserves not gold, say experts .
 The industrialized countries have financial reserves roughly in proportion to the size of their economies . The world's largest economies have large financial reserves, according to the IMF .
 Governments decide, individually or jointly, to establish official rates of exchange for their currencies .
 Floating exchange rates are now more commonly used for the world’s major currencies . Floating currencies are now used for most of the major currencies in the world .
 Rates are determined by global currency markets in which private investors and governments alike buy and sell currencies . Rates are based on the value of currencies sold by private investors in the world .
 There is a supply and demand for each state’s currency, with prices constantly adjusting in response to market conditions . Prices are constantly adjusted to meet demand and supply needs .
 Investors might buy shares of Apple or Wal-Mart stock if they expected its value to rise in the future . Just as investors might buy a pile of Japanese yen if they expect that currency’s value to increase in future .
 Exchange rates adjust to changes in the longer-term supply and demand for currencies . Through short-term speculative trading in international currencies, exchange rates adjust exchange rates .
 Government intervention to manage the otherwise free-floating currency rates is called a managed float system . Such government intervention is known as managed float systems .
 The leading industrialized states often, but not always, work together in such interventions . The world's leading industrialized countries often work together, but sometimes not always .
 If the price of the U.S. dollar goes down too much relative to other important currencies, governments step into the currency markets, side-by-side with private investors, and buy dollars .
 With this higher demand for dollars, the price may then stabilize and perhaps rise again . The price of dollars will then stabilize, perhaps rise, perhaps again .
 Such interventions usually happen quickly, in one day, but may be repeated several times within a few weeks in order to have the desired effect . Such interventions often happen quickly but may need to be repeated repeatedly within weeks .
 Liberals point to such cooperation as evidence that states recognize their long-term interest in a mutually beneficial international economy . Liberals say such cooperation is evidence that it is in the best interests of the world .
 Even acting together, governments control only a small fraction of the money moving on such markets, most of it is privately owned . Governments are at a disadvantage in their interventions in international currency markets, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Governments can work together to have enough impact on the market to make modest changes in price . However, governments have one advantage in that they can have enough influence to make a change .
 Governments can also operate in secret, keeping private investors in the dark regarding how much currency governments may eventually buy or sell, and at what price . Governments also can also keep private investors out of the dark .
 Only after a coordinated multinational intervention into markets does the public find out about it . Only after the public finds out about the intervention, the public will find it out .
 States have a common interest (making sure a large economy does not collapse) aligned against transnational actors, investors who are trying to make money at the expense of states . Note that this is an area where states have an interest in making sure the economy not collapse .
 A successful intervention can make money for governments at the expense of private speculators, says Simon Tisdall . A successful government intervention can also make money, he says .
 G20 governments step in to raise the price of U.S. dollars by buying them around the world . If they succeed, the governments can then sell again and pocket a profit . The G20 can then profit from raising the prices of the U.K. dollar .
 If the price of dollars keeps falling, the governments lose money and may have to keep buying and buying in order to stop the slide . However, if the intervention fails, the government will lose money . If the government loses money, it will have to continue to buy and buy in order
 If investors become aware of such moves, they may interpret it as a signal that the currency being bought is weak, which could depress the price even further .
 In extreme cases, governments may run out of their stockpiles of hard currencies before then and have to absorb a huge loss .
 Governments must be realistic about the limited effects they can have on currency prices . Governments must also consider the impact of currency prices on their currency, says David Cameron .
 Argentina's financial crisis was the result of the 2001 Argentine financial collapse . Argentina's debt crisis was caused by the collapse of the country's banking sector . Argentina is now struggling to cope with its debt crisis .
 Argentina in the 1990s had pegged the value of its currency at a fixed rate to the U.S. dollar . Argentina's currency was pegged to the United States dollar .
 Tying the peso to the dollar represents a loss of sovereignty over monetary policy . The move is one of the key levers to control an economy . The peso was tied to the U.S. dollar for the first time in its history .
 Argentina suffered four years of recession, but could not lower interest rates to stimulate growth . As a historic U.S. expansion brought unprecedented prosperity, interest rates were kept relatively high . Argentina suffered a four-year recession in 2008 .
 Argentina accumulated $100 billion in foreign loans and could not service its debts . Argentina accumulated more than $100billion in foreign debt . Argentina has been unable to meet its debt obligations . Argentina's debt crisis began in 2009 after a decade in recession .
 Assistance from the IMF in restructuring debt was contingent on a tight financial policy of tax increases and spending cuts . Critics say the policy was a mistake during a major multi-year recession .
 In 2001, Argentina’s economy collapsed; two presidents resigned in short order; and a populist took power, defaulted on foreign debts, and devalued the peso to create jobs . The IMF and the United States stood by, as the U.S. and IMF stood
 Argentina defaulted on a $3 billion payment to the IMF in 2003, the largest default in IMF history . In 2003, it was Argentina's largest default on IMF payment to date . The default was the largest in the IMF's history .
 Its economy turned around and it paid the IMF off in 2006, though negotiations with foreign government creditors continued .
 Pressure built up in a vastly more important case—China’s currency . More recently, pressures build up in the vastly important case . The pressure has built up on China's currency .
 As in Argentina in 2001, the current policy of ‘pegging’ China’s currency to the dollar did not adjust to different economic conditions in China and the U.S. China's economic conditions have not adjusted to those of the two countries .
 U.S. runs a big trade deficit with China alone in 2012 and over $500 billion in total . China runs a huge trade surplus with the United States . The United States ran a big deficit of $300 billion in 2012 .
 Critics charge that the dollar-yuan ratio is held artificially high, making China’s exports to the United States cheaper and contributing to the trade imbalance and the loss of United States manufacturing jobs .
 As the economic position of the United States has worsened in the past three years, pressure on China to reform its currency has grown . Pressure on the Chinese government to reform China's currency has also grown .
 Globalization has brought great wealth to the world as business increasingly operates internationally . Stable Currency Exchange Rates for World Business are based on stable currency rates .
 The ability to do business internationally depends on the stability of currency exchange rates in different countries . The ability of doing business internationally is dependent on currency exchange rate stability .
 Whatever the exchange rate, businesspeople can plan on investments, imports, or purchases based on knowing what these things will cost if paid in a foreign currency .
 If the world’s major countries maintain stability by coordinating their financial policies, all enjoy the benefit . The world's major countries will all benefit from the benefit of the coordinated financial policies .
 Some states free-ride by manipulating their own currency exchange rates to advantage . That stability can be achieved even if some states manipulate their own rates .
 If too many countries do so, the collective good is not achieved, as shown in the 1930s, which worsened the Great Depression . Competition devaluations of major currencies in 1930s led to a Great Depression.
 China has kept its currency pegged to the United States dollar for years . Economic conditions in the two countries have diverged and a huge trade imbalance has developed . The U.S. dollar has been pegged to China's currency since 2000 .
 Most economists expect that if allowed to float freely like the world’s other major currencies, the Chinese currency would rise substantially . The Chinese currency is expected to rise substantially in coming years .
 This would help American exports and harm Chinese exports, reducing the trade imbalance somewhat . The trade imbalance would help reduce the U.S. trade deficit somewhat .
 China has only slowly allowed its currency to appreciate in value modestly . China will not allow it to float freely, and will not let it float freely .
 In 2006, China, Japan, and South Korea announced plans to work toward coordinating their currency policies . China, South Korea, Japan and China announced plans for coordinating currency policies in 2006 .
 South Korea agreed to further coordinate currency exchanges with China in 2010 . In 2010, the South Korean currency exchanges were agreed to coordinate with China .
 Along with the ASEAN countries, they are also studying the creation of an Asian currency unit that would track the aggregate value of the region’s currencies . The ASEan countries are also looking at creating a currency unit .
 Both measures are possible early steps toward the eventual creation of an Asian currency like the euro . Both measures could be seen as early steps to the creation of a currency like that .
 In the short term, exchange rates depend on speculation about the future value of currencies . Currencies rise or fall in the short-term, but prices depend on speculating about the value of currency .
 The value of a state’s currency tends to rise or fall relative to others because of changes in the long-term supply and demand for the currency . But over the long term, the value of the currency tend to rise and fall .
 Printing money is a quick way to generate revenue for the government, but the more money printed, the lower its price . Printing money means less money is printed, but it also means a lower price for the dollar .
 Printing too much money creates inflation because the amount of goods in the economy is unchanged but more money is circulating to buy them with. Domestically, printing too much cash creates inflation . The amount of money is unchanged, but more people circulate to buy goods with .
 Demand for a currency depends on the state’s economic health and political stability . Demand for the currency is dependent on state's economic health, political stability and economic health .
 People do not want to own the currency of an unstable country, says economist . Political instability leads to the breakdown of economic efficiency and of trust in the currency, he says .
 Indonesian currency jumped 13 percent in two days in 2001 after a period of political and economic turmoil . In 2001, when a new Indonesian president took office, the Indonesian currency rose 13 percent . The actual changes have been quite modest .
 International financial system more closely resembles a dominance hierarchy . Unlike the trade system based on equality and reciprocity, the international financial system is based on dominance hierarchy, the system is more like a hierarchy .
 The IMF uses a weighted voting system that gives power to the largest economies . IMF votes on each country's share of power to influence the IMF .
 Until recently, major world currency decisions were taken by the Group of Seven countries . The group of seven countries took currency decisions on behalf of them .
 The G20 is a flattening of the dominance hierarchy in response to the world economic crisis . This was expanded to the larger and more inclusive G20, but still leaves the top countries calling the shots .
 World currency markets are dominated by the United States dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen . The euro, the U.S. dollar, and Japanese yen are the main currencies in the world .
 China is free riding on the world currency system by boosting its own exports . By keeping its currency artificially low, China is able to boost its exports . China's currency is artificially low by keeping it artificially low .
 2010 piece of the world economy as a whole to bring down the currency system by its nonparticipation . However, China is not a large enough . Dollars and euros anchor the currency .
 States also have a shared interest in currency stability because instability tends to be profitable for speculators at the expense of central banks . States also share an interest in stability because stability is beneficial to speculators .
 States also share an interest in the integrity of their currencies against counterfeiting, but ‘rogue’ states may feel otherwise . States also want to keep their currencies from being counterfeited .
 In 2006, the United States accused North Korea of passing off tens of millions of dollars in extremely realistic counterfeit $100 bills . The U.S. Treasury says the North Korean regime passed off the money at the expense of the Treasury .
 States also experience conflicts over currency exchange . Despite shared interests in currency stability, states also experience currency exchange conflicts .
 As Canada’s dollar rose 25 percent in 2009-2012 relative to the U.S. dollar, American automakers shifted production out of Canada and into the United States . The Canadian dollar rose significantly in the past decade .
 An overvalued currency, whose exchange rate is too high, creates a chronic trade deficit . Overvalued currencies create a chronic deficit in the U.S. economy .
 liberals view these changes as positive mechanisms for the world economy to work out inefficiencies and maximize overall growth . Because they see such adjustments as harmless, liberals see them as harmless . Liberals view such changes as working out inefficiency and maximizing growth .
 A unilateral move to reduce the value of one’s own currency by changing a fixed or official exchange rate is called a devaluation . A devaluation is a move to devalue a country's own currency .
 Devaluation is a quick fix for financial problems in the short term, but it can create new problems . devaluation can create problems for the long-term, but can also create new ones .
 As a result, demand for the currency drops, even at the new lower rate . The new rate is lower than the previous one, so demand for currency drops .
 Investors become wary of future devaluations, and indeed such devaluations often follow one after another in unstable economies . Such devaluations are often followed by one after two in unstable countries .
 In the first three weeks of 2009, Russia devalued its ruble six times after the price of its main export, oil, plummeted . The ruble was devalued six times in three weeks after the collapse of oil prices .
 A currency may be devalued by being allowed to float freely after a period of fixed exchange rates . A single sharp drop in values is often bringing a single sharp fall in values . A currency devalued is devalued after a fixed exchange rate .
 Changes in the value of the dollar reflect underlying trends in U.S. and foreign economies . In general, any sharp or artificial change can affect prices of imported goods such as gasoline .
 Growth rates continue to run near 9 percent as of 2012 . Growth rates exceed nearly all countries in the developing world, exceeding nearly all nations .
 After economic slowdowns during the 2008 global financial crisis, rapid growth has returned . The world's economic growth has been slowing since the 2008 financial crisis .
 Chinese exports fell during the crisis, but have surged back, leading to massive yearly trade surpluses . Chinese exports have surged in recent years leading to huge yearly surplions .
 China's currency, the yuan, does not float freely and was pegged to the U.S. dollar for more than a decade . China's position in the international economy is unique, because China's yuan is not freely floated freely .
 Many economists consider it still substantially undervalued . President Obama let the currency rise by 40 percent between 2005 and 2012 .
 Many feel your fixed currency is one explanation for your country's tremendous economic growth and trade surplus . Many feel it is one of the reasons for the country's economic growth .
 The demand for the yuan is high , but because it does not float, your government can keep its value low . The demand is high, but because of the yuan's low value, the government is able to keep it low .
 The result is that Chinese exports are much cheaper on the world market, making your goods very attractive . The result of Chinese exports is that they are cheaper than other countries' exports .
 Given the country's large population, increases in jobs are important to keep unemployment low . Given the size of the population, increasing jobs is important for the economy . The country's unemployment rate has been at a low level since 2008 .
 Exports contribute heavily to your economic growth and generating hard currency for your economy and creating jobs . Exports are a key part of this picture, contributing heavily to economic growth .
 Since 2010, your country has experienced labor unrest from workers unhappy with their low pay . Your country has seen labor unrest since 2010, with many countries experiencing labor unrest .
 Responses to protests could include higher wages, raising the costs of goods produced and potentially lowering exports . Responses could include raising wages and raising the cost of goods .
 Both Europe and the U.S. have complained bitterly about your exchange rate and trade surplus . The U.K. and Europe are unhappy about your trade surplus and currency value .
 The United States has blamed the undervalued yuan for costing America 1.1 million jobs . The 2012 American presidential election featured recurrent ""China bashing,"" further exacerbating political tensions .
 The condition is that you allow the yuan to float freely on international currency markets, the government says . The condition would be that the yuan float freely in international markets .
 Such a move would be very popular in international political circles and would lessen the chances that your own economy will ""overheat"" and become inflationary . The move would also lessen the chance that your country's economy will "overheat" and inflationary.
 "In the long run, such a move will ensure your further integration into the international economy," says President Obama .
 "Leading the World Bank would provide great prestige and leverage for your government," says President Obama . "It would be great prestige for your country," says Obama .
 If the yuan rises rapidly in value, your exports will be less competitive internationally, risking a stall in your economy just as you have come through the financial crisis . China's economy is a key engine of its economy, but it could stall if it does .
 You also become more vulnerable to international currency shocks, such as the 1997 Asian economic crisis . You avoided this crisis in large part due to your fixed exchange rate . You become more susceptible to international shocks such as 1997 Asian crisis .
 All members of the international economy benefit from a stable framework for making investments and sales, yet an individual country can benefit from devaluing its own currency . Relatively stable exchange rates for international currency seen as a collective good .
 Hegemonic stability includes backing for world currency stability, using the hegemon’s own economic clout and its influence over other great powers . Hegemon's own economic power is used to provide backing for stability, according to theory .
 Collective goods are thought to be easiest to ensure if controlled by a small group . Lacking a hegemon, collective goods are best to be controlled by small groups . Collective goods can be best to ensure that they are not controlled by large groups .
 In the small-group setting, defectors stand out and mutual cooperation is more readily enforced . In small groups, defecting is more common in small groups than in large groups .
 In some states, the politicians or generals who control the government directly control the amounts of money printed . The money printed is printed in the United States .
 It is not surprising that inflation tends to be high in those states, because political problems can often be solved by printing more money . Inflation is a political problem in some states, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Politicians know they cannot trust themselves with day-to-day decisions about printing money . But in most industrialized countries, politicians know they can't trust themselves . Politicians say printing money is a problem .
 Politicians appoint the people who run the bank, but generally for long terms that do not coincide with those of the politicians . Politicians often appoint people who work for them, but they are appointed by politicians .
 Central bank managers try to run the bank in the national interest, a step removed from partisan politics . The central bank managers are trying to run a national interest in the country's national interest .
 If a state leader orders a military intervention, the generals obey, but if the leader orders an intervention in currency markets, the central bank does not have to comply . The central bank is not obliged to comply with the orders of the government .
 The head of Thailand’s central bank was fired by the prime minister in a dispute over interest rates in 2001 . The prime minister fired the head of the central bank in 2001 over a dispute with interest rates .
 In the United States, the central bank is the Federal Reserve, or the Fed . In the U.S., the Fed is the largest bank in the world .
 Multilateral interventions are usually coordinated by the heads of central banks and treasury ministries in the leading countries in the world . Multilateral intervention is coordinated by heads of heads of national banks or treasury ministries .
 The long-term, relatively nonpartisan perspective of central bankers makes it easier for states to achieve the collective good of a stable world monetary system . Central bankers are nonpartisan, making it easier to achieve a stable monetary system, authors say .
 The Fed exercises its power mainly by setting the discount rate . The discount rate is the interest rate the government charges when it loans money to private banks . Domestically, the Fed exercises most of its power in setting the interest rates .
 In effect, this rate controls how fast money is injected into the economy . The rate controls the amount of money injected by the central bank .
 If the rate is set too high, too little money will circulate and consumers and businesses will find it hard to borrow as much or as cheaply from private banks . Economic growth will be depressed if rates are too high or too high .
 Central bank decisions about the discount rate have important international consequences . Central bank decision on discount rate has important international implications, experts say .
 If interest rates are higher in one state than in another, foreign capital tends to be attracted to the state with the higher rate . Foreign capital is attracted to states with a higher rate of interest .
 If economic growth is high in a foreign country, more goods can be exported to it . And if economic growth in a country has a high, it will be able to export more goods to the country .
 The resulting international conflicts can be resolved only politically (such as at G20 meetings), not technically, because each central bank, although removed from domestic politics, still looks out for its own state's interests .
 Central banks are constrained by the limited share of world money they own . Central banks control sizable reserves of currency, but have limited global reserves of money . Central bank reserves are limited by how much money they control .
 As economic actors, states do not drive the direction of the world economy, writes John Defterios . But in many ways they follow it, at least over the long run, he says . As economic actor, states don't drive direction of world economy .
 States still play a key role in the global economy, says David Cameron . Yet, as we have seen in the recent global economic crises, states still play an important role .
 States can adopt massive financial stimulus packages, rescue private banks and corporations that teeter on bankruptcy, and prosecute individuals who act illegally to cause economic hardship . In the short run, states can adopt stimulus packages .
 The World Bank and the IMF have developed around norms of behavior in monetary relations . Because of the importance of international cooperation for a stable world monetary system, international regimes have developed .
 The UN institutionally supports regimes based on norms of behavior in international security affairs . The same is true in the world monetary regime, the UN says .
 World Bank established the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development . It was a source of loans to reconstruct the Western European economies after the war .
 The World Bank and the IMF continue to be the pillars of the international financial system . The IMF and the World Bank are the world's most powerful financial institutions .
 Bretton Woods set a regime of stable monetary exchange, based on the United States dollar and backed by gold, that lasted from 1944 to 1971 . The U.S. dollar and gold were backed by the U.K. dollar .
 Other states’ currencies were exchanged at fixed rates relative to the dollar . The currency exchange rates were fixed at fixed rate relative to dollar .
 The International Monetary Fund in the Global Economy. The IMF in the global economy. Mark Copelovitch, Mark S. Copelovaitch . The IMF is the world's most powerful institution .
 The international currency markets operated within a narrow range around the fixed rate . International currency markets operate within a very narrow range of interest rates .
 If a country’s currency fell more than 1 percent from the fixed rate, the country had to use its hard-currency reserves to buy its own currency back and thus shore up the price . The country's hard currency reserves must also be used to shore up prices .
 If the price rose more than 1 percent, it had to sell its currency to drive the price down . The currency had to be sold to drive down the price of its currency .
 The U.S. economy no longer held the overwhelming dominance it had in 1944 . European and Japanese recovery from World War II led to decline in dominance of the American economy . Overspending on the Vietnam War and the outflow of United States dollars to buy oil led to drop in
 By 1971, the dollar was no longer worth 1/35 of an ounce of gold, and the U.S. had to abandon its fixed exchange rate .
 President Nixon dumped the dollar-gold system, and allowed the dollar to float freely . President Nixon unilaterally dumped the system in 1971 . The dollar was allowed to float in free floating .
 The abandonment of the gold standard was good for the United States and bad for Japan and Europe . Leaders expressed shock at the unilateral U.S. actions . Europe and Japan were shocked by the decision .
 The interdependence of the world capitalist economy, which had produced record economic growth for all the Western countries after World War II, had also created the conditions for new international conflicts . World capitalist economy had created the . conditions for the . conflicts .
 The SDR has been called “paper gold” because it is created in limited amounts by the IMF . It is held as a hard-currency reserve by states’ central banks, and can be exchanged for international currencies .
 The SDR is today the closest thing to a world currency that exists, but it cannot buy goods—only currencies . It cannot be used to buy goods, only currencies, so it can only buy goods .
 SDRs are linked in value to a basket of several key international currencies . SDRS are linked to the value of a number of currencies .
 When one currency rises a bit and another falls, the SDR does not change value much . But if all currencies rise, SDR rises with them . The SDR's value depends on the strength of each currency's value .
 Since the early 1970s, the major national currencies have been governed by the managed float system . The managed float is a system of national currencies governed by national currencies .
 Transition from the dollar-gold regime to the managed float regime was difficult . Transition from dollar gold regime to managed float regimes was difficult, says IMF chief .
 States had to bargain politically over the targets for currency exchange rates in the meetings now known as G6 summits . The G6 summit is now called the G6 Summit of Nations .
 In 2009, it was announced that the G20, including far more developed and developing countries, would begin to replace the G8 in major financial deliberations . The G20 is now a major financial forum that includes more developed countries .
 A state can borrow against its quota to stabilize its economy in difficult times and repay the IMF in subsequent years . A state then borrows against the IMF quota to stabilise its economy and repay its IMF debt in the future .
 In 2009, world leaders pledged an additional $1 trillion to the IMF to help developing countries cope with the global financial crisis . World leaders pledged the extra money in 2009 to help the IMF deal with the crisis .
 IMF and the World Bank use a weighted voting system . Each state has a vote equal to its quota . Unlike the WTO or UN General Assembly, the IMF and World Bank vote weighted voting systems . The IMF uses a weighted vote system .
 The advanced economies control the IMF, although nearly all the world’s states are members . Thus the advanced economies . The IMF is a powerful body of powerful nations .
 In 2008, the IMF adjusted the voting formula, increasing modestly the quota and voting power of China (from about 3 to 3. percent of the total) and other developing countries . The IMF adjusted its voting formula in 2008 to increase China's voting power .
 Since 1944, the IMF and the World Bank have tried to accomplish three major missions . The IMF and World Bank has been trying to achieve three major tasks since 1944 .
 First they sought stability and access to capital for states ravaged by World War II, especially Japan and the states of Western Europe . They sought to provide stability and capital for countries ravaged by WWII .
 "This mission was a great success, leading to growth and prosperity in those states," says President Obama . "It was a mission that led to the growth of those states"
 The World Bank and the IMF have tried to promote economic development in poor countries . The IMF and the World Bank have been involved in the development of poor countries since the 1970s .
 The third mission, in the 1990s, was the integration of Eastern Europe and Russia into the world capitalist economy . The mission was to integrate the two countries' economies into the global market .
 World Bank works to stabilize and develop economies in poor and middle-income countries . The World Bank is the largest bank in the world and invests in developing economies .
 The Bank runs programs to increase agricultural productivity and improve nutrition in Pakistan . In Pakistan, the Bank is trying to boost agricultural productivity .
 As currency rates change and state economies grow, the overall positions of states relative to each other shift . State financial positions shift as currency rates rise and states' economies grow .
 IMF maintains a system of national accounts statistics to keep track of the overall monetary position of each state . IMF keeps track of each country's monetary position . IMF: National Accounts is based on national accounts .
 Current account is basically the balance of trade discussed in Chapter 8 . The current account is essentially the current account .
 Money flows out of a state to pay for imports and out of the state to fund exports . Money flows into the state from imports and flows into exports from exports .
 Money spent by a British tourist in Florida is equivalent to money spent by British consumer buying Florida oranges in a London market . In both cases money flows into the United States current account .
 Government transactions are military and foreign aid grants, as well as salaries and pensions paid to government employees abroad . Government transactions include military and aid grants and salaries of government employees .
 Honda subsidiary in America may send profits back to Honda in Japan . For example, Honda in America sends profits to a subsidiary in the U.S. Honda subsidiary .
 Capital flows are measured in net terms—the total investments and loans foreigners make in a country minus the investments and . loans that country’s companies, citizens, and government invest in other countries .
 Most of such investment is private, although some is by government agencies and state-owned industries . Most of the investment is in private, but some is in government agencies .
 Capital flows are divided into foreign direct investment and indirect portfolio investment, such as buying stocks and bonds or loans to a foreign company .
 These various kinds of capital flows have somewhat different political consequences (see ‘International Debt’ and ‘Foreign Direct Investment’ later in this chapter) But are basically equivalent in the overall national accounts picture .
 The third category, changes in foreign exchange reserves, makes the national accounts balance . Changes in foreign reserves makes the country's accounts balance.
 Any difference between inflows and outflows of money (in the current account and capital flows combined) is made up by an equal but opposite change in reserves .
 If a state has more money flowing out than in, it gets that money from its reserves . If that money is flowing out of the state, the state will use that money to pay for it .
 If it has more money flowing in than out, it puts the money in its reserves . If more money is flowing in, the money is put in the bank's reserves .
 Even the most efficient and honest government cannot keep track of every bit of money crossing its borders . At least, they almost balance; there is a residual category, errors and omissions .
 In one sense, an economy is constantly in motion, as money moves through the processes of production, trade, and consumption . In another sense, money is in the process of producing, trade and consumption, and consuming .
 Hard-currency reserves owned by governments are one form of standing wealth, but not the most important . Hard-currencies reserves are one of the biggest forms of wealth in the world . The U.S. dollar is worth more than $1.2 billion .
 Most standing wealth is in the form of homes and cars, farms and factories, ports and railroads . The nation's wealth is most concentrated in homes, cars, factories and ports .
 Capital goods are products that can be used as inputs for further production . Capital goods include capital goods that are used as an input to further production. Capital goods can also be used in further production, according to experts .
 Standing wealth lasts for enough years to be treated differently from goods that are quickly consumed . Nothing lasts forever, but standing wealth lasts longer . Standing wealth is treated differently than goods that can be consumed quickly, says CNN.com .
 Standing wealth creates new wealth, so the economy tends to grow over time . Standing wealth is created by standing wealth, and new wealth is added to wealth .
 Businesses borrow money because they think they can use it to create new wealth faster than the rate of interest on the loan . Businesses and households borrow money to create more wealth than interest on loan .
 If a state’s economy is healthy, it can borrow money from foreign governments, banks, or companies . It can create enough new wealth to repay the debts a few years later . A state can borrow from foreign countries, banks and companies and create new wealth .
 States, like businesses, sometimes operate at a loss; then their debts mount up . But states, like business, often operate at loss, then they have to deal with their debts .
 More and more of the income they generate goes to pay interest, and more money must be borrowed to keep the state in operation . In a vicious circle, more and more interest must be paid to pay for the state .
 If its fortunes reverse, a state or business can create wealth again and over time pay back the principal on its debts to climb out of the hole . State or business will be able to create wealth and pay back its debts over time .
 Failure to repay debts makes it hard to borrow in the future, a huge impediment to economic growth . Failure to pay off debts is a huge obstacle to the economy's economic growth, experts say .
 When debts become unpayable, lenders have to write them off the books or settle them at a fraction of their official value . Banks and governments must write off debts and settle them with fraction of the official value they owe .
 Argentina collapsed in 2001 under more than $100 billion of debt accumulated over the prior decade . In 2005, creditors had to accept less than onethird of their money in a 2005 restructuring deal . In 2001, Argentina collapsed under $100B debt .
 In 2010 to 2012, financial markets repeatedly slumped in reaction to fears of a Greek default on large debts, and possible contagion to larger economies—Spain, Portugal, Ireland, and perhaps Italy . In 2010-2012 financial markets rallied around fears of Greek default, but markets have since recovered
 In 2012, several bailouts stabilized the crisis but not until austerity measures had driven the entire euro zone into a recession . The euro zone is now in a recession projected to last through 2013 . Greece is the only country in the euro zone to be bailed out of recession .
 A second reason is the income and consumption pattern among households and businesses . A third reason is a second reason for the increase in consumption among businesses .
 If people and firms spend more than they take in, they must borrow to pay their bills . People and firms must borrow more to pay for their bills if they do not have enough money to keep afloat .
 The credit card they use may be from a local bank, but that bank may be getting the money it lends to them from foreign lenders . The bank's credit card may be used by people in the U.S.
 A third reason for national debt is government spending relative to taxation . The debt is a result of higher taxes and higher taxes on the individual .
 Under the principles of Keynesian economics, governments sometimes spend more on programs than they take in from tax revenue —deficit spending —to stimulate economic growth .
 Many G8 countries have adopted a similar strategy in the current financial crisis, especially the United States . This has been the strategy adopted by many G8 nations in the financial crisis .
 If this strategy works, increased economic growth eventually generates higher tax revenues to make up the deficit . Increased economic growth will eventually generate higher tax revenue .
 If it does not, a state finds itself with a poor economy in even deeper debt . If it doesn't, it will be even worse for the state .
 Failure to make payments on international debt, called a default, is a very serious action . It can cut off a country's access to future investment and loans . Thus, for all the debt, the debt has been DRAGGED DOWN by debt .
 Several states have defaulted on debts rather than inflict painful budget cuts that would hurt the population . Nonetheless, several states default on debts instead of inflicting painful cuts .
 In 2011-2012, Greece narrowly averted defaulting on its huge debts . Greece accepted EU bailouts intended to stabilize the euro zone that Greece belongs to . Greece is the only member of the Eurozone that Greece is part of .
 Germany's stock market falls on fears of a Greek default . Germany's economy has been hit hard by the prospect of a default in Greece .
 In the long run, international debt reflects these underlying realities, says IMF . International debt reflects underlying realities in the world, IMF says .
 Shifts in financial fortune among the great powers often accompany changing power relations . Shifts among financial fortunes among the world's most powerful nations often accompany changes in power relations.
 Consider how the past decade has changed the financial positions of the United States, of Russia and Eastern Europe, and of Asia . Consider how much of the world's financial positions have changed in the last decade .
 The United States is an extraordinarily wealthy and powerful state . The position of the U.S. is that of the United States . It is a very powerful and wealthy state .
 Its most unique strengths may be in the area of international security, but its economic strengths are also striking . The country's economic strength is also striking, as well as international security .
 It is not only the world’s largest economy but also the most technologically advanced one in such growth sectors as computers, telecommunications, aviation and aerospace, and biotechnology, it says .
 The U.S. position in scientific research and higher education is unparalleled in the world . The United States position in higher education and scientific research is unparalleled, experts say .
 The United States position in the international economy, however, has shifted over the decades . The U.S. position in international economic terms has shifted .
 In the early 1950s, the United States economy was about twice the size of the next six advanced industrial states combined . The U.S. economy was twice the economy size of any other major industrial state .
 By the 1980s, its relative share of world GDP had dropped almost by half . By the 1990s, it had dropped by almost a third of the world's GDP .
 In 1950, the U.S. held half of the world’s financial reserves; by 1980, it held less than 10 percent . The United States now holds just 10 percent of all financial reserves .
 This long-term decline after the extraordinary post-1945 U.S. hegemony was a natural and probably unavoidable one . This is a natural decline after a long and probably inevitable one .
 In the early 1980s, the trade deficit (exports minus imports) grew from near zero to $200 billion in just a few years . The trade deficit grew from $100 billion in the 1980s to $400 billion in one year .
 The trade deficit shrank back, but then grew to more than $700 billion a year by 2007 . The U.S. trade deficit grew back, then grew back to $700 a year in 2007 .
 After shrinking again during the 2008-2009 recession, the trade deficit began to grow again in 2010 . After shrinking during the recession, it has grown again in recent years .
 The budget deficit jumped to $300 billion per year in the early 1980s, then closed in the 1990s and briefly became a large surplus . The deficit reached $1 trillion a year in 20082012 as a result of war spending, tax cuts, and a Keynesian effort to stimulate
 These trends have caused alarm regarding U.S. international economic leadership . These trends are causing alarm regarding the United States international leadership .
 The United States economy began the 21st century roughly, after a decade of relative prosperity in the 1990s . The U.S. economy began its first decade roughly, roughly, in 2000 .
 The bursting of an Internet investment “bubble’s” was followed by a worldwide recession in 2001 and then the economic disruptions that followed the September 2001 terrorist attacks . The burst of the Internet investment "bubble" followed by the worldwide recession .
 Tax cuts and war spending primed growth in 2002-2006, but at the cost of rising debt . War spending and tax cuts helped boost the economy, but also increased the debt .
 Growth resumed in 2009 but remained sluggish, with persistently high unemployment, ever-rising debt, and contentious government decision-making .
 By 2013, stock markets had fully recovered from the 2008 crash, but a new European recession threatened to hurt U.S. exports . New European recession could hurt United States exports .
 The Effects of U.S. Budget Deficits on Financial Markets since 1980 . The effects of the United States budget deficit on financial markets since 1980 have been studied .
 The accumulated debt from decades of deficit spending remains . In addition, the accumulated debt remains . Congressional Budget Office .
 The United States government’s national debt grew from about $1 trillion in 1980 to $3 trillion in 1990, $5 trillion in 2000, and $16 trillion in 2013 . The U.S. national debt now stands at $17 trillion .
 Interest payments are equivalent to what would otherwise be a healthy rate of economic growth . The interest payments would be equivalent to the growth of the country's economy .
 Once, the U.S. was the world’s leading lender state; now it is the leading debtor state . The United States is now the world's leading debt-ridden state, according to experts .
 The U.S. financial trends have profound implications for the entire world political economy . These trends are significant for the world's political economy, says David Frum .
 The United States provided limited capital to help get the Russian and Eastern European region on its feet again after the Cold War . The position of Russia and Eastern Europe is that of the U.S.
 States in this region faced daunting challenges as they converted from centrally planned to capitalist economies and joined the world capitalist economy . Instead, states in the region faced . Instead of facing daunting challenges, states faced daunting .
 These challenges included integrating into the world trading system (membership in the WTO, bilateral trade agreements, and so forth) and attracting foreign investment .
 Among the most difficult tasks were the attempts of states in this region to join the international monetary system . The region's most difficult task was the attempts to join international monetary systems .
 Having a stable and convertible currency is a key element in attracting foreign business and expanding international trade . These matters greatly because of the importance of having a stable currency, it is key for foreign business .
 Most of the states of the former Soviet bloc became members of the IMF and were assigned quotas . The IMF was created after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 IMF and World Bank would not make loans available freely to these states until their governments took strong action to curb inflation, balance government budgets, and ensure economic stability . The IMF and the World Bank will not give loans freely to the states until they take strong action .
 Such stability would have been easier to achieve with the foreign loans, however, creating a chicken-and-egg problem . The foreign loans have created a problem for the country's economy .
 All the economies of the region experienced a deep depression in the years following the end of the Cold War . The region's economies suffered a deep recession in the 1990s .
 Eastern European countries have turned around their economies more effectively than have the former Soviet republics . In general, the Eastern European nations have turned their economies around more effectively .
 Russia inherited much of the Soviet Union’s economic infrastructure and natural resources . Russia was better off than some others, including some of the former Soviet Union's economic infrastructure .
 Inflation reached 1,500 percent in 1992 but was brought down to less than 10 percent by 2006 . Inflation was brought to 10 percent in 2006 after inflation reached 1.5 percent .
 Growth returned—more than 6 percent a year in 2000-2005—and a new flat tax on income boosted tax collections . Tax collections increased by 6 percent per year between 2000 and 2005 .
 The chaos of transition also provided fertile ground for corruption among government officials, officials say . The chaos was created by the chaotic transition of government officials .
 In 2004, Russia’s largest oil company was shut down by President Vladimir Putin because of nonpayment of a $10 billion tax bill, only to have its assets purchased by a state-owned business . The company's assets were purchased by the Russian government .
 The state has consolidated its control of major companies and the media again, using its powers to put the ‘plutocrats’ under its control or push them aside . The state is using its power to push the “plutocrat’s” into its control
 Russia has registered strong economic growth and reduced runaway inflation to less than 10 percent a year . Since a financial crisis in 1998, Russia's economic growth has been strong . Russia's inflation rate has been lower than 10% a year since 1998 .
 In recent years, high oil prices have helped Russia pay off debts and build large foreign reserves . High oil prices helped Russia to pay off debt and build foreign reserves in recent years .
 Corruption, weak rule of law, and political uncertainty remain, say experts . Political uncertainty as government centralizes power and reasserts control over business and press .
 Russia was aggressive in attempting to stabilize its economy during the 2008 global recession . Those efforts appeared to pay off, as economic growth began to return a year later .
 The return of Vladimir Putin to the presidency in 2012 could provide greater economic stability, perhaps at the cost of freedoms . Russia’s WTO membership should boost trade and foreign investment .
 Full integration into the world capitalist economy will require currency stability, stronger rule of law, and reduced corruption . Full integration will need currency stability and stronger rule-and-law enforcement, says President Obama .
 Russia’s biggest economic challenge is its current reliance on oil exports . The need to diversify its sources of wealth is a key to Russia's economic success .
 By the 1980s, Japan seemed to be emerging as a possible rival to the U.S. as the world’s leading industrial power . The position of Asia in the world's most populous region is Asia .
 Japanese auto manufacturers gained ground on U.S. rivals when smaller cars became popular after the oil-price shocks of the 1970s .
 In electronics and other fields, Japanese products began to dominate world markets . In the United States, Japanese creditors financed much of the growing U.S. national debt .
 The economic growth of the 1980s drove prices of stocks and real estate to unrealistic levels based on speculation rather than inherent value . The 1980s saw the price of real estate, stocks and stocks fall from value to value .
 Many banks were left with bad loans backed by deflated stocks and real estate . When these collapsed at the end of the 1980s, many banks left behind bad loans . Many banks are now struggling to recover from the collapse of the economy .
 These losses were covered up, and the underlying problems persisted through the 1990s . The banking industry suffered from lax regulation, political cronyism, and outright corruption .
 Despite the example of Japan’s financial system, these mistakes were repeated almost exactly in the 1990s by other countries of East and Southeast Asia . Despite the examples, Japan's financial system has not been able to repeat its mistakes .
 Real estate and stocks became overvalued as rapid economic growth led to speculation and ever-rising expectations . Real estate, stocks and property prices have become overvalued in recent years .
 Banks made massive bad loans based on the overvalued assets and got away with it because of political corruption and cronyism . Banks made the loans because they got away from it because they were overvalued . Banks got away because of the overvaluable assets .
 In 1997, these economies suffered a serious financial crisis, which jumped across international borders and sent shock waves around the globe that reverberated for two years . The crisis was a two-year-long period of financial turmoil in the United States .
 The 1997 Asian financial crisis began when currency speculators began selling off the currencies of Southeast Asian countries . The crisis was triggered by the collapse of the Asian currencies in 1997 .
 Thailand, Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia were forced to let their currencies be devalued . Thailand, the Philippines, and Malaysia, among other countries, forced to devalue their currencies .
 Other emerging markets around the world, including Brazil, suffered as investors generalized the problems in Asia . Brazil, China and other emerging markets also suffered from the problem .
 The Philippines addressed the problem in the manner that international agencies and foreign investors preferred . The country's economy has been hit by a wave of low unemployment rates .
 The Philippines let its currency float and then asked the IMF for a $1 billion stabilization loan, which the IMF approved in a week . The IMF approved the Philippines' request for a stabilization loan . The Philippines lost $1.1 billion in unsuccessfully defending its currency’s value .
 In return for the IMF loan, the Philippines’ government agreed to keep interest rates high and budget deficits low . The Philippines also agreed to tighten control of banks that had made bad real estate loans .
 These kinds of tough measures create political problems, especially when banks are politically connected or when governments are corrupt, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Tough measures create problems for banks and corrupt governments .
 The Philippines, by addressing such problems, won international approval . The Philippines has been criticized for its lack of transparency in the past .
 Asian countries did not act decisively and suffered greater economic setbacks . Other Asian countries have suffered more economic setbacks than Japan .
 The currency speculators attacked Indonesia, which had to let its currency fall, raise interest rates, and let its stock market drop . Indonesia's stock market also dropped, leaving the country's currency and stock market in free fall .
 Indonesia too sought tens of billions of dollars in IMF loans, with the usual conditions attached . Within months, Indonesia sought the usual IMF loans from the IMF .
 Indonesia resisted implementing the promised reforms, and its economy continued to slide in 1998 . Indonesia resisted implementation of the reforms . Indonesia's economy was still sliding in 1998, despite the promise of reforms .
 Riots and student protests forced Indonesia’s President Suharto to resign after 30 years of dictatorship . Riots eventually forced Indonesia to end its 30 year dictatorship .
 Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia, stock markets lost about half their value and currencies about a quarter of their value . Overall, in Thailand and Malaysia, stocks and currencies were down by about half the value of their values .
 When South Korea caught this “Asian flu” in 1997, its stock markets collapsed and its banks were saddled with $50 billion in bad loans based on cronyism . South Korea's banks have been saddled by the 'Asian flu' in 1997 .
 The IMF stepped in with a $60 billion international bailout, the largest ever . Koreans elected a new reformist president . IMF steps in with the largest bailout ever .
 In South Korea, as in Thailand and Indonesia, the financial crisis brought about reform as well as pain . The financial crisis in South Korea has brought about reforms and pain .
 The government reduced inflation from 20 percent to less than 4 percent in 1995-1997 . The engineer of this tight-money policy, Zhu Rongji, became the Chinese prime minister in 1998 .
 In theory, the instant free flow of capital around the world should stabilize economies . It's a result of global communications technologies, it's hoped that it will stabilize the world's economies .
 East Asia's economies have grown robustly in the decade since the 1997 financial crisis, but many of the causes of instability remain . Investors can shift money quickly, and thus incrementally, as conditions indicate shifting strength and weakness .
 China's fast-growing export sector has sent tainted foods, drugs, and toys to Western markets . Poor quality control in China's export sector sends tainted foods and drugs to the West .
 Instead of waiting for governments to devalue or revalue currencies when problems are far along, markets can gradually adjust values day by day . Markets can also adjust values by day rather than waiting for them to be devalued or revalued .
 In practice, however, the global liquidity of capital has also shown a destabilizing tendency, as small events can be amplified and reverberate in distant locations . Small events can also be amplified, as they can be heard in distant areas .
 The problems of Thailand became an Asian crisis and then an emerging-markets crisis, as liquid capital fled for cover at the speed of light .
 These events foreshadowed the financial crisis in 2008 when events in one country and sector again quickly spread worldwide . The events in 2008 were foreshadowing the global financial crisis .
 Governments face a dilemma in that politically desirable policies, from stimulating growth and keeping taxes low, to supporting banks and businesses owned by friends and relatives, tend to undermine currency stability .
 If allowed to continue, such policies may lead to an economic collapse and the loss of foreign investment . But tough policies to maintain currency stability may cause a government to lose power . Tough policies may cause the government to step down .
 The role of private businesses is expanding relative to that of the state . Private businesses are becoming more important in the United States, Asia and Eastern Europe .
 Private business plays a role in the economy that exceeds that of the state . Throughout the rest of the world, private business has a role that exceeds the state's .
 The remainder of this chapter considers the international political issues related to the operation of private businesses across state borders . The rest of the chapter discusses the issue .
 Although states are the main rule makers for currency exchange and other international economic transactions, those transactions are carried out mainly by private firms and individuals, not governments . Multinational Business is based in the United States .
 Multinational Corporations £2 Watch the Video ""Banking interests and Regulatory Reform"" at MyPoliSciLab . Multinational corporations are companies based in one state with affiliated branches or subsidiaries operating in other states .
 The clearest case of an MNC is a large corporation that operates on a worldwide basis in many countries simultaneously . MNCs operate in many different countries simultaneously, with fixed facilities and employees in each .
 There is also no exact count of the total number of MNCs, but most estimates are in the tens of thousands worldwide . There are no exact counts of the number of companies involved in MNCing .
 Most important are industrial corporations, which make goods in factories in various countries and sell them to businesses and consumers . Most important is industrial corporations which sell goods to businesses in various nations .
 Financial corporations also operate multinationally, although often with more restrictions than industrial MNCs . Financial corporations often operate in multinational ways, such as multi-national corporations .
 Among the largest commercial banks worldwide, the United States does not hold a leading position . U.S. antitrust policy that limits banks’ geographic expansion limits banks' geographic expansion .
 The McDonald’s fast-food chain and American Telephone and Telegraph are good examples . American Telephone & Telegraph is a good example of the telephone chain .
 International airlines sell tickets in dozens of states for travel all over the world . So are the international airlines, which sell tickets for travel across the globe .
 The United States predominates in service MNCs as it does in industrial ones . The U.S. is predominately in service-oriented MNC companies .
 Some scholars see MNCs as virtually being agents of their home national governments . This view resonates with mercantilism, in which economic activity ultimately serves political authorities . The role of MNCS in international political relations is complex and in some dispute .
 A variant of this theme (from a more revolutionary world view) considers national governments as being agents of their MNCs . The state interventions serve private, monied interests, the author argues .
 Others see MNCs as citizens of the world beholden to no government . Dow Chemical head said he dreamed of buying an island beyond any state’s territory .
 In such a view, MNCs act globally in the interests of their (international) stockholders and owe loyalty to no state . MNCS are motivated by the need to maximize profits, says Andrew Keen .
 Only in the case of state-owned MNCs do MNC actions reflect state interests . State-owned companies are an exception but a small minority of the total companies worldwide .
 As independent actors in the international arena, MNCs are increasingly powerful . As independent actor in the world, they are now increasingly powerful. MNCS are now more powerful.
 Only 27 states had more economic activity per year in 2011 than Shell Oil, the largest MNC, at nearly $500 billion . Shell Oil is the largest oil company in the world .
 The largest government has government revenues above $2 trillion —about six times that of Shell . Shell is the largest government in the world, with revenues of more than $1 trillion .
 They are so deeply entwined in so many states that they have a profound interest in the stable operation of the international system . They have an interest in security affairs as well as in trade and monetary relations, the authors say .
 MNCs prosper in a stable international atmosphere that permits freedom of trade, of movement, and DOING BUSINESS WORLDWIDE . Multinational corporations play important roles in international relations .
 Airbus, a division of a European MNC, shows off its new super-jumbo jet at the Singapore Airshow, 2008 .
 Multinational Corporations, Globalization, and the Changing Calculus of Conflict, are at odds with the U.S.
 MNCs are, overall, a strong force for liberalism in the world economy, despite the fact that particular MNDs in particular industries push for certain mercantilist policies to protect their own interests .
 Most MNCs have a world management system based on subsidiaries in each state in which they operate . Most of the world's largest companies have subsidiaries based in each of their states .
 The operations within a given state are subject to the legal authority of that state’s government . Operations within a state are under the authority of the government . Operation in a state is subject to legal authority, subject to that state's government .
 Foreign subsidiaries are owned (in whole or in substantial part) by the parent MNC in the home country . MNCs in the U.S. are owned by foreign subsidiaries, but not by their parent company .
 The parent MNC hires and fires the top managers of its foreign subsidiaries . Thus, the parent company fires and fires top managers .
 The business infrastructure is a key aspect of transnational relations . Business infrastructure is an important part of people and groups across national borders . It's a key part of the international community's relations with each other .
 Operations of MNCs support a global business infrastructure connecting a transnational community of businesspeople . In addition to the direct connections among members of a single MNC, the operations of members of the MNC are also important to the global community .
 A United States manager arriving in Seoul, South Korea, does not find a bewildering scene of unfamiliar languages, locations, and customs . A U.S. manager arrives in Seoul in South Korea with no need to worry about language or customs .
 English is spoken in a familiar sequence of airport lounges, telephone calls and faxes, international hotels, business conference rooms, and CNN broadcasts .
 Foreign Direct Investment MNCs do not just operate in foreign countries, they also own capital there . MNC's own capital in countries such as China, they own factories, cars, and so forth .
 U.S. and German MNCs own some of the capital located in Japan, and some of it is located in the United States and Germany . For instance, some of Japan's capital is owned by some of its major corporations .
 Investments in foreign countries are among the most important, and politically sensitive, activities of MNCs . Investing in foreign nations is one of the most politically sensitive and important investments in the world .
 Although there is a strong trend toward more foreign direct investment, these flows rise and fall with the global economy . Foreign direct investment is a key factor in growth in the United States .
 Direct investment is long term, and it is more visible than portfolio investment . Direct investments are long term investments, and are more visible, than portfolio investments . Investing is a long-term investment, rather than a portfolio investment.
 Investments in manufacturing sector usually involve the greatest investment in fixed facilities and in training workers and managers . Investments in the manufacturing sector involve the most investment in the country's manufacturing sector .
 Investments in service sector tend to be less expensive and easier to walk away from if conditions change . Investments in the service sector are less expensive than investments in other sectors, experts say .
 Mercantilists tend to view foreign investments in their own country suspiciously . Foreign investments in the U.S. tend to be seen as suspiciously in the West .
 In developing countries, foreign direct investment often evokes concerns about a loss of sovereignty . Governments may be less powerful than the MNCs that invest in their country . Foreign direct investment evokes fears about a lack of sovereignty in developing countries .
 Most foreign investment in the global South once came from colonizers . These fears also reflect the historical fact that most foreign investment came from the colonizer .
 Although such investments create jobs, they also bring dislocations of traditional ways of life and cultures . Furthermore, although such jobs create . jobs, . investments create . dislocation of traditional . ways of . life . and cultures.
 Economic nationalists in industrialized countries worry about losing power and sovereignty due to foreign investment . Economic nationalists also worry that foreign investment could erode their sovereignty .
 In Canada, mercantilists are alarmed that U.S. firms own more than half of Canada’s manufacturing industry and more than two-thirds of its oil and gas industry . The United States owns more than 50 per cent of the manufacturing industry .
 Canada is much smaller than the United States, yet it depends heavily on U.S. trade . Canada is a much smaller country, but depends heavily heavily on United States trade .
 Some Canadians worry that they are being turned into an annex of the United States . Canada is losing their own national culture and control of their economy, they say .
 U.S. economic nationalists have similar concerns over foreign direct investment in the United States . Meanwhile, United States economic nationalists are concerned about foreign direct investments .
 Mercantilists see a loss of power when foreign investors buy up companies and real estate in a debtor country . Foreign investors are seen as having less power when they buy up real estate, companies and companies .
 Foreign MNC buys an existing company or building than when it builds a new factory or other facility . Such concerns seem stronger when a foreign MNC bought an existing business or building .
 An outcry in the U.S. forced a Chinese oil company to withdraw its bid to buy the United States company Unocal . Unocal ended up selling itself for a lower price .
 Honda builds a new car factory in Ohio, adding jobs and facilities to the U.S. economy . Americans perceive no such loss when they see a new factory in the United States . Honda's new factory will add jobs to the economy .
 Liberal economists emphasize that global efficiency and the increased generation of wealth result from the ability of MNCs to invest freely across international borders . Liberal economists say global efficiency is the result of the ability to invest across the world .
 Investment decisions should be made solely on economic grounds, not nationalistic ones . Investing decisions should not be made on nationalistic grounds, rather economic grounds . Investment decisions must be made based on economic reasons, not political ones, says PM .
 In the view of liberal economists, foreign investments in the United States help, rather than hurt, the U.S. economy . In the world, foreign investment in the U., however, is a problem, not a problem .
 U.S. MNCs have more than $1 trillion of foreign direct investment outside the United States . The picture is not one-sided .
 A state in which a foreign MNC operates is called the host country . The state where the MNC has its headquarters is called its home country . A state where a foreign company operates is known as the home country.
 MNC operations create a variety of problems and opportunities for both the host and home countries’ governments . MNCs operate in countries such as Russia and China, say experts .
 Conflicts between the host government and the MNC may spill over to become interstate conflict . Conflicts could spill over into an interstate conflict between the home government and home government .
 Host governments cannot generally force an MNC to do business in the country against the MNC’s wishes . Conversely, because MNCs have many states to choose from, the host government cannot force them to comply with their wishes .
 At least in theory, MNCs operate in host countries only when it is in the interests of both the MNC and the host government . At least the theory is that they operate in a host country only .
 One obvious conflict concerns the distribution of new wealth between the MNC and the host government . The MNC says it wants to take advantage of the power of the country to create new wealth .
 This distribution depends on the rate at which MNC activities or profits are taxed, as well as on the ground rules for MNC operations . This distribution is based on the tax rates and ground rules .
 Before an MNC invests or opens a subsidiary in a host country, it sits down with the government to negotiate these issues . MNCs are negotiating these issues before investing or opening a subsidiary .
 The government's main leverage is to promise a favorable climate for doing business and making money . The MNC’s main lever is to threaten to take its capital elsewhere . Rather, the government has to promise to do business and make money in India .
 National and local governments may offer to provide business infrastructure at the government’s expense . Roads, airports, phone lines, or phone lines could be provided by the government at the expense .
 Certain locations may develop a strong business infrastructure and gain a comparative advantage in luring MNCs to locate there . Over time, certain locations may become more attractive to MNC companies .
 MNC relations with host governments contain several other sources of potential conflict, including distribution . The U.S. government has been criticized by some of the world's largest corporations .
 U.S. Policy toward the Nationalization of Natural Resource Investments in the Third World . The United States has been criticized for its policy on natural resource investments .
 Russia, Venezuela, Bolivia, Bolivia and Ecuador have all taken significant state ownership in what had been foreign assets in those countries’ oil and gas sectors . In recent years, Russia and Venezuela have taken significant ownership in those sectors .
 Once an MNC has invested in fixed facilities, it loses much of its leverage over the government . MNCs cannot move to another country without incurring huge expenses .
 Governments hesitate to break their word with MNCs because they fear other companies may not invest in the future . However, governments hesitate to do so because of their commitment to the project .
 Foreign direct investment in Bolivia dropped by 90 percent from 1999 to 2005 . Bolivia's foreign direct investment dropped 90 percent between 1999 and 2005 .
 Another source of conflict is the trade policies of the host government . Trade policies are also a source of tension in the region .
 Government restrictions on trade seldom help foreign MNCs; more often they help the host country’s own industries . Host countries often help their own industries, which often directly compete with foreign MNDs .
 Trade restrictions are another form of leverage that states have in luring foreign direct investment . Trade restrictions can be used as leverage to lure investment from foreign direct investors .
 Trade regulations often seek to create as many jobs and as much taxable income as possible within the host country . Trade regulations are often aimed at creating jobs and taxable income in host countries .
 MNCs generally want the freedom to assemble goods anywhere from parts made anywhere . Governments, by contrast, want to maximize the amount of wealth created on their own territories .
 Parts and supplies are now converging from many countries to go into a product completed in one country . It is very difficult to say exactly where the product was made .
 The question is a complex one that entails long negotiations between MNCs and host governments . The question has been a long-running affair between the two countries .
 Monetary policy also leads to conflicts between MNCs and host governments . Monetary policy is also a source of conflict between the two countries .
 When a state’s currency is devalued, imports suddenly become more expensive . When a country devalues its currency, the cost of imports suddenly becomes more expensive.
 Foreign direct investment is often sought by host governments because it stimulates employment and economic growth . A foreign MNC selling an imported product in the host IT S a JOB .
 A host country imports certain cultural trappings of the MNC's activity, such as Mattel's rendition of femininity in its doll .
 Toyota USA may have to charge more U.S. dollars for its cars in order to pay for parts it brings in from Japan . The dollar falls relative to the yen, so Toyota may need to pay more for parts . Toyota USA has a history of importing parts into the United States
 An MNC making a long-term investment in a host country wants the country’s currency to be stable . Therefore, an MNC . wants the currency . to be reasonably stable . MNC makes a long term investment in the host country .
 MNCs may conflict with host governments on issues of international security as well as domestic political stability . Finally, they could conflict with hosts on international security and domestic stability .
 When an MNC invests in a country, it assumes that its facilities there will operate profitably over a number of years . MNCs assume that their facilities will operate profitsably over the next few years .
 If a war or revolution takes away a MNC’s facility, the company loses not just income but capital—the standing wealth embodied in that facility . The company loses income and capital, but also the standing wealth of the facility that it uses .
 In 2001, ExxonMobil suspended operations at gas fields in Aceh province of Indonesia for three months . Indonesian government brought in military forces to suppress armed separatists who had been attacking ExxonMobil .
 In 2003, Chevron Texaco, Shell, and TotalFinaElf had to shut down oil production in Nigeria for weeks owing to ethnic violence . The violence shut down Nigerian oil production for weeks .
 MNCs use a variety of means to influence host governments, says CNN.com.com . In negotiating over these various sources of conflict, MNC.com negotiates with host governments .
 Domestic corporations generally follow the same patterns as those used by domestic corporations . These patterns are used by companies such as Coca-Cola .
 Such activities are politically sensitive because host-country citizens and politicians may resent foreigners’ trying to influence them . Such activities may be politically sensitive in host countries . Hosts and politicians might resent foreigners trying to . influence them.
 Corruption is another means of influence over host governments that cannot be overlooked . Corruption is a key factor in influence of host governments, says CNN.com .
 Corruption often occurs frequently with host governments in the global South . But corruption also occurs regularly in rich industrialized countries .
 MNCs have a range of conflicts with their home governments . Just as they do with their host states, they also have conflicts with host states . The world's largest companies face a host of political and economic challenges .
 Some MNC conflicts with home governments resemble the conflicts with host governments . Some of the conflicts are similar to that of those with host countries .
 A recurrent complaint of MNCs against home governments is that policies adopted to punish political adversaries end up harming them more than the intended target . Economic sanctions and less extreme restrictions often hurt the home-country MNC’s business interests .
 Usually, a competing MNC from another country is able to step into the gap when a government restricts its own MNCs . Usually, the MNC has been able to stand in to fill the gap .
 MNCs tend to go on doing business wherever it is profitable, with little regard for the political preferences of their governments . Unless they are prohibited from doing so, they tend to do business where it's profitable, says the author .
 International business prospers in stable political environments in host countries . Relationship of a host country with an investing MNC can be complex, say experts .
 Foreign investors wary of putting money into business environments marked by crime, crime, corruption, and especially armed violence that could hit their facilities and employees . Foreign investors are wary of investing into countries marked by inflation, crime and corruption .
 Ivory Coast is the world's largest supplier of cocoa . Ivory Coast has suffered from civil war in recent years . It depends on child labor to grow cocoa that corporations ultimately market as chocolate products .
 Under pressure from the U.S. government, Conoco quickly decided to back out of the deal . Conoco reversed the deal with the United States government .
 This move saved Conoco a fight with its home government, but cost it a lucrative contract that went instead to a European company . Conoco lost the contract to a company that went to Europe .
 The shareholders and top executives of an MNC are mostly from its home country . Shareholders and top execs of the MNCs mostly from their home country.
 As the world economy becomes more integrated, this is becoming less true . But as the world's economy grows more integrated it is less likely to be as integrated as it is .
 MNCs are increasingly doing business all over the world and assembling products from parts made in many countries . Shareholders and managers are becoming more international in composition .
 All business activity takes place in an environment shaped by politics, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "All business activity is shaped by the environment of politics," he says .
 The international business environment most conducive to the creation of wealth by MNCs is one of stable international security . The world's most important business environment is stable and secure, says the author of the book . The author says the world's security is the key to the success of MNC
 It is difficult and risky to make money in a situation of international conflict, especially one that threatens to degenerate into violence and war, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 War destroys wealth, reduces the supply of labor, and distorts markets in many ways . War is not the first time war has destroyed wealth, reduced labor supply and reduced labor demand . War has been a source of instability in the world for decades .
 Some businesses profit from international instability and the threat of war, such as arms merchants and smugglers . But these are the exceptions .
 MNCs favor political stability in the broader rules of the game governing international business . Beyond these international security concerns, the world's largest companies favor stability in political stability .
 In monetary policy, international business benefits from the stability of rates that the managed float system tries to achieve . The managed float is the key to the success of the global managed float policy .
 In trade policy, business benefits from the stability of tariff levels in the slowly shifting WTO framework . Business benefits from stability of tariffs in the WTO framework, business says .
 Business benefits from traditions holding governments responsible for their predecessors’ debts and requiring compensation for nationalized foreign assets . In norms of international law, business benefits from the tradition of paying compensation for foreign assets.
 MNCs can get their home governments to provide security when host governments fail to do so . MNC's security is a key priority in the Middle East .
 IR scholars continue to study the relationships between the international economic activities of MNCs and the international security activities of their home governments . Corporate alliances involving MNCS often have international implications . IR scholars are continuing to study relationships between economic and security ties between the two countries .
 When business alliances in an industry that has international markets occur within a single state, the alliances may in effect promote economic nationalism .
 Increasingly, however, corporate alliances are forming across national borders . Corporations are now forming across international borders .
 Such alliances tend to promote liberalism rather than economic nationalism, such as economic nationalism . Such alliances often promote liberalism, not economic nationalism.
 These international business alliances undermine both economic nationalism and the concept of a world splitting into rival trading blocs based in Europe, North America, and East Asia .
 International business alliances create interdependence among their home states . In fact, they create inter-independence among their own states . The alliance is based on international business agreements .
 National interests become more intertwined and interstate conflicts tend to be reduced . The U.S. has a better relationship with the world's most powerful nations .
 By operating in multiple countries at once, all MNCs have these effects to some degree, all have . By operating across multiple countries, all of the world's largest corporations are affected by this .
 MNCs are 2 Bernhard, William T., and David Leblang. But because they are based in one home country, they're based in the U.S.
 International alliances of MNCs, however, are at home in several countries at once . The alliances of international alliances are not only at home but at home all over the world .
 We do not yet live in a world without national borders, but the international activities of MNCs are moving us in that direction . We don't yet live with national borders but we do with international activities moving us towards that .
 Chapter 10 explores some of the ways in which people, companies, and ideas are becoming globally integrated across states . Chapter 10: People, businesses, ideas, and people, people, ideas becoming global integrated .
 These currencies have no inherent value but depend on the belief that they can be traded for future goods and services . These currencies are currencies that depend on a belief that future goods can be exchanged .
 Inflation rates vary widely but are generally much higher in the global South and former Soviet blocs than in the industrialized West . Inflation in the former Soviet Union blocs is much higher than in industrialized countries .
 These reserves back a national currency and cover short-term imbalances in international financial flows . These reserves are used to back the national currency .
 A sudden unilateral devaluation of the currency is a risky strategy because it undermines confidence in the currency . However, a sudden devaluation is not a good strategy for the Chinese economy, says economist .
 Central bank can control the supply of money in the national economy . By adjusting interest rates on government money loaned to private banks, a central bank can do so . Central bank adjusts interest rates to adjust the interest rates .
 From 1945 to 1971, this was done by pegging state currencies to the United States dollar and the dollar in turn to gold . From 1945 until 1971, the U.S. dollar was pegged to gold in turn .
 Since then the system has used Special Drawing Rights —a kind of world currency controlled by the IMF — in place of gold . Since then, the world currency has been used in the form of SDRR in the world .
 The balance of trade must be balanced by capital flows and changes in reserves, says the IMF . The balance must also be balanced, says IMF .
 The economies of the former Soviet republics are still not fully integrated into the world economy . Though the uncontrolled inflation of the early 1990s has subsided, the economies have still not been fully integrated .
 The largest are based in the leading industrialized states, and most are privately owned . Most of the world's largest private companies have been based in industrialized states .
 MNCs depend on states to maintain international stability conducive to doing business globally . States depend on MNC's to create new wealth, and MNC’s rely on states for stability . States need to keep international stability to do business globally.
 Governments seek foreign investments on their territories so as to benefit from the future stream of income . Governments seek such foreign investments .
 MNCs promote policies favorable to business, including low taxes, light regulation, stable currencies, and free trade . MNCS promote low taxes and light regulation .
 They also support stable international security relations, because war generally disrupts business . The countries need each other to have strong international relations, the authors say .
 These inter-MNC alliances, even more than other MNC operations across national borders, are creating international interdependence and promoting liberal international cooperation . These alliances are even more important to MNC alliances than other alliances across the borders .
 Analyze the various influences that may have been at work in the change of currency values . The underlying state of national economies, the actions of central banks and factors such as political uncertainty that affect investors' confidence in a currency .
 The IMF’s Special Drawing Rights are a world currency used only by governments for international currency management and national accounts . The IMF is used by governments only for managing international currency .
 Many scholars and politicians alike think private international investment is the best hope for the economies of Russia and Eastern Europe . Private international investment could be a key to Russia's economic success .
 Dow’s world headquarters on an island outside all state territories . Dow's world headquarters should be based in the United States, not in any of its territories .
 Foreign direct investment is a central part of the international economy . It is a key component of the world's economic growth .
 An increasing amount of investment flows from developed countries to developing countries in the global North . Much of that investment is investment between developed countries (such as Japan and the U.S.)
 With the growth of the global economy and the rise of globalization, FDI has become a global phenomenon . FDI is a form of investment that can be found in many countries around the world .
 FDI into developing countries averaged less than $20 billion as the 1990s approached . In the 1970s and 1980s, FDI in developing countries remained low, averaging less than a billion dollars .
 By the end of the 1990s, over $200 billion in investments entered into developing economies from abroad from abroad . By that time, the world had invested in developing economies .
 Some argue that the money is not worth the political and social costs . FDI flows are necessary to spur economic growth, but others argue that they are not worth it .
 Some states have attempted to lure FDI, especially from large Western MNCs, by undertaking domestic economic reforms . FDI has been sought by some states, especially by large Western corporations .
 Other states do little to encourage FDI, fearful of potential negative environmental, social, and political impacts . FDI is banned in most of the world, but it is illegal in some countries .
 FDI Brings Positive Benefits to Develop ng Countr es . FDI brings capital investment that is key to economic growth. FDI is a key investment in developing countries' economies .
 What developing countries need more than anything to spur growth is capital, says IMF . Capital is key to economic growth in developing countries, IMF says .
 It is difficult for developing economies to generate this capital from within, so foreign investment is an excellent source of it . Foreign investment can increase the potential for economic growth in developing economies, says David Cameron .
 FDI often comes in the form of factories that bring increased employment for developing countries . FDI is often a form of investment that brings increased employment to developing nations .
 While some argue that these jobs do not pay well, by local standards they often pay better than jobs generated locally . By local standards, these jobs are often better than those generated locally, according to experts .
 As firms and MNCs spread their manufacturing across the globe, this increases economic interdependence between states . This fosters better relationships between states and thus foster better relationships .
 As investors put more money into other states' economies, they may care more about those states' policies in other areas such as human rights or environment .
 This could lead to pressure on FDI recipients to improve standards in areas such as labor practices or pollution . This could mean pressure on them to improve labor practices and pollution .
 FDI's impact on developing economies is limited, says FDI expert . FDI brings problems to developing countries, but FDI is beneficial to developing nations, he says .
 Often, a very small number of individuals benefit from FDI, leaving the rest of the population unaffected by this external investment . FDI is often seen as a very large part of the global economy .
 Even when FDI does add to economic growth, this growth is distributed very unevenly, leading to a large rich-poor gap in recipient states . FDI growth is unevenly distributed, leaving a large gap between rich and poor in recipient countries .
 To lure large amounts of foreign investment, states will often adopt policies to please investors such as large MNCs . The policies are often adopted by states to please foreign investors .
 Almost all lack any significant benefits, and unionization is nearly always prohibited . Unionization is almost always prohibited in the U.S. Almost all of the workers lack significant benefits .
 MNCs will pick up and move to other locations at a moment's notice . The jobs can be very temporary as well as very temporary .
 These are not the types of jobs that bring long-term stability to developing economies . These jobs will not bring long term stability to countries like India, China .
 Some of these forces are the result of state decisions . States have attempted to integrate their economies through free trade agreements . Free trade agreements have helped some of the world's economies integrate .
 Other factors are factors such as technological changes that influence how states, nonstate actors, and even individual citizens function on a day-to-day basis .
 We will discuss state decisions to cooperate in order to create international organizations that are supranational . They subsume a number of states and their functions within a larger whole . First, we will discuss the role of states in creating international organizations such as the International Organization of Nations .
 The UN, as we have seen, has some supranational aspects, though they are limited by the UN Charter, which is based on state sovereignty . The UN Charter is based upon state sovereignty, but the UN has some of its supranic aspects .
 The European Union is a somewhat more supranational entity than the UN . Other regional organizations have tried to follow Europe’s path as well, but with only limited success .
 These IOs all contain a struggle between the contradictory forces of nationalism and supranationalism . The struggle is between state sovereignty and the authority of the higher authority of nationalistic structures .
 The other source of “coming together” is technological change, specifically, the revolution in information technologies such as the Internet, we examine . We examine the Internet as a source of "coming together"
 These technologies operate globally and regionally across state boundaries without formal political structures . These technologies may be even more far-reaching in that they operate globally, regionally, across state borders .
 Information technology has brought us closer together within a state, across a region, or around the world . Nearly all of us have been affected by information technology that has helped us connect .
 The process of integration always involves transnational actors or issues . Whether the sources of integration are from states or nonstate actors, the process is always transnational . The integration process is a process that takes place in the U.S.
 Transnational actors (for example, MNCs and NGOs) bridge national borders, creating new avenues of interdependence among states . Transnational actor groups (MNCs) and NGOs (NGOs) bridge borders .
 Transnational issues (for example, global warming or the spread of information technology) are processes that force states to work together because they cannot solve or manage the issue alone . States must work together to solve issues such as global warming and information technology .
 This chapter explores how transnational actors and issues can lead to integration . It explores how states and technology can be used to integrate the world .
 International integration refers to the process by which supranational institutions replace national ones . The gradual shifting upward of sovereignty from state sovereignty to regional or global structures is the process .
 The ultimate expression of integration would be the merger of several states into a single state . Or ultimately a single world government, the author says .
 Such a shift in sovereignty to the supranational level would probably entail some version of federalism . States or other political units recognize the sovereignty of a central government while retaining certain powers .
 This is the form of government adopted in the United States Constitution . The Constitution was adopted by the Founding Fathers of America .
 In practice, the process of integration has never gone beyond a partial and uneasy sharing of power between state and supranational levels . The process has never been successful in practice, with states and nations sharing power .
 States have been unwilling to give up their exclusive claim to sovereignty . States have limited the power and authority of supranational institutions, says the UN .
 It represents only a step in the direction of international integration, it is said .
 The most successful example of the process of integration by far is the European Union . Even that success is only partial, it's only partial .
 European states have historical and present-day religious, ethnic, and cultural differences . The European states are divided by religious, cultural, and historical differences .
 The 27 members of the EU in 2011 spoke 23 different official languages . The 27 EU members spoke 23 official languages in 2011 .
 If ever there were a candidate for the failure of integration in Europe, Europe would appear to be it . Europe is Europe's most important region, Europe's biggest economy, the European Union .
 IR scholars used the term integration to describe what they observed . Western European states began forming supranational institutions and creating an economic community .
 Integration challenged the realist assumption that states were strictly autonomous and would never yield power or sovereignty . Seemingly, integration challenged the idea that states would be strictly autonomous . integration challenges the assumption of states being autonomous and sovereignty .
 Integration processes in Europe and elsewhere are making state borders more permeable to people, goods, and ideas—increasing interdependence . Integration processes make state borders permeable, and more open to people and ideas .
 The European Union is deepening economic integration while expanding eastward . The EU is deepening its economic ties with the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 Tour de France crosses into Germany, passing only a road sign where armies faced off across massive fortifications . The race crossed the border in 2006, crossing only a sign .
 Technology and economic development lead to more and more supranational structures, functionalists say . States seek practical means to fulfill necessary functions such as delivering mail from one country to another or coordinating use of rivers that cross borders .
 functionalism predicted that states would be drawn together into stronger international economic structures . As these connections became denser and the flows faster, functionalism said .
 European experience went beyond the creation of specialized agencies to include the development of more general, more political supranational bodies, such as the European Parliament . The European experience, however, went beyond that of the specialized agencies .
 Neofunctionalism is a modification of functional theory by IR scholars to explain these developments . IR scholars use functional theory to explain the developments in IR theory .
 Neofunctionalists argue that economic integration generates a political dynamic that drives integration further . Neofunctionsalists say economic integration creates a political and economic dynamic that leads to integration .
 Closer economic ties require more political coordination in order to operate effectively . This will eventually lead to political integration as well as economic integration .
 Some scholars focused on the less tangible sense of community that began to develop among Europeans, running contrary to nationalist feelings that still existed as well as nationalism .
 The low expectation of violence among the states of Western Europe created a security community in which such feelings could grow . This is a prime example of the identity principle discussed in Chapter 1 .
 Elsewhere in the world, economies are becoming more interdependent at both the regional and global levels . Elsewhere, economies were becoming more interconnected at both of the global levels, according to experts .
 In Asia, the Association of South East Asian Nations chalked up some successes in promoting regional economic coordination over several decades . The Association of S.E. Nations was founded in 1967 .
 The Andean Common Market, begun in 1969, promoted a limited degree of regional integration in the member states of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia . It was founded in 1969 and is now the Andean Community Market .
 Mercosur was formed in 1991 to increase economic trade and integration . Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Uruguay are members of the group . Argentina and Brazil are the other South American members of Mercosuro .
 Of course, none of these organizations have experienced the success of the EU, but their aims are often similar . The EU is one of the most successful countries in the world, but its aims are similar .
 Integration reduces states’ ability to shield themselves and their citizens from the world’s many problems and conflicts . Integration reduces the ability of states to shield itself and its citizens from world's many problems, conflicts .
 Venezuela's open border with Colombia brought in large transshipments of cocaine bound for the U.S. In the early 1990s, Venezuela found that its open borders with Colombia helped smuggle drugs into the United States .
 As states increasingly fear transnational terrorism, the prospects of open borders can give state leaders pause . The prospect of an open borders is also a concern for the public .
 The centralization of political authority, information, and culture as a result of integration can threaten individual and group freedom . Centralization of power, information and culture could threaten individual freedom, author says .
 Ethnic groups want to safeguard their own cultures, languages, and institutions against the bland homogeneity that a global or regional melting pot would create . Ethnic groups also want to protect themselves against bland homogenization that would create.
 Many states and citizens have responded to the new wave of integration with resurgent nationalism over the past decade . As a result, many states, in Europe and elsewhere, have responded . Many citizens have reacted to the rise of nationalism with more nationalist tendencies .
 These forces have set in motion a wave of disintegration of states running counter to the integrating tendencies in today’s world. Indeed, these forces have . set in . motion, they have set . motion to the disintegration . of states in today's world .
 After the Cold War, disintegration centered on Russia and Eastern Europe . The former Soviet Union and former Yugoslavia were the two countries most at center of disintegration .
 States in Somalia, Democratic Congo, and Iraq appear to be in danger of breaking into pieces, if not formally .
 A challenge to integration theorists in the future will be to account for these new trends running counter to integration . A challenge is to make integration theorists account for the new trends .
 In the less successful integration attempts, nationalism stands virtually unchallenged . Even in the most successful cases, nationalism remains a potent force locked in continual struggle with supranationalism .
 This struggle is a central theme even in the most successful case of integration, the European Union . The struggle for integration in the EU continues to be a problem .
 The European Union was created after World War II and has developed since . Like the UN, the EU was created by WWII and developed since then . You Are a Citizen of Europe is a citizen of Europe .
 The EU has gone through several waves of expansion in scope, membership, and mission over the past 50 years . The UN structure has changed little since its Charter was adopted, but the EU has since expanded its scope and mission .
 Most of the next decade was spent recovering with help from the United States through the Marshall Plan . The Marshall Plan was used to help rebuild the Soviet Union .
 Two French leaders, Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman, were developing a plan to implement the idea of functionalism in Europe . Future wars could be prevented by creating economic linkages that would eventually bind states together politically .
 In 1950, Schuman as French foreign minister proposed merger of French and German steel and coal industries into a single framework that could most efficiently use the two states’ coal resources and steel mills . Schuman proposed a first modest step .
 Six states worked through the ECSC to reduce trade barriers in coal and steel . The six states worked to reduce their trade barriers .
 The ECSC established a High Authority that could bypass governments and deal directly with companies, labor unions, and individuals . Britain did not join, however, however .
 If coal and steel sound like fairly boring topics, that was exactly the idea of functionalists . The functionalists are functionalists.
 The issues involved were matters for engineers and technical experts, and did not threaten politicians . They were matters of engineers, technical experts and not politicians, it is claimed .
 Technical experts have served as the leaders of the integration process in other aspects of European life and outside Europe . Since 1952, technical experts have led the European integration process .
 International scientific communities deserve special mention in this regard . International scientific community deserves special mention, say scientists .
 If German and French steel experts had more in common than politicians, this is even truer of scientists, says German steel expert . The two countries' steel experts say they have much in common .
 Today the European scientific community is one of the most internationally integrated areas of society . Today the scientific community has become an internationally integrated area of society, says Dr. Martin .
 The EU operates the European Space Agency and the European Molecular Biology Laboratory .
 Although technical cooperation succeeded in 1952, political and military cooperation proved much more difficult . The two countries were able to reach an agreement in 1952 . The United States and the United Kingdom signed a treaty in 1953 .
 In line with the vision of a united Europe, the six ECSC states signed a second treaty in 1952 to create a European Defense Community . The community was created to work toward integrating Europe’s military forces under one budget and command .
 The French parliament failed to ratify the treaty, and Britain refused to join such a force . The treaty was ratified by the French parliament, but Britain refused .
 The ECSC states also discussed formation of a European Political Community in 1953, but could not agree on its terms . They also failed to agree on the terms of the ECSC in 1953 .
 In economic cooperation the supranational institutions succeeded, but in political and military affairs, state sovereignty prevailed . Thus, in economic cooperation, the institutions succeeded but not in military affairs .
 In 1957, the same six states created two new organizations . The Treaty of Rome in 1957 created the two organizations .
 Euratom, the European Atomic Energy Community, was formed to coordinate nuclear power development by pooling research, investment, and management . Euratom was formed in 1958 to coordinate research and investment in nuclear power .
 As discussed briefly in Chapter 8, there are important differences between free trade areas, customs unions, and common markets . There are also differences between customs unions and common market markets .
 Creating a free trade area meant lifting tariffs and restrictions on the movement of goods across borders, as was done shortly after 1957 . Free trade area was created in 1957 .
 The European Free Trade Association is an extended free trade area associated with the European Union . Its members are Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Liechtstein, and Switzerland .
 In a customs union, participating states adopt a unified set of tariffs with regard to goods coming in from outside the free trade area . In the EU, participating countries adopt a set-up of tariffs for goods coming into from outside of free trade areas .
 Without unified tariffs, each type of good could be imported into the state with the lowest tariff and then reexported (tariff free) to the other states in the free trade area . This would be inefficient. This would not be possible without unified tariffs .
 The Treaty of Rome committed the six states to creating a customs union by 1969 . The treaty was signed by six states in 1969, with the aim of creating a union by 1968 .
 A customs union creates free and open trade within its member states, bringing great economic benefits . The union is one of the world's most powerful and most successful countries .
 A Belgian financier can invest in Germany on the same terms as a German investor . For instance, a Belgian investor can invest on same terms in Germany as an investor in Germany .
 The Treaty of Rome adopted the goal of a common market, even today it has been only partially achieved . The treaty of Rome was adopted by the Roman Empire in 1903 .
 CAP has led to recurrent conflicts among member states and tensions between nationalism and regionalism . In practice, the CAP has resulted in conflicts between member states .
 To promote national self-sufficiency in food, many governments give subsidies to farmers . Many governments give farmers subsidies to help self-sufficient countries .
 CAP was based on the principle that a subsidy extended to farmers in any member state should be extended to all EU countries . The CAP was designed to ensure farmers in all EU member states receive the same subsidy .
 No member government was forced to alienate politically powerful farmers by removing subsidies, yet the overall policy would be equalized throughout the community in line with the common market principle . That way, no member government would be forced to . remove subsidies .
 The next step in the plan for European integration, after a free trade area, customs union, and common market, was an economic and monetary union . The overall economic policies of the member states would be coordinated for greatest efficiency and stability .
 A possible future step could be the supranational coordination of economic policies such as budgets and taxes . The idea is to coordinate economic policies with the world's governments .
 Treaty of Rome provides that changes in its provisions must be approved by all member states . To reduce state leaders’ fears of losing sovereignty, changes in the treaty must be OK’s approval .
 France vetoed Britain’s application for membership in the EEC in 1963 and 1967 . For example, France vetoed the UK's application to join the European Economic Community .
 Britain finally joined the European Union in 1973, along with Ireland and Denmark . Denmark and Ireland also joined in 1973 .
 This action expanded the organization’s membership to nine, including the largest and richest countries in the region . The action expands the organization's membership to 9, including nine of the richest countries .
 Richer European states give substantial aid to poorer ones in hopes of strengthening the weak links . Richer states give more aid to the poorer ones, hoping to strengthen the links .
 In 2011, the debt problems of these countries created the need for expensive new bailout funds . Yet, in 2011, these debt problems were not the problems of the wider European economy . They threatened the stability of the broader European economy, writes David Cameron .
 Under the 1957 Treaty of Rome, goods can move freely across European borders to reach consumers in any member country . The free trade area was created by the 1957 treaty .
 In agriculture, creating an integrated free market in Europe has not been easy . The EC adopted a Common Agricultural Policy in the 1960s to address the problem .
 Danish farmers took to the streets in 2011 to protest EU agricultural policies that put them at a disadvantage . Danish farmers were protesting EU agricultural policy in 2011 .
 Structure of the European Union reflects its roots in technical and economic cooperation . Structure of EU reflects the roots of the EU's economic and technical cooperation . The EU is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world .
 The coal and steel experts have been joined by experts on trade, agriculture, and finance at the heart of the community . They have also joined experts on agriculture, finance and finance .
 The rule of Eurocrats follows the functionalist plan, it has created problems as the EU has progressed . Although the rule of the Eurocrat has led to problems in the EU, it is not the only solution .
 Politicians in member states have qualms about losing power to the Eurocrats . Politicians are worried about losing their influence to the European Union .
 Citizens in those states have become more uncomfortable in recent years with the growing power of faceless Eurocrats over their lives . Citizens in Europe have become increasingly uncomfortable with the power of the EU .
 Citizens can throw their own political leaders out of office in national elections, but the Eurocrats seem less accountable . Citizens can vote for their own leaders, but they can't be held accountable for their actions .
 The Eurocrats consist of a staff of 25,000, organized under the European Commission at EU headquarters in Brussels, Belgium . The EU is the largest economic body in the world, with a total of 7,000 members .
 The Commission has 27 individual members, one from each member state, who are chosen for four-year renewable terms . The Commission is one of the largest in the world .
 Their role is to identify problems and propose solutions to the Council of the European Union . They are to propose problems to the council of the EU and identify solutions .
 These individuals are supposed to represent the interests of Europe as a whole (supranational interests), not their own states . This goal has been only imperfectly met, but this goal has not been met, writes David Cameron .
 The European Commission lacks formal autonomous power except for day-to-day EU operations . The EU has no formal autonomous powers except for the Commission itself .
 The 27 energy ministers met in 2009 to approve EU efforts to restart natural gas supplies from Russia that had been shut off in a price dispute with Ukraine .
 This formal structure reflects states’ resistance to yielding sovereignty . It is a formal structure of state sovereignty, rather than sovereignty, it is a state of sovereignty .
 The individuals making up the Council of the European Union vary from one meeting to the next . Technical issues receive priority over political ones, according to the EU .
 The arrangement gives some advantage back to the Commission staff . The arrangement thus gives some advantages back to Commission staff.
 The Council of the European Union in theory has functioned using weighted voting based on each state’s population, but in practice it operated by consensus on major policy . In theory, the Council of European Union functioned with weighted voting .
 After adoption of the Lisbon Treaty, nearly all issues are now decided by qualified majority voting . The Lisbon Treaty was adopted by the European Parliament in 2007 .
 The Treaty’s definition of a qualified majority is that at least 55 percent of EU members must vote in favor to secure passage . At least 65 percent of European citizens must vote for passage of the bill . The Treaty requires 55 percent, representing 65 percent EU citizens, to vote in
 The Council of the European Union must approve the policies of the EU Commission and give it general directions . The European Commission must approve its policies and give them general directions.
 The European Council of the 28 state leaders meets with the European Commission president twice a year . This European Council meets with European Commission presidents on two occasions each year .
 There is a European Parliament, which falls somewhat short of a true legislature passing laws for all of Europe . The European Parliament is a "legislative legislature" that falls short of passing laws . There is not a true parliament that can pass laws for Europe .
 The Commission must approve the Commission’s budget but cannot control it item by item . The Commission cannot control the budget item by order .
 The parliament shares power with the Council under a “co-decision procedure” in such areas as migration, employment, health, and consumer protection .
 The 2009 Lisbon Treaty significantly expanded the areas in which the co-decision procedure applies . The Lisbon Treaty was signed by the European Union in 2007 .
 In 1999, an independent commission created by the parliament found waste and fraud in the Commission, leading all 20 commissioners to resign . All 20 commissioners were found guilty of fraud .
 The Economic and Social Committee discusses continent-wide issues that affect particular industries or constituencies . The committee also discusses issues affecting African countries .
 This committee is purely advisory; it lobbies the European Commission on matters it deems important . The committee is based in Brussels and advises the EU on matters important to the European Union .
 It is designed as a forum in which companies, labor unions, and interest groups can bargain transnationally . The forum is designed to be a forum for companies and labor unions to bargain .
 The European Court of Justice in Luxembourg adjudicates disputes on matters covered by the Treaty of Rome . The treaty covers many issues, including many issues .
 The European Court can overrule national laws that conflict with EU law . The court has unique powers among international courts . It can also overrule EU law that conflicts with national law .
 In addition to cases brought by individuals, not just governments, the case is heard in court . The case is the first of its kind in the U.S. court system .
 In hundreds of cases, the Court has ruled on matters ranging from discrimination in the workplace to pensions of Commission staff members .
 European integration has proceeded in a step-by-step process that produces tangible successes, reduces politicians’ fears of losing sovereignty, and creates pressures to continue the process . The Single European Act has produced tangible successes and reduces politicians' fears .
 Often major steps forward are followed by periods of stagnation or even reversals in integration . The U.S. has taken a series of steps forward in the process of integration .
 The first major revision of the Treaty of Rome—the 1985 Single European Act—began a new phase of accelerated integration . The 1985 single European Act was a major reform of the treaty of Rome .
 Professional professionals licensed in one state should be free to practice in another . Spain’s licensing requirements for, say, physical therapists may have differed from those of Britain .
 The Commission bureaucrats worked to smooth out inconsistencies and create a uniform set of standards . The Commission is now working on a new set of rules to ensure standards are consistent .
 For example, a dispute raged for decades over the definition of chocolate .
 Belgium requires the exclusive use of cocoa butter for a product to be called chocolate . Britain and other countries use a cheaper process that partially substitutes other vegetable oils .
 Britain and six other EU countries that joined the EU since 1973 won exemption from the all-cocoa butter rule . The rule applies to the other eight EU members .
 The EU is moving to unify standards such as food regulations . Under the pressure of integration, the EU is unifying standards such a food regulation .
 The chocolate wars illustrate that the seemingly simple concept of economic integration sets in motion forces of change that reach into every corner of society and affect millions of people . Economic integration is the key to economic integration in society .
 The Single European Act also gave a new push to the creation of a European Central Bank and a single currency and monetary system . Longstanding goals that have since been accomplished .
 As long as the economies of the EU members were tied to separate states, efforts to maintain fixed exchange rates were difficult . The EU's economies are tied to different states .
 British politicians in 1992 were reluctant to deepen a recession by keeping interest rates high just to save German politicians from inflation that might result from lowering rates . For example, British politicians were reluctant in 1992 to keep rates high .
 1992 process moved economic integration into more political and controversial areas, eroding sovereignty more visibly than before . The 1992 process . erodes sovereignty .
 Europe 1992 continued to put aside for the future for the difficult problems of political and military integration . However, Europe 1992 did not put aside .
 The Maastricht Treaty, signed in 1992, renamed the EC as the EU . It committed the EC to further progress in three main areas . The treaty was signed in the Dutch city of Maastrict .
 The first was monetary union, in which the existing national currencies were abolished and replaced by a single European currency . The second was the European Monetary Union, which replaced national currencies with a single currency .
 A second set of changes, regarding justice and home affairs, created a European police agency . The agency responded to the new reality that borders were opening to immigrants, criminals, sex traffickers, and contraband .
 French citizens living in Germany can vote in local elections there . It also expanded the idea of citizenship, so that, for example, a French citizen living in German can vote there .
 A third goal of Maastricht— political and military integration — was even more controversial . Maastirt was also a goal of political and economic integration .
 The treaty commits European states to work toward a common foreign policy with a goal of eventually establishing a joint military force . The treaty was signed in 2007 .
 National Interests and Conventional Statecraft in the European Community in the EU Community . National interest in the U.S. in Europe is a key part of the European Union . The U.N. Council of Europe has published a series of articles on the topic .
 Maastricht was an amendment to the Treaty of Rome, which was ratified by all members of the world's political parties . The treaty was signed by the European Union in 1973, but was not ratified by any member .
 The ratification process stirred up strong public feelings against closer European union in several countries . Several countries have considered closer union closer than the EU .
 In the end, the Maastricht Treaty was implemented, although more slowly and with fewer participating countries than originally hoped . The EU implemented the treaty, although with fewer participation countries than initially hoped .
 Economic and technical integration, including the new monetary union among 12 members, maintained momentum . New monetary union, including a new currency union, also kept momentum .
 Europe’s economic integration has begun to reshape political economy at a global level . Europe's economic integration will reshape the world's political economy, writes David Frum .
 The EU now sets the rules for access to one of the world’s largest markets, for a vast production and technology network, and for the world's strongest currency . The EU is now the only country in the world to have access to a vast network of technology and production networks
 The United States chemical industry operated under United States regulations that exempt 80 percent of chemicals . The U.S. chemical industry is exempt from most of its chemical regulations .
 EU adopted stricter chemical regulations, requiring tests of health effects of all chemicals used in products . But the EU has also adopted stricter regulations, mandating efforts to substitute for toxic chemicals in everyday products . The EU has been criticized for being too strict about the use of toxic chemicals .
 Several major U.S. cosmetics companies reformulated their products to comply with new EU cosmetics regulations . As a result of the new EU regulations, cosmetics companies must remove unhealthy substances from their products .
 Even after 50 years of preparation, spillover from economic to political issues is elusive . Even after . 50 years, spillovers from economic . issues are elusive .
 A European currency, the euro, has replaced national currencies in 17 EU member states, as mandated in the Maastricht process . The euro is now a common currency in the EU, replacing national currencies .
 The euro came into full circulation in 2002 and national currencies ceased to exist . After several years as an abstract unit like the IMF’s SDR, the euro was used by national governments and for international exchange .
 The European Central Bank took over the functions of states’ central banks . The European central bank is now responsible for most of the country’s main banks .
 In participating states, fundamental economic and financial conditions must be equalized . The countries must equalize their economic, financial conditions, the EU says .
 In 2010 the unemployment rate was over 11 percent in Slovakia but only 5 percent in the Netherlands . For example, in 2010, in Slovakia, unemployment was 11 percent . In the Netherlands, unemployment rates were over 5 percent .
 In an integrated economy that is also politically centralized, the central government can reallocate resources, as the U.S. might do if Texas were booming and Massachusetts were in recession . The central government might be able to move resources if the economy is booming .
 The EU does not have centralized powers of taxation or control of national budgets . But the EU does have control over national budgets and taxes . The EU has no power to tax or control national budgets, but does not control taxes .
 The main solution adopted at Maastricht was to restrict membership in the monetary union, at least in the first round, to only those countries with enough financial stability not to jeopardize the union .
 To join the unified currency, a state had to achieve a budget deficit of less than 3 percent of GDP . A national debt was less than 60 percent of the GDP, inflation rate was no more than 1. percentage points above the average of the three lowest-inflation EU members .
 This meant hard choices by governments in France, Spain, Italy, Italy and other countries to cut budgets and benefits . This meant cutting budgets, benefits and other politically unpopular moves .
 Governments fell to opposition parties in several countries, but the new leaders generally kept to the same course . New leaders often kept to same course.
 As a result of fiscal discipline, all 12 EU members that wanted to participate in the euro qualified . All 12 members of the EU want to participate qualified to participate .
 Slovenia joined in 2007, Cyprus and Malta in 2008, Slovakia and Slovakia in 2009, and Estonia in 2011 . Cyprus, Malta and Malta also joined in 2008 and 2009 .
 Britain, Denmark, and Sweden opted to retain their national currencies . Denmark, Sweden and Britain opted to keep their currencies .
 A monetary union infringes on a core prerogative of states, the right to print currency . A state should be able to print its own currency, the author says . The EU is a member state, not a member member state .
 A European currency along these lines could deepen citizens’ sense of identification with Europe . It could be a victory for supranationalism over nationalism, says Julian Zelizer .
 Some state leaders and citizens have resisted the idea of giving up the symbolic value of their national currencies . However, precisely for this reason, some state leaders .
 Euro's problems are reflected in the task of designing euro banknotes and coins, says Euro expert . The euro was designed to solve the problems of designing bank notes and coins .
 The solution was to put generic architectural elements on the front of the banknotes and a map of Europe on the back . The solution to the problem was to use the front and back of banknotes to create the new currency .
 European Commission challenged EU member states for voting to let France and Germany break the euro rules by running high budget deficits . In 2004, the Commission challenged the European Commission for voting for allowing them to break the rules .
 Maastricht Treaty called for a monetary union with a common currency . Latvia’s government lost power within six months of TAKE A NUMBER .
 In 2002, euro currency came into effect smoothly in 12 countries and emerged as a world currency that rivals the U.S. dollar . The euro currency has emerged as the world's most powerful currency .
 The 2008 recession exposed underlying problems that triggered a eurozone debt crisis and second recession in 2012 . The eurozone's second recession was in 2012, especially in weaker members . The crisis was triggered by the 2008 recession .
 Unemployment in Spain hit 25 percent in 2013, with unemployment at 25 percent . Spain's unemployment rate now stands at an all-time high of 50 percent .
 Greece admitted to falsifying economic data to be admitted to the eurozone . Greece had for years borrowed more than it could repay, and needed a European bailout to survive the global financial crisis .
 Greece's troubles affected global investors’ impressions of all euro states . Because Greece used the euro, its troubles affected investors' impressions of other eurozone states . Greece’s troubles have affected the views of global investors, analysts say .
 In 2010, only two states in the EU actually met the EU targets for debt levels . Only two of the EU's debt targets were met by the EU in 2010 .
 Greece, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, Ireland and Italy all undertook large-scale economic reforms . Governments lost power in Greece, Italy, and other EU states . Greece and Spain were among the countries to undertake large scale reforms .
 Germany and France fought over who would help bail out the euro states in trouble . France and Germany have been involved in the bail-outs of euro states .
 After Germany’s economic minister stated that Germany “would not offer Greece a cent,” cooler heads prevailed and the EU countries banded together to support one another’�s economies . After Germany said he would not offer a cent for Greece, the EU nations band
 By 2012, the EU had patched together a bailout system capable of propping up its members’ economies when needed, backed by more than a trillion dollars . The EU's bailout system is backed by over a trillion dollar dollars .
 Citizens took to the streets frequently in countries such as Greece and Spain that had to implement harsh austerity budgets in exchange for bailouts . But the EU’s decision process remained cumbersome, with the EU's decision process becoming cumbersome .
 The austerity measures drove up unemployment, above 25 percent in the case of Spain in 2013 . They also helped drive the whole eurozone into recession . Spain's austerity measures have also been blamed for Spain's recession .
 Despite these recent problems in the eurozone, the creation of a European currency is arguably the largest financial overhaul ever attempted in history . In its first eight years it has been successful, the eurozone has been a success in the process .
 The 17 states that make up the eurozone have given up their national currencies in favor of a common one . European Financial Health is based on the European Monetary Union's European Economic Outlook .
 Deficit spending on politically popular programs would normally affect just that country’s currency, but if the country is in the eurozone, then that effect is spread across all the other euro countries . For instance, deficit spending on popular programs normally affects only one country's currency .
 European Union set up rules for fiscal responsibility (including low deficits) before a country can adopt the euro . To avoid the temptation to free-ride, the EU set up strict rules before adopting the euro.
 Several countries, including Greece, fudged those requirements when they first joined the euro . As later became clear, several countries including Greece had to comply with those requirements .
 The health of the euro currency is thus a collective good depending on the fiscal discipline of its members, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: Euro's health depends on its members' fiscal discipline .
 Free riding threatens all eurozone members . Economic crisis in one country can easily spread to others through the common currency . Free riding could be a problem for all eurozone countries .
 In 2010, Greek fiscal policies combined with the aftermath of the global recession to put Greece into a debt crisis, nearing bankruptcy . Greece is now in the midst of a major financial crisis . Greece's debt crisis began in 2010 .
 The value of the euro began to drop and world financial markets fell as anxiety increased . World financial markets also began to fall as anxiety increases .
 EU has expanded from 15 members to 28 since 2004, with potentially far-reaching changes in how the EU operates . The EU has been expanding from 15 to 28 members since 2004 . EU 14 has been in the spotlight since the start of the EU in 2004 .
 Spain and Portugal were admitted in 1986 as the 11th and 12th members of the European Union . Portugal and Spain were admitted as the 12th and 11th in 1986 .
 As relatively rich countries, they did not disrupt the EU economy . They are located on the immediate fringe of the present EU area, and as relatively rich .
 Norway applied to join and was accepted, but its citizens voted down the idea in 1994 . It left the EU with 15 members after 1995, leaving all but two of the main states of Western Europe out .
 Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Latvia and Lithuania are among the countries in the EU . Cyprus, Malta, Malta and Cyprus are also included .
 The European Commission expanded to 25 members, without the five largest having two seats, and with new voting rules that move away from a requirement for consensus . The five largest have two seats in the European Commission .
 Croatia joined in 2013 as the 28th member of the EU, showing that despite its financial problems the EU continues to expand, albeit slowly . Croatia joined the EU in 2013 and is now the only member state of the union .
 The European Union and IMF put together a $141 billion rescue package for Greece . In response to the crisis, Greece was forced to rely on the IMF and EU .
 The package needed approval from all 16 eurozone members to take effect . To take effect, the package would have to be approved by all 16 .
 In Germany, where fiscal discipline is a tradition, angry voters did not want to bail out the irresponsible Greeks . The governing party’s slim majority in Parliament was threatened by the Greek crisis .
 The German government faced both domestic costs and a direct price tag of $28 billion for Germany’s share of the bailout . German government faces both domestic and direct cost of the German bailout . Germany's share of bailout is $28billion .
 Identity played a role in the German government’s decision to approve the deal, the government says . Identity plays a part in Germany's approval of the deal .
 The European Union’s identity as a continent in common meant that Germany saw the collective good of euro stability as its own good . The EU's identity was that it was meant to be a common European Union . Germany saw that the euro stability of the euro was its own own good
 The German government supported the bailout only after the problem threatened to spread and destabilize the euro . Germany did not protest austerity measures taken as part of a bailout plan, 2010. approve the deal, 2010 .
 Just the thought of fellow Europeans in need did not alone make Germany want to help . Germany is looking to help those in need of help .
 The EU agreed to begin formal entry negotiations with Turkey in 2005, the start of a yearslong process . Although it rebuffed Turkey in 2002, the EU later agreed to start formal entry talks with Turkey .
 EU has not reached a consensus on admitting Turkey as a full member of the EU . Turkey has not been admitted to a full membership of the European Union .
 Turkey has made major economic and political changes, including abolishing the death penalty and improving human rights, to try to win EU membership . Proponents note that Turkey has also made major political and economic changes to try and win membership .
 Granting full membership would reward Turkey's changes, keeping an implicit promise to reciprocate Turkey’s actions . Granting Turkey membership would keep a promise that reciprocity would reciprocate with the country .
 Turkey’s GDP, growing rapidly in recent years, would add about 5 percent to the EU economy . Turkey's GDP is growing rapidly, adding about 5 per cent to EU's economy . The EU says Turkey's economy would be a major source of growth in the EU .
 Turkish workers could help alleviate a labor shortage in Western Europe . Turkish workers will help alleviate Western Europe's labor shortage . Turkey has a long history of working in Europe's labour force .
 Supporters say Turkey as an EU member would serve as a bridge between Europe and the Middle East region . Supporters also argue that Turkey would be an example of secular democracy to other Middle Eastern countries .
 Opponents say Turkey would be the only Muslim country in the EU . Opponents note that Turkey would become the second most populous EU member after Germany . Turkey is currently the only member of the European Union .
 With 2 million Turks already living in Germany, opponents argue that EU membership would open the floodgate for immigration from a large, poor country . Opponents argue that the smaller and richer EU members would be overwhelmed by the influx .
 Costs of subsidizing Turkish farmers and expanding social programs could reach tens of billions of euros . Costs to subsidize farmers and expand social programs are estimated to be around $1 billion a year .
 Income Levels of Old and New EU Members, 2005 $40,000 30,000 LO O o C\J CC5 H—■ g 20,000 CD Q Q_ O CD 10,000 12 Euro Countries* Other Pre-2004 Members 10 countries 2 Countries Joined in 2004
 In 20102013, the financial crisis in the eurozone pushed aside the question of admitting Turkey or other new members . In 2010, the eurozone was pushed aside by the crisis in which it was forced to admit Turkey .
 Slovakia’s single-handed veto of a massive euro bailout briefly in 2011 . The working time required to make decisions in the Council of the European Union expanded, with potential conflicts and alliances on a particular issue among 28 members .
 Recall that collective goods are generally harder to provide in larger groups, where free riding is less obvious, than in smaller ones . Collective goods are harder for larger groups to provide than smaller ones, says John Defterios .
 By Western European standards, the new members of the new European Parliament are relatively poor . Furthermore, by Western European Standards, they're relatively poor. Furthermore, they are not the only members of parliament .
 Existing EU members were wary of being dragged down by these economies . Most of them are still embroiled in the painful transition from socialism to capitalism . Existing members of the EU are wary of these economies, which sometimes lack stable currencies .
 In fact, the 2012-2013 debt crisis and recession centered on the older members such as Greece, Spain, and Portugal, not the new members . The debt crisis centered on older members of the eurozone, not new members, according to the IMF .
 The EU in the last decade has shown signs of dividing into ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ layers of the EU . France and Germany joined a currency union and deepening their integration . Those such as Britain and perhaps the new members operating at the edges of EU with more
 Since 1995, the EU has established and expanded the Schengen area . The zone in which border controls have been abolished has been abolished . The EU has set up and expanded a zone known as the "Schengen zone"
 Goods and people freely move freely within the zone without stopping at borders . Goods, people move freely in the zone .
 Norway, Iceland, and Switzerland also belong to the EU, although they are not EU members . Iceland, Iceland and Switzerland are also members of the EU .
 The European Union added 12 members, mostly from Eastern Europe, in 2004 and 2007 . The EU added 12 new members to the EU in 2004-2007 .
 Efforts to update European governance with the new Lisbon Treaty finally succeeded in 2009 . The Lisbon Treaty was first ratified by the European Parliament in 2007 .
 Much complexity remains to be worked out, as shown in the muddled response to the Greek financial crisis in 2011 . Greece's financial crisis was muddled by the government's response to it, but much complexity remains .
 Demonstrators demonstrate at the European Central Bank in Frankfurt, Germany, 2011 .
 The 25 leaders signed an EU constitution in late 2004 . The European Parliament gave it a strong vote of support in 2005 . The Lisbon Treaty was signed by the 25 leaders .
 To take effect, it had to be ratified by all 25 states, including several requiring referenda . It had to take effect after it was ratified by several states .
 The constitution would establish a stronger president of the EU, as well as a foreign minister . It would replace the requirement for consensus in EU decision making with majority voting in more cases .
 Voters in France and the Netherlands rejected the constitution and the process halted . But voters in both countries rejected it and the constitution was overturned .
 At the end of 2007, the EU moved forward with another new proposed constitution, the Lisbon Treaty . The Lisbon Treaty is the EU's second proposed constitution .
 The treaty was similar to the previous constitution, but faced a popular referendum only in Ireland . The treaty faced a referendum in Ireland only in 2008 .
 For example, a charter of human rights was made legally binding on all member states . The charter was made binding on members of the European Union .
 Some changes allow state members and individual citizens to place more checks on EU power . On the other hand, some changes allow individual citizens and state members to place checks .
 National parliaments will now also receive draft legislation to evaluate and respond to before it is enacted in Brussels . Draft legislation will now be evaluated and respond before it can be enacted .
 Treaty attempts to increase transparency by requiring European Council meetings to be held in public . Treaty also attempts to make it more transparent by requiring public meetings held in the public .
 Commission must now take up any proposal or petition that receives 1 million signatures . EU citizens must now be able to engage EU citizens directly, the Commission says .
 Within the EU are the ‘inner six’ and the new arrivals, each with its own concerns . The EU is divided between the 'inner six' and 'the new arrivals'
 Around the edges are the EFTA states participating in the European Economic Area . The EFTA is part of the EU's largest economic body, the European Union .
 Russia and the United States are European actors in some respects but not others . Russia and even the U.S. are involved in some of the world's most violent anti-terrorists .
 The OSCE has little power except to act as a forum for discussions of security issues . Operating by consensus, with a large and universal membership of 56 states, the OSCE is a body of 56 countries .
 In the late 1990s, the OSCE shifted into new tasks such as running elections, helping political parties in Bosnia and Kosovo . The OSCE is providing various forms of monitoring and assistance in half a dozen Eastern European countries .
 International integration is not a matter of a single group or organization but more a mosaic of structures tying states together . Thus, international integration is a mosaic, not a single organization or group, it is more of a mosaic rather than a one .
 These various structures of the European political system, centered on the EU, are IGOs composed of states as members . These structures are composed of members of the EU .
 Economic ties bring people closer together across borders across borders . But a lesstangible aspect of integration is the sense of identity that develops over time .
 Supranational identity, culture, and communication are also aspects of international integration . Supranations identity and culture are also a key part of integration in the world .
 The remainder of this chapter considers how information technologies are bypassing states and bringing about this kind of integration globally . The next chapter will consider how information technology can be used to bypass state borders .
 Global telecommunications are profoundly changing how information and culture function in international relations . The Power of Information is changing the world's relationship with the world .
 These technological advances, at the center of globalization, are bringing the identity principle to the fore as communities interact across distances and borders . The identity principle is being brought to the forefront by technology .
 Newly empowered individuals and groups are creating new transnational networks worldwide, bypassing states . The networks are bypassing state borders and bypassing countries .
 Connecting the World: New international political possibilities arise from technological developments . Connecting to the World is a series of technological developments in the world's political sphere .
 Media over which information travels shape the way ideas take form and spread from one place to another . The media over which ideas travel is the shape of how ideas form .
 The media with the strongest political impact are television, radio, phones, and the Internet . TV, radio and phones have the strongest impact on politics .
 For decades, Turkey has desired full membership in the European Union . Turkey has sought full membership of the EU for decades .
 Germany is Turkey's top source of imports and biggest market for exports . Turkey is also Turkey's biggest export market for its own exports .
 An economically healthy Turkey in the EU would be good for German businesses, says German businesswoman . Turkey is an economically healthy member of the EU, she says . Turkey's relationship with the EU is important to Germany, she adds .
 Past German leaders have differed on their views on Turkey's application, ranging from outright opposition to strong support . Past leaders have expressed strong support for Turkey's bid to rejoin the country .
 Turkish leaders strongly oppose this option, and other European leaders have not supported your compromise to date . Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has called for a more moderate approach to the EU .
 Turkey's application to the EU has supporters and detractors across Europe . France opposes Turkish membership more than any other EU member state .
 Recently, when France held the EU presidency, it demanded delays of Turkey's accession talks . France also demanded delays in Turkey's talks with the EU .
 Turkish membership in the EU is not popular domestically . Turkey's membership is also not popular among its citizens .
 Native Germans are concerned that immigrants could freely come to Germany and take jobs . Native Germans fear that immigrants will freely come freely to Germany to take jobs. Native Germans say they are concerned about the influx of immigrants .
 Germans fear a wave of cheap exports from Turkey will undermine their workers . They also fear that a wave will undermine German workers .
 More than 2 million Turks live in Germany, making them the largest ethnic minority in your country . Already, more than 2. million Turks are in Germany .
 There have been ethnic tensions between the Turkish immigrants and native Germans . Calls for tight restrictions on Turkish immigration have been made .
 Many of the Turks in Germany are voting and tax-paying citizens who have urged you to support Turkey's membership . Yet, many of them are voting, tax-payer citizens who want Turkey to join NATO .
 Ethnic Turks begin large protests in several cities in Germany to urge your support of Turkey's application . Upon hearing of France's proposal, ethnic Turks began large protests against Turkey .
 Radio, and increasingly TV, reaches the poorest rural areas of the global South . Radio and TV is increasingly important to the poor in rural areas .
 Ordinary over-the-air TV and radio signals are radio waves of specific frequencies, which are a limited resource in high demand, regulated by governments . Ordinary broadcast signals are broadcast signals of specific frequency .
 Because radio waves do not respect national borders, the allocation of frequencies is a subject of interstate bargaining .
 Qatar-based al Jazeera is a force in Middle Eastern politics and reaches an influential audience worldwide . Al Jazeera was founded in 1996 and is a leading broadcaster in the Middle East .
 In a 2006 poll in six Arab countries, citizens listed al Jazeera as their main source of international news by a large margin over any other satellite TV network . In the 2006 poll, citizens said al Jazeera was their main news source by large margin .
 Telephone and Internet empower ordinary citizens to use their phones and the Internet . Even more empowering of ordinary citizens are telephones and the internet .
 These are two-way media through which users interact among themselves without a centralized information source . Users interact with each other without a central source of information .
 In 2012, the world had 6 billion cell phone subscriptions, almost as many as people and far outnumbering the 1. billion landlines . The world now has 6 billion phone subscriptions and 6 billion landline subscriptions .
 The cell phone camera is one of the most politically important features of cell phone technology . The camera is a key component of the technology .
 It has empowered ordinary citizens to create visual records, such as videos of political demonstrations that end up on TV in another country . Videos of political protests in one country end up appearing on another country's TV .
 In the 2011-2012 Arab Spring revolutions, cell phone videos played a critical role in winning support by showing governments brutally murdering citizens . In Syria, especially in Syria, such as Syria, the videos were critical to winning support .
 A related technological development of paramount political importance is the growth of social media such as Facebook, building communities and allowing sharing of ideas outside government control and sometimes across international borders .
 In Africa, cheap cell phones with cheap prepaid calling cards have let millions of relatively poor individuals communicate . Cheap cell phones and prepaid calls cards have given millions of people a way to communicate .
 These phones empower individuals by letting farmers check market prices before deciding when to harvest crops . These phones can also be used by individuals to check prices of crops .
 Kenya has become the world’s leader in using cell phones for banking . Kenya is one of the world's most successful African countries .
 M-Pesa mobile payment system developed by entrepreneurs in Kenya . The country has 10 million banking transactions daily, but half the population lacks a bank account .
 City dwellers can transfer money to their home villages by phone instead of taking a wad of cash for a long bus ride . The move is a way to get money back to your home village .
 Deep political divisions over the Internet came into focus in December 2012, at a conference of the ITU in Dubai to develop a new treaty on the Internet and global Internet .
 International Telecommunication Union . telecommunications, Russia, China, and others saw the Internet as a system of government-controlled networks . Others, including Google and various NGOs, saw it as a more amorphous entity to facilitate the free flow of information .
 The United States House of Representatives, in a rare moment of bipartisanship, unanimously opposed the new treaty . The U.S. House voted in favor of the treaty, but the Senate voted against it .
 The addition of phone and Internet capability in poor countries is impressive . Taken on its own, the addition to phone and internet capability is impressive, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A person living in the global North is far more likely to have a landline, cell phone, and Internet access than a person in the South . A North American person is more likely than a South American person to have access to the Internet .
 As the Internet wires parts of the world into a tight network, other regions are largely left out . Most Web users live in the United States, Europe, and East Asia .
 In 2012, the Internet bandwidth per user was 25 times higher in Europe than Africa . Europe is 25 times more connected to the Internet than Africa, according to CNN.com .
 The Internet reached 70 percent of households in the global North but only 20 percent in the South . The Internet is now reaching 70 percent in 70 percent households in North America .
 The numbers for mobile phone Internet are 51 percent in North and 8 percent in the South . Mobile phone Internet is 51 percent of the population in the North . The South is 8 percent more than the North, according to the statistics .
 The explosive growth of Internet use is occurring mainly among the world’s richer people . Internet use in the U.S. is mainly among those who use the Internet more often .
 Some activists hope that the Internet can transform poor villages in the global South . Activists say it can let them produce traditional goods locally and market them globally .
 A businessman placed computer screens with pointing and clicking devices and high-speed Internet access in walls and kiosks in very poor slums in India .
 In each location, neighborhood kids quickly gathered, taught themselves to browse the Internet . They even invented their own terminology to describe the unfamiliar cursor and icons on the screen .
 This small-scale “hole in the wall experiment” shows that simple methods can go far to break down the digital divide between the world’s rich and poor .
 A model project in Cambodia in 2001 helped revive a village silk-weaving industry by marketing locally made scarves on a village Web site . Cambodia's silk weaving industry was revived in 2001 by a model project .
 Critics noted that the project was feasible only because a satellite company owned by the Thai prime minister donated $18,000 per year of link time to the project . Critics say the project is only feasible because of the donation from the company .
 A United States aid organization provided the computers, training, Web site design, and credit card processing required to sell scarves from the village .
 The reality is that most poor villages cannot afford the Internet, cannot read the language of most Web sites . Poor villages cannot maintain computers and Web sites without extensive training .
 Since 2007, the One Laptop Per Child project has been mass-producing an inexpensive Web-capable wireless personal computer, priced at $200 . The project has produced a $200 computer for each child since 2007 .
 Hand-powered laptops can be hand-powered with one minute of exertion charging the battery for ten minutes of use . The laptops can also be used to recharge the battery .
 Several countries have ordered millions for their children . About 3 million have shipped to 40 countries, notwithstanding problems and setbacks .
 In 2009, Uruguay bought one for every school-age child in that country . Uruguay has since bought one of the same for every child in the country .
 Other than showing adults how to use the solar chargers, the project included no instructions .
 The students were singing ABC songs, teaching themselves to read . Within two weeks, the students had learned ABC songs .
 In five months, they had hacked into the Android operating system to enable a camera and customize the desktop . And in five months they had a camera, and a custom desktop .
 Today, governments can gather, organize, and store huge amounts of information . Governments can gather and organize, organize and store enormous amounts of data . Governments are now able to use this technology to gather information .
 In this respect, the information revolution empowers governments more than ever . The information revolution has been empathetic to governments, says David Cameron .
 A wanted criminal, drug lord, or terrorist could slip over the border and take refuge in a foreign country . In the past, a wanted criminal or drug lord could slip into a foreign nation .
 The terrorists who attacked the U.S. in 2001 demonstrated how easy this was. It was easy to attack the United States.
 A routine traffic ticket in a foreign country could trigger an instant directive to arrest the person . Today, however, it is more likely that a routine ticket in the foreign country can trigger an arrest . It's more likely to be a routine traffic stop in the future .
 Information technologies give repressive governments more power to keep tabs on citizens, spy on dissidents, and manipulate public opinion . On the other hand, information technology gives repressive governments power to spy and manipulate people .
 Those technologies are now being mobilized in force to strengthen counterterrorism . They are being used to train counterterrorism forces in Afghanistan .
 Just as citizens and terrorists find it harder to hide from governments, so do state governments . State governments are finding it hard to hide information from each other, says David Cameron .
 A powerful state such as the United States can increase its power through information technologies . The U.S. can use information technologies to boost its power in the future, experts say .
 It can and does monitor phone calls, faxes, data transmissions, and radio conversations in foreign countries . It can also monitor faxes and data transmissions from foreign countries.
 Global communication, a new capability on the time scale of the international system, is changing the rules of IR and empowering nonstate transnational actors . Global communication is a very new capability that is changing how the world works .
 Telecommunications could change the path of development in poor countries, possibly bypassing traditional infrastructure such as phone lines and leapfrogging to a wireless networked economy .
 Egypt successfully blocks a choke point and cut off international Web access . Egypt successfully blocked the choke point in Cairo, Egypt, on Monday .
 Syria’s government used its own hackers to track down the identities of protesters anonymously posting antigovernment videos and messages on the Web . The government also tracked down the identity of those posting anti-government videos .
 The U.S. government in response trained democracy activists in technologies of the Internet and social media . It created shadow Internet and cell phone networks inside foreign countries whose governments were trying to shut down communications .
 As the cost of information technology decreases, it comes into reach of more states . Information technology is becoming more available in the United States .
 Small states can gain some of the same capabilities electronically . Now small states can also gain the same capability electronically .
 High-resolution satellite photos are now available commercially and are cheap or free . Even sophisticated information is more available and cheaper .
 These images can be used for both military purposes and natural resource management . Knowing which states (including one's own) have such resources as oil, minerals, forests, and farmland, can be useful for military purposes .
 Most governments create explicit channels of information dissemination to influence domestic and international audiences . Most governments use these channels to influence their own public opinion .
 Radio Moscow broadcasts programs in dozens of languages aimed at all the world’s regions . Stations such as Radio Moscow broadcast programs aimed at world's regions .
 The United States operates the Voice of America shortwave radio network . The network is picked up in many remote regions . It is also picked up by people in remote regions of the world .
 The United States also beams specialized programming into Cuba (TV/ Radio Marti) and China, among others . The U.S. also beams programming to Cuba and China .
 Governments spread false as well as true information as a means of international influence, says President Obama . The U.S. government has been accused of spreading false and true information .
 In the 1930s, the Nazis discovered that the “big lie,” if repeated enough times, would be accepted as truth by most people . The Nazis found that the lie, if repeated many times, was accepted as true by most .
 It is harder to fool international audiences these days, but domestic ones can still respond to propagandists misinformation . Domestic audiences can respond to misinformation, but they can also respond to it .
 Most governments own and operate at least one main TV station, and many hold a monopoly on TV stations . Many governments own or operate one main television station .
 TV signals rank with military equipment and currency as capabilities so important to a government that it must control them itself . Thus, TV signals often rank with weapons and military equipment, military equipment .
 In a military coup d’etat, usually one of the first and most important targets seized is the television broadcasting facility . In a coup d'etat usually, usually, the first target is the TV broadcasting facility.
 Information can be used against governments as well, by foreign governments, NGOs, or domestic political opponents . Information as a Tool against Governments can also be used as a tool against governments .
 Governments fear the free flow of information, especially repressive ones, for good reason . Governments fear it, but it's a good thing to know about the Internet .
 Information technologies have become powerful tools of domestic opposition movements and allies in foreign governments . New information technologies have been powerful tools for domestic opposition .
 Television coverage has fed popular discontent regarding the current U.S. war in Iraq . It did for the Vietnam War and the Russian war in Chechnya . Television coverage of the Iraq War has fed public discontent .
 In 2009, the Chinese government began blocking all access to YouTube after videos surfaced of Chinese military forces repressing pro-Tibet demonstrations . The Chinese government blocked YouTube access in 2009 .
 In Iran, millions of people have used the Internet to discuss taboo topics such as sex, fashion, politics . The government was widely criticized for cracking down on protesters after a disputed election in 2009 .
 Opposition members posted video and pictures of beatings and even the shooting death of a female protester . The crackdown was broadcast on Internet sites such as Twitter and Facebook as opposition members posted videos .
 The global peace demonstrations used information technologies to turn out millions of people in dozens of countries on short notice . The 2003 Iraq War protests were led by information technologies . The demonstrations were used to turn people out on short-notice .
 In 2010, the United Arab Emirates announced it would shut down BlackBerry’s services, but later reached a compromise allowing users to continue using the devices . BlackBerry's services were shut down by the UAE in 2010 .
 A major controversy over Web freedom emerged in 2010 when Google announced that it would no longer comply with Chinese law that censors Internet searches by blocking politically sensitive words from its Chinese search engine . Google said it would not comply with the Chinese law by censoring Internet searches .
 Nonstate actors such as terrorist organizations have also harbored the power of cellular phones and the Internet to recruit operatives, raise money, and coordinate attacks . The Internet can also be used to detonate improvised explosive devices remotely with a cell phone's ring triggering the bomb when called .
 New “smart weapons” technologies empower foot soldiers . Information easily crosses state borders . Information is a major factor in both international and domestic politics .
 Police stormed Kenya's daily newspaper offices and burned tens of thousands of copies in 2006 . Police were responding to an unfavorable coverage of the president . The newspaper's offices were attacked by police in an anti-government campaign .
 New communications technologies may be doing the same for ordinary citizens relative to governments and political parties . New communications technology may be helping ordinary citizens in the future .
 The Internet in many ways empowers small fringe groups relative to states, and leaves states vulnerable in new ways . The Internet is often more powerful than the Internet, but it's also more powerful .
 Hackers have taken over control of U.S. government computers and unleashed costly viruses against businesses and people worldwide . Hackers take over government computers in the United States and unleash costly viruses .
 During the U.S. spy plane standoff in 2001, nationalistic Chinese hackers claimed to have put pro-Chinese graffiti on 1,000 United States Web sites . United States hackers returned the favor in 2001 .
 An Ohio school district found that its site now played China’s national anthem .
 The Chinese communist party criticized “Web terrorism” and the crisis eased . The Chinese Communist Party criticized ‘Web terrorist’ The crisis eased after the party was criticized for its criticism .
 The U.S. government worries that real terrorists could use the Internet to cause massive disruptions in the United States economic life . But the government worries about real terrorists using the Internet could cause economic disruptions .
 All in all, the tide of technology seems to be running against governments . The tide of tech seems to run against governments, according to experts .
 Information gets through, and no political power seems capable of holding it back . No political power can be held back for long, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As more and more communication channels carry more information to more places, governments become just another player in a crowded field . Governments are just another players in an increasingly crowded field of information .
 States do not control the global flow of information, which has become a potent force in world politics . U.S. does not control information flow, but it has become an important part of global politics .
 Arab Spring participants used Internet capabilities and social networking sites to publicize abuses and organize resistance . Despite efforts by authoritarian governments, young participants in the Arab Spring used the Internet to organize protests .
 These protesters in Egypt's capital in 2012 stay connected to each other and the world via iPad .
 As the information revolution continues to unfold, it will further increase international interdependence . It will make actions in one state reverberate in other states more strongly than in the past . The information revolution will continue to grow in the future .
 Information is slowly undermining realists’ assumptions of state sovereignty and territorial integrity . Information is thus undermining realist’s assumptions about state sovereignty, territorial integrity, he says .
 Information technology is undermining the centrality of states themselves in world affairs . At the same time, by empowering substate and transnational actors, it is undermining states' centrality . Information technology can be used to empower sub-state actors, say experts .
 The information revolution greatly increases transparency in international relations, says President Barack Obama . Obama says the information revolution will greatly increase transparency .
 States do not need to arm against unknown potential threats because they see the real threats . As a result, states do not arm against known potential threats . States see real threats and not arm themselves against unknown threats, experts say .
 The ability to monitor performance of agreements makes collective goods problems easier to resolve because cheaters and free riders can be identified . Similarly, the ability to identify cheaters or free riders in collective goods can also be resolved easily .
 The ability of governments to bargain effectively with each other and to reach mutually beneficial outcomes is enhanced by the availability of instant communications channels . Moreover, governments can also bargain effectively and reach mutual beneficial outcomes, says the author .
 In these ways, the increased transparency allowed by new technologies strengthens the reciprocity principle as a solution to IR conflicts . The increased transparency allows for new technologies to be more transparent .
 The complex monitoring and accounting required in international agreements based on reciprocity, such as arms control, comes much easier in a transparent world . It's easier to monitor and account for international agreements such as trade deals and arms control .
 In the past, nationalism has tapped into the psychological dynamics of group identity in a powerful way that has legitimized the state as the ultimate embodiment of its people's aspirations and identity .
 The information revolution may aid the development of transnational or supranational identities . Now the information revolution is in place of the internet .
 Journalists, scientists, and church members work in communities spanning national borders . CNN.com will feature iReporters, scientists and church leaders .
 Members of transnational movements, such as those linking women from various countries, or environmentalists, join transnational groups . Activists such as environmentalists and human rights activists join the movement .
 The links forged in such transnational communities may create a new functionalism that could encourage international integration on a global scale . The links forge in such communities could create a 'new functionalism'
 Citizens of different states share their admiration of sports stars, who become international celebrities . Citizens of various states share photos of their admiration for sports stars .
 The U.S.-Chinese rapprochement of 1971 was so delicate that political cooperation was impossible until the way was paved by sports . The United States table tennis team made the first official United States visit to China . The Olympics (run by the International Olympic Committee, an NGO)
 People who travel to other countries often develop both a deeper understanding and a deeper appreciation for them, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Students are exchange students and those who attend college in a foreign country . Added to these contacts are students and exchange students .
 Like international integration and globalization generally, global culture has its downside . Global culture has some downsides, but it is still positive overall .
 For many people, especially in the global South, the information revolution carrying global culture into their midst is, despite its empowering potential, an invasive force in practice . The information revolution is a force in the South, but it is also invasive in practice in practice, says CNN.com's
 The emerging global culture is dominated by the world’s superpower, the U.S. says . United States cultural influence is at least as strong as United States military influence, he says .
 Culture may be just another economic product, to be produced in the place of greatest comparative advantage, but culture also is central to national identity and politics . Culture is not only economic product but also important in national identity .
 The prospect of cultural imperialism opens another front in the conflict of liberalism and liberalism . The power of information, opening up a wave of globalization in international business, is also strengthening global communities .
 Some events, such as the British royal wedding in 2011, may be rooted in one nation but become global news stories followed by millions around the world . The royal wedding is one of the most global news events in history .
 A Behind'the'Scenes Look at the Politics, the Scandals, and the Glory of the Games . A Behindthe'scenes look at the politics, the scandals and the glory of the Olympics .
 At the UN-sponsored World Summit on the Information Society, Europe and developing countries tried unsuccessfully to break the monopoly held by a United States consortium over registering domain names .
 By 2009, Internet's governing body announced that Internet addresses can now contain non-Latin characters . The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers announced that this change .
 This will allow addresses to contain Chinese, Cyrillic, Japanese, Arabic, or any number of non-Latin based characters to form a Web address .
 Recent trends seem to be moving toward a more multilateral world culture, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Boy and girl bands are systematically recruited and developed, then marketed globally via social media . The bands are recruited, developed, and marketed globally using social media.
 Another highly successful cultural export product can be found in Brazilian soap operas . Brazil's soap opera is one of the world's most successful cultural exports .
 Scholars will be able to determine more accurately how they influence world politics and state sovereignty . Over the coming years and decades, their shape will become clearer, they say .
 We need not wait as long to see the effects of a different kind of supranational influence, however, however . We need to wait for the next few years to see effects of the EU in Europe .
 Environmental problems, which rarely recognize national borders, have forced states into ever-closer cooperation . Political leaders find that the only effective responses are at a supranational level .
 These processes generally lead to an ongoing struggle between nationalism and supranationalism . These processes often lead to a struggle between nationalisms and nationalism, writes David Cameron .
 Forces of disintegration tore apart previously existing states such as the Soviet Union . Instead of disintegrating, the disintegration was caused by the collapse of the USSR . The collapse of Soviet Union was the result of a stateless society .
 The EU has given considerable power to the EU in economic decision making . Its 28 member states have given it considerable power over economic decisions .
 EU agricultural subsidies are a major source of trade conflict with the United States . The EU has been accused of using agricultural subsidies to drive trade between the U.S. and China .
 It is the biggest experiment with money in history and had great success in its first years . But it hit a crisis in 2010-2013 over members’ debts .
 A monetary union requires roughly comparable inflation rates and financial stability in participating states . The union is based on roughly equal inflation rates, financial stability and economic stability .
 The Commission’s president, individual members, and staff all serve Europe as a whole . The Commission has a supranational role in the EU .
 The Council of the European Union representing member states has power over the Commission . However, the EU has the power of the Council of European Union .
 The European Court of Justice also has limited powers, but has extended its jurisdiction more successfully than any other international court . The court can overrule national laws, and can also extend its jurisdiction to countries .
 The EU’s structures and procedures were adapted as it moved from 15 to 27 members . The EU has been in touch with the EU since it moved to 27 countries .
 The EU faces challenges in deciding how far to expand its membership, particularly regarding Turkey . The EU is considering whether to expand membership in Turkey .
 Supranational relationships and identities are being fostered by new information technologies such as TV, radio, and the Internet . The process is still in an early stage, although it is still early .
 Government access to information can also increase the stability of international relationships . Security dilemma and other collective goods problems become less difficult in a transparent world, he says .
 Authoritarian governments find it hard to limit the flow of information into and out of their states . Authoritative governments often find it difficult to limit information flow to their citizens .
 This process may hold the potential for the development of a single world culture . This process could be used to develop a single global culture, say experts .
 Some politicians and citizens worry about cultural imperialism . Some worry that such a culture would be too strongly dominated by the U.S. However, some citizens worry that cultural imperialism is a problem .
 Functional economic ties among European states contributed to the emergence of a supranational political structure, the EU . The EU has considerable though not unlimited power, but it has considerable but not unlimited powers .
 President of the European Commission complains about the public reaction in European states against the growing power of the Commission’s Eurocrats .
 Turkey's government hired you as a consultant to help it develop a presentation to the EU about why Turkey should be admitted as a member of the EU . The government of Turkey hired you to help them develop their presentation .
 Information technologies are strengthening transnational and supranational communications and identity . Information technology is a key part of the identity of the United States .
 Governments are providing states with new instruments of power and control . However, they also provide them with new tools of power, control .
 Since the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community, there appears to be a forward-moving process of integration in Europe . The EU is the largest economic bloc in the world .
 It is economically large, with an aggregate GDP greater than that of the United States . It is the largest economy in the world, with the largest GDP in the country .
 It is a powerful force diplomatically mediating international disputes and conflicts, even those involving other great powers . It mediates international disputes, mediating disputes, including those involving others .
 The EU has lately had difficulty furthering the integration process . Yet, the EU has recently had difficulties furthering it .
 After the adoption of the euro, the EU changed its focus from deepening integration to broadening membership by admitting former Eastern European states to membership . The EU's focus was to broaden its membership, rather than deepening integration .
 This expansion has extended the economic and political power of the EU, but it has also resulted in challenges . The EU has extended its economic, political power, but has also been challenged by challenges .
 Attempts to change EU rules to further extend the power of the European Parliament have met with stiff resistance . Attempts have also been met with resistance to changing voting systems within the EU Council .
 Hungary's prime minister warned in 2009 of a ""new iron curtain" between rich and poor states . The global economic recession also put strains on the EU, with the global recession also putting strains .
 The EU Integration Process Is Fonished Progress ng Troubles with the proposed Constitution and new Lisbon Treaty prove there are difficulties . The EU integration process is on the verge of being completed .
 Major challenges lie ahead when it comes to implementing major EU policy changes . The rejection of the proposed European Constitution in 2007 and the Lisbon Treaty in 2008 show that major problems lie ahead .
 Even the attempt to guarantee individual rights in Europe created controversy . Even the idea of guaranteeing individual rights was controversial .
 Many of the major EU changes, including the Single European Act and Maastricht, began when the EU had 12 or 15 members . The EU has now had more than 30 members, with more than 100 members .
 With 28 states, finding agreement among all the states will be extremely difficult, especially on issues where unanimous consent is required . Now, with 28 members, it will be difficult to find agreement among them .
 Obstacles have been overcome in the past, but obstacles have not been overcome . The EU integration process will continue to be successful in the long run, argues the author .
 Few observers gave the EU much of a chance to get the euro off the ground, yet it has succeeded in doing so . The euro has been a major success for the EU since it was formed in 1999 .
 A new agreement was reached to allow a second vote after the defeat of the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland . The Lisbon Treaty was defeated by the British Parliament in 2010 .
 EU ministers have been persistent and creative in their attempts to deepen the integration process . EU ministers are trying to deepen their efforts in the EU to deepen its membership .
 The EU has strong incentives to deepen cooperation among its members . The failure to date of the Doha Round of WTO negotiations and tensions with the U.S. over NATO forces should be used, the EU has said .
 It now knows it cannot rely only on the WTO to further trade liberalization or on the United States for military leadership . The U.S. is no longer relying only on WTO or the WTO, it says .
 The EU has been and remains flexible as to how member states respond to the deepening of cooperation . The EU is flexible as it responds to the need for cooperation, says the EU .
 Further integration does not require unanimous adoption of all policies, it is said . Further integration is possible, but it does not mean all policies must be agreed upon .
 EU Enlargement, Region Building and Shifting Borders of Inclusion and Exclusion . EU's new policy aims to strengthen the EU's membership of the EU . EU President Michel Vaclav Koskinov says the EU is building on the continent .
 Global threats to the natural environment are a growing source of interdependence . Watch the video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction' at MyPoliSciLab Interdependence
 States' actions regarding pollution, conservation, and natural resources routinely affect other states . States’ actions on pollution and conservation often affect each other states' actions .
 A sustainable natural environment is a collective good, and states bargain over how to distribute the costs of providing that good . States bargain over the costs to provide that good, but not how much is needed .
 The technical, scientific, and ethical aspects of managing the environment are complex, but the basic nature of states’ interests is not . The state’s interest is not, but that of states, it is important to manage the environment .
 The collective goods problem arises in each issue area concerning the environment, resources, and population . It is not the only problem to be solved by collective goods .
 The world’s major fisheries in international waters are not owned by any state; they are a collective good . For example, the world's major fisheries are not a state's own fish .
 The various fishing states must cooperate (partly by regulating nonstate actors such as MNCs) to avoid depleting the stocks of fish . The fish stocks must also be regulated by the fishing states .
 If too many states fail to cooperate, the fish populations decline and everyone’s catch drops . The fish populations drop and everyone's catch drops if the fish are not caught .
 1997-2007, catch catches worldwide declined by about 15 percent . And indeed, in 1997- 2007, catch rates were 15 percent higher .
 The world’s states did not solve the collective goods problem of world fisheries, they are paying $20 billion a year in subsidies to bankrupt fishing industries .
 The benefits of catching fish go entirely to the one catching it, whereas the eventual costs of depleted stocks will be shared by all who fish there . The benefits go to catch fish, but the costs of that fish are shared by everyone who catches them .
 No world government exists to decide such a question, so states must enter into multilateral negotiations, agreements, and regimes . The question is whether a world government can decide whether or not to decide the future of the planet .
 In 1999, a UN-sponsored agreement among all the world’s major fishing states set goals to reduce fleet overcapacity . The agreement was aimed at reducing fleet over capacity .
 The pain of unemployment and economic adjustment should thus be shared . The pain should also be shared, says David Cameron . Cameron: "The pain of unemployed and adjustment should be shared"
 The agreement is voluntary, its implementation delayed, and its effect on collapsing fisheries is probably too little, too late . However, it is voluntary and implementation of the agreement is delayed . It is voluntary but implementation of it is likely to be delayed .
 This type of collective goods dilemma has been called the tragedy of the commons/ Centuries ago, the commons were shared grazing land in Britain . Centuries later, the common land was shared by grazing land .
 As with fisheries, if too many people kept too many sheep, the commons would be overgrazed . The commons is overgrown by over-grazing, says author .
 Britain solved the problem by enclosure of the commons by splitting it into privately owned pieces . Each owner would have an incentive to manage resources responsibly .
 The global commons refers to the shared parts of the earth, such as the oceans and outer space . It is also known as the 'global commons' in the world .
 The solution of environmental collective goods problems is based on achieving shared benefits that depend on overcoming conflicting interests . Regimes are an important part of the solution, providing rules based on the reciprocity principle .
 Functional IOs specialize in technical and management aspects of the environment . Functional IO is a functional IOs that specializes in the technical aspects of an environment . IOs can be used to help manage the environment of a functional environment .
 The transnational community of experts and policy makers concerned with pollution in the Mediterranean is an epistemic community . For example, experts are concerned with the health of the Mediterranean region .
 Interest in the environment has grown steadily since the first Earth Day organized by environmental activists in 1970 . Earth Day is a global day of environmental awareness .
 It adopted general principles, that one state’s actions should not cause environmental damage to another, for instance . It raised awareness about international aspects of environmental damage, for example .
 The larger and more ambitious 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, brought together more than a hundred state leaders . More than 100 state leaders gathered for the 1992 summit .
 The 1992 Earth Summit established the Commission on Sustainable Development . It monitors states’ compliance with the promises they made at the Earth Summit .
 The Commission’s ability to monitor and publicize state actions is supposed to discourage states from cheating . The Commission is meant to discourage state cheating .
 China and other developing countries in Asia stand at the center of the debate over sustainable development . China is one of the most populous countries in the world, followed by China .
 In the drive for rapid economic growth, these countries have created serious pollution and other environmental problems . China's rapid growth has led to serious pollution, environmental problems, experts say .
 In early 2013, Beijing’s smog far exceeded dangerous levels, and residents who ventured outside suffered burning lungs and stinging eyes .
 Any success in developing China's economy along Western industrialized lines could create shocks to the global environment . Because of China’s size, any success in . developing its economy along . industrialized lines (for example, with mass ownership of automobiles) could create shock shocks to global .
 China has become a leader in the development of ‘green’ technology . In recent years, China has been scouring the planet for raw materials . The country has also become a global leader in developing “green” technology .
 China’s growth is still powered in large part by dirty, coalburning power plants . China's growth is powered in part by coal power plants, but it's still powered by coal .
 A major theme of these conferences is sustainable development . Sustainable Development is a major theme in these conferences .
 This refers to economic growth that does not deplete resources and destroy ecosystems so quickly that the basis of that economic growth is itself undermined . Economic growth is not depleting resources and destroying ecosystems so fast that it deforms the basis for that growth is undermined .
 The concept n applies to both the industrialized regions and the global South . The global South is a part of the world's most populous region .
 The Atmosphere Preserving the health of the earth’s atmosphere is a benefit that affects people throughout the world without regard for their own state's contribution to the problem or its solution . Preserving health of Earth's atmosphere affects people across the globe without regard to their own contribution to
 Two problems of the atmosphere have become major international issues: global warming and depletion of the ozone layer . Global warming, depletion of ozone layer are major issues in the world .
 Developing countries rely heavily on coal and other dirty technologies for the energy and raw materials they need . Developing nations such as China rely on coal for energy, raw materials and energy .
 Beijing air quality far exceeded the most dangerous end of the pollution scale in 2013 . In 2013, Beijing's air quality was at the highest level of pollution in the world .
 A woman's mask offers scant protection as she rides past a steel plant in Beijing, 2013 . This woman's masks offer scant protection when she rides in Beijing .
 Global climate change, or global warming, is a long-term rise in the average world temperature . Global warming is a rise in average world temperatures . The average global temperature has risen in the past decade .
 Growing and compelling evidence shows that global warming is a real problem, that it is caused by the emission of carbon dioxide and that it will get worse in the future .
 Unfortunately, the international community has had little success solving the problem . Unfortunately, there has been little success in solving the issue .
 Over the coming decades, according to most estimates, global temperatures may rise by between 3 and 10 degrees Fahrenheit if nothing is done . Most estimates say global temperatures could rise by 3 to 10 degrees F. F.C. C.E. E.I.’s new book
 Possibly within a few decades, the polar ice caps will begin to melt and cause the sea level to rise by as much as a few feet . Possibly within the next few decades the polar sea level will rise . The sea level is expected to rise as well as a foot .
 Studies in 2012 confirmed that the warming trend is accelerating, faster than what had been seen as worst-case scenarios . Studies have shown that warming trends are accelerating faster than seen in 2012 .
 The first 12 years of the 21st century were all among the 14 warmest ever recorded . First 12 years were the warmest year of the century .
 Global warming could flood many coastal cities and devastate low-lying areas . The heavily populated coastal areas of Bangladesh and China are at risk of flooding .
 Island states in the Pacific that will likely disappear this century . Urgent calls for action to avert global warming come from island states . Island states are likely to disappear in the next century .
 The Maldives created a fund to buy land in another country to move its 300,000 residents as its territory disappears . The low-lying state of the Maldives has created an all too realistic lack of faith .
 Climate changes could benefit some regions and make agriculture more productive . It is also possible that climate changes could make some regions more productive, experts say .
 The UN Environment Program monitors environmental conditions . It works with the World Meteorological Organization to measure changes in global climate .
 Since 1989, the UN-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has served as a negotiating forum for this issue . The panel has been in talks with the world's leading climate scientists .
 It is costly to reduce the emissions of gases—mainly carbon dioxide, that cause global warming . It is also costly to cut emissions of carbon dioxide that cause climate change, scientists say .
 These gases result from the broad spectrum of activities that drive an industrial economy . These gases are produced by industrial activity in the United States .
 Fossil fuels are a by-product of burning fossil fuels to run cars, tractors, furnaces, factories, and so forth . They are by-products of burning oil, coal, and natural gas to run vehicles and factories .
 Data stored in “the cloud’s” data centers use vast amounts of electricity and run large diesel generators, contributing to global warming . Ironically, data stored in the cloud is actually stored in data centers that use electricity and use diesel generators . Data centers use large amounts of
 United Nations Environment Program 9 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . U.N. panel: Climate change is a global warming problem .
 The political costs of such actions could be severe for the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration . Such actions would likely increase unemployment, reduce corporate profits and lower personal incomes .
 If Arctic sea ice melts, polar bears may go extinct, but they do not have a seat at the table in international climate negotiations . Polar bears have a role in climate negotiations, but not a seat in the table at international climate talks .
 Neither do today’s children, who cannot vote but will live with the long-term consequences of their elders’ actions . Neither do the children who can't vote but must live with consequences of those actions .
 For individual states, the costs of reducing greenhouse emissions are almost unrelated to the benefits of a solution . The costs of cutting greenhouse emissions in individual states are similar to those of reducing emissions in the United States .
 If one state reduces its industrial production or makes expensive investments in new technologies, this will have little effect on the long-term outcome, unless other states do likewise . The U.S. should not reduce its production or invest in new technology, experts say .
 A free rider that did not go along would save money and still benefit from the solution . And if most states took such steps, the free rider would also benefit from it .
 First, there is the dilemma of short-term (and predictable) costs to gain long-term benefits . First, the dilemma is the choice between short and predictable costs and benefits . Second, the challenge is to find a solution to the problem .
 Oil companies and industrial workers pay the costs, but benefits are distributed more generally across domestic society and internationally . Second, specific constituencies such as oil companies and workers pay costs .
 Greenhouse gases are produced by each state roughly in proportion to its industrial activity . Each state produces its own greenhouse gases at roughly a proportion of industrial activity.
 Eighty percent of greenhouse gases now come from industrialized countries . 25 percent of the greenhouse gases come from the United States alone . The United States is one of the world's biggest emitters .
 Most severe impacts of global warming are likely to be felt in the global South . Yet the most severe impacts will likely be felt by the global south of the world .
 In densely populated countries such as Bangladesh, Bangladesh, hundreds of millions of people stand to lose their homes and farmland under a rising sea .
 Global climate change could cause environmental catastrophes across both North and South . Offsetting these North-South divisions, however, is the emerging realization that global climate change is causing environmental catastrophe across the world .
 International treaties have been much more successful at addressing ozone depletion than global warming, mostly because of costs . International treaties are often more successful in addressing global warming than global climate change .
 Kyoto Protocol set modest goals for industrialized countries to reduce their output of carbon dioxide and related gases . The 1997 Kyoto Protocol, extended in 2012, was set by the Kyoto Protocol .
 If global warming melts polar ice caps in the coming decades, sea levels could rise and devastate many cities . Global warming could devastate cities like New York City and Washington .
 All of these elements make for a difficult multilateral bargaining situation, one not yet resolved . The U.S. and China are at odds over what happens next .
 The Framework Convention on Climate Change adopted at the 1992 Earth Summit set a nonbinding goal to limit greenhouse emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000 . The goal was set to be reached by the end of the 1990s .
 The treaty did not commit the signatory states to meet target levels of greenhouse emissions by a particular date, owing to United States objections to such a commitment . The United States has objected to the treaty .
 National Governance and the Global Climate Change Regime . Fisher, Dana R. Fisher and Dana R . Fisher .
 The 1997 Kyoto Protocol adopted a complex formula for reducing greenhouse emissions to 1990 levels in the global North over about a decade . The Kyoto Protocol was adopted by the U.S. in 1997 . The 1997 Protocol was designed to reduce greenhouse emissions by about 10 years .
 Countries in the global South received preferential treatment because their levels were much lower . Countries in global South were treated differently because of their levels of poverty .
 The agreement called for 40 industrialized countries to reduce emissions to 5 percent below 1990 levels, by 2012, with binding penalties for failure . The agreement was reached by 40 countries, including the United States .
 The EU pledged $400 million per year to help the global South reduce its emissions . EU pledged to help reduce emissions in the region of the world by 2020 .
 Mandatory carbon cuts began in 2008, but are falling short of targets . After enough ratifications, the treaty came into effect in 2005, and mandatory carbon cuts started in 2008 . The treaty was ratified by the European Union in 2005 .
 The European Union established markets to trade carbon emission credits among 11,000 industrial facilities across Europe . In 2012, the EU linked it to Australia’s market to create a global carbon trading system by 2015 .
 The economic slowdown in Europe led to a drastic price drop for carbon credits in 2011 . However, the economic slowdown led to the drop in carbon credits prices in Europe .
 Europe deferred requirement for flights to and from Europe to buy carbon credits pending talks scheduled for 2013 . Europe deferred the requirement for the requirement until 2013 .
 South Korea created its own carbon emissions trading scheme in 2012 . Meanwhile, South Korea has its own .
 All these carbon markets use free market principles to make reduction in carbon emissions more efficient . All these markets are based on principles of the free market .
 For example, a venture in Brazil earned carbon credits by burning methane gas from a garbage dump instead of venting it as a strong greenhouse gas . The venture earns carbon credits in Brazil for burning methane from garbage dumps .
 European investors bought the credits and could then sell them to, say, a polluting factory in Eastern Europe where reducing carbon might be especially expensive . European investors can then sell the credits to a polluted factory .
 The United Nations Framework Convention and Kyoto Protocol were ratified by the United Nations . The Kyoto Protocol was ratified by U.N. Kyoto Protocol .
 Victor, David G The Collapse of the Kyoto Protocol and the Struggle to Slow Global Warming. The Kyoto Protocol. The struggle to slow global warming. Global warming .
 In late 2011, a meeting in Durban agreed to extend the Kyoto framework to 2013-2017 . Meeting in late 2011 agreed to extended Kyoto framework until 2017 .
 195 countries, 99 IGOs, and 1,598 NGOs made plans for a new treaty by 2015 . It would force cuts starting in 2020 and include countries such as China, India, and Brazil that had gotten a free ride under Kyoto .
 A new Green Climate Fund was to disperse $100 million to developing countries to help them adapt to climate change . The fund was set up to help developing countries adapt to the climate change in their countries .
 Whether these new plans meet with more success than past agreements remains to be seen . It is unclear whether the new plans will be successful .
 About half of the U.S. states and a number of cities are taking steps to limit greenhouse emissions . Meanwhile, about half the states of the United States .
 Yet, none of these moves are enough, or soon enough, to decisively reverse the direction of climate change, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The dilemma of global warming remains fundamentally unsolved, and with weak enforcement mechanisms, even the states that signed the Kyoto Protocol did not meet their targets by 2012 . Even the states with Kyoto Protocol failed to meet their target by 2012, according to the UN .
 Even European states, which have the largest markets for carbon as an attempt to lower emissions, have yet to see any declines in carbon dioxide . Indeed, even European states have the biggest markets for reducing emissions .
 Some EU leaders have questioned the operation of the cap-and-trade carbon market systern . They have pushed for other alternatives to cut emissions .
 Ozone Depletion is a second major atmospheric problem negotiated by the world’s governments . The depletion of the world's ozone layer is a major problem for governments .
 The prevention of global warming is a collective good that affects the entire world, but results from the actions of the world’s states individually . A New Climate Treaty is a new way to prevent global warming .
 Those affected most actually will be those least responsible for causing it, says CNN.com.com .
 Weather disasters such as the 2010 catastrophic floods in Pakistan would become more common if the world does not address the problem effectively . The world needs to tackle the problem of climate change, experts say . Climate change is a global problem, scientists say .
 The costs of required actions are high, however, and states have not been willing to pay them . The costs are not high, but states have been unwilling to pay .
 The international community has not yet been able to address the very serious problem of global warming . Thus, the international community is not yet able to solve the problem, he says .
 Major players such as the United States did not ratify the Kyoto Protocol . The world’s output of greenhouse gases has not slowed . The United States is the only major player in the world to ratify such a treaty .
 In late 2011, the world’s states gathered in Durban, South Africa, to negotiate a new treaty on global warming to follow Kyoto . The new treaty will follow Kyoto, which followed Kyoto .
 Countries of the global North and global South differed on their approaches . Countries of North and South differ on approaches to dealing with the problem .
 At 3:00m., Europe bitterly denounced language that India and China favored . Europe bitterly denounces language that China and India favored .
 As the ozone layer thins, more ultraviolet radiation reaches the earth’s surface . More ultraviolet radiation is reaching the surface of the earth .
 Over Antarctica, a seasonal hole in the ozone grew larger year by year . The hole grew larger in Antarctica over the years .
 If ozone levels kept rising, the increased radiation could kill off vegetation, reduce agricultural yields, and disrupt ecosystems . The increased radiation may eventually kill vegetation and kill off agricultural yields .
 One state could benefit by allowing the use of CFCs in its economy, provided that most other states prohibited their use . Clearly, this was another collective goods problem in that one state can benefit from the use, provided other states banned it .
 CFCs could be replaced with other chemicals at relatively modest costs . CFCCs could also be replaced by other chemicals in relatively modest amounts .
 The consequences of ozone depletion were both better understood and more immediate than those of global warming . Furthermore, the consequences of the depletion were better understood than global warming, scientists say .
 States had much more success in negotiating agreements and developing regimes to manage ozone depletion than global warming . Perhaps because of these cost issues, states had much success in developing regimes .
 In the 1987 Montreal Protocol, 22 states agreed to reduce CFCs by 50 percent by 1998 . In 1987, the Montreal Protocol was reached by 22 states . The Montreal Protocol aims to reduce the CFCS emissions by 50 per cent .
 In 1992, as evidence of ozone depletion mounted, the schedule was again accelerated, with major industrial states phasing out CFCs by 1995 . The schedule was then accelerated again in 1992, with the schedule being accelerated .
 Signatories agreed in principle to establish a fund to help developing countries pay for alternative refrigeration technologies not based on CFCs .
 Without such an effort, states of the global South would be tempted to free-ride and could ultimately undermine the effort . Without such a effort, the states of South will be tempted free-riding and could undermine it, experts say .
 The Montreal Protocol was revised and strengthened again in 1997 and 1999 . The Protocol is now being updated again in the United States .
 Rich countries stopped making CFCs in 1996 and have contributed about $3 billion to the fund . Rich countries have contributed more than $4 billion to fund in recent years .
 South Africa’s foreign minister convened a small group of key players for a huddle on the conference floor . The United States, China, India, Britain, France, Sweden, Poland, Gambia, and Brazil were among the players .
 Brazil’s negotiator suggested new language, and within two hours the group had reached agreement, the talks were over and the conference saved .
 The dominance principle came into play as a few big players from North and South worked out an agreement and presented it to the rest of the world . North and North worked out a deal and presented the agreement to the world.
 Collective goods problems are easier to solve in smaller groups than in larger ones, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 The ozone hole is projected to slowly shrink back over the coming 50 years if current arrangements continue . Current arrangements are set to continue to shrink back in the coming decades .
 Montreal Protocol on CFCs is the most important success yet achieved in international negotiations to preserve the global environment . The Montreal Protocol is the latest in a long line of international negotiations on the issue .
 It showed that states can agree to take action on urgent environmental threats, can agree on targets and measures to counter such threats . States can allocate the costs of such measures in a mutually acceptable way and actually pay up when the bill comes .
 The international cooperation on the ozone problem has not been widely repeated on other environmental issues . But the international cooperation is not widely repeated in other issues .
 Environmental negotiations resemble trade talks in that they rely on the reciprocity principle as the prime mover of agreement . Environmental negotiations are similar to trade negotiations in that regard .
 If each country contributes, and all the others contribute, a goal such as restoring the ozone layer can be achieved . If each nation contributes, all the other contribute, the goal can be accomplished, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As with trade, agreements and regimes are complicated and require monitoring of compliance to prevent free riding, says the author of the book . "As with trade," the author says .
 The biggest difference from trade talks is that when trade talks succeed in solving a collective goods problem, the participants get a short-term, tangible benefit of billions of dollars added to the world economy .
 When environmental collective goods problems are solved, the participants get a short-term, tangible bill to pay, and then long-term benefits . The benefits of collective collective goods can be seen in the long run of time, the author says .
 The size of that bill seems to be the major difference between very difficult, expensive global warming solutions and reasonably affordable ozone solutions, says John Defterios .
 Biodiversity refers to the tremendous diversity of plant and animal species making up the earth’s ecosystems . The diversity of plants and animals makes up the diversity of ecosystems .
 Large numbers of species are already extinct . Because of humans’ destruction of ecosystems, large numbers of . species are . already extinct. Because of . humans' destruction of . ecosystems, . humans have destroyed ecosystems, scientists say .
 Extinction results from overhunting, overfishing, and introducing non-native species that crowd out previous inhabitants . Extinction occurs when species are over-hunted, over-fished, and introduced non-Native species .
 The most important cause is loss of habitat, loss of rain forests, pollution of lakes and streams . Loss of agricultural lands to urban sprawl is also a cause .
 The extinction of a few species can cause deeper changes in the environment, experts say . Because ecosystems are based on complex interrelationships among species, the extinction can cause deep changes in environment .
 The loss of native microorganisms can lead to chronic pollution of rivers or to the transformation of arable land into deserts . For example, the loss of microorganisms could lead to the creation of deserts .
 It is usually impossible to predict the consequences of a species’ extinction or of the loss of a habitat or ecosystem . Because ecosystems are so complex, it is often difficult to predict consequences of extinction or loss .
 Activities that lead to habitat loss are economically profitable, so real costs are associated with limiting such activities . Real costs of limiting habitat loss include limiting activities such as hunting, trapping and trapping .
 Species preservation is thus a collective good resembling global warming . Costs are immediate and substantial but the benefits are long term and ill defined . Species preservation costs are immediate but long-term and ill-defined, says author .
 It has been difficult to reach international agreement on sharing the costs of preserving biodiversity . It has also been hard to reach an agreement on how to share biodiversity costs .
 UN convention on trade in endangered species has reduced but not eliminated such trade . UN convention has reduced trade of endangered species since it was established in 1973 .
 The United States never ratified the treaty because of fears it could limit patent rights in biotechnology . The U.S. never ratified it because of the treaty . The treaty was intended to protect the rights of biotechnology companies .
 The United States does, however, participate in other biological treaties, such as a 1971 wetlands convention and the 1973 Convention of Wetlands .
 International regimes to protect whales and dolphins have had limited success . International regimes have had little success in protecting whales, dolphins .
 The International Whaling Commission sets quotas for hunting certain whale species, but participation is voluntary . Participation is voluntary and governments are not bound by decisions they object to .
 The Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission regulates methods used to fish for tuna . The commission aims to minimize dolphin losses .
 The United States, which consumes half the world’s tuna catch, has gone further . The Marine Mammal Protection Act requires dolphin-safe methods be used for tuna sold in U.S. territory .
 Other countries have challenged the act through international trade organizations as unfair restriction on tuna exports to the United States .
 Such conflicts portend future battles between environmentalists and free trade advocates . Free trade advocates say they want to protect the environment .
 Free traders argue that states must not use domestic legislation to seek global environmental goals . Free traders say domestic legislation must not be used as a tool to achieve global goals .
 Environmentalists do not want to give up national laws that they worked for decades to enact, over the opposition of industrial corporations . Environmentalists say they want national laws passed over the objections of industrial firms .
 The United States Clean Air Act successfully reduced air pollution in U.S. cities, but the regulations had to be revised in 1997, on order of the WTO, to allow gasoline refined in Venezuela and Brazil to compete in the United States markets . The WTO had to allow refined gasoline refined
 Environmentalists adopted the sea turtle as a symbol of their opposition to the WTO after the WTO overturned U.S. regulations that required shrimp to be caught in nets from which sea turtles (an endangered species) can escape .
 Recent conflicts have arisen over U.S. laws restricting imports of foods with pesticide residues . European laws on imports of genetically engineered agricultural and pharmaceutical products are also in question .
 Unilateral approaches to biodiversity issues are problematic because they disrupt free trade . Multilateral approaches are also problematic because of the collective goods problem . Unilateral approach to biodiversity is problematic because it disrupts free trade. Multilateral approach is problematic for multilateral approaches .
 It is not surprising that the international response has been fairly ineffective to date . The international response to the crisis has been largely ineffective, says CNN.com .
 Tropical rain forests and oceans are especially important to biodiversity and the atmosphere . Forests and oceans can be found in tropical rain forests or oceans .
 Both countries are reservoirs of commercially profitable resources such as fish and wood . Both are also reservoirs of profitable resources .
 The oceans are largely beyond any state territory, in the global commons . They differ in that forests are located almost entirely within state territory . They are located in forests and oceans, but oceans are not within state territories .
 Elizabeth R. DeSombre, Elizabeth R Domestic Sources of International Environmental Policy, is published by the International Institute of Environmental Studies .
 Some environmentalists criticize the World Bank for interfering with ecosystems such as rain forests . The World Bank and other institutions promoting economic development in poor countries are criticized by environmentalists .
 The green revolution increased yields but shifted patterns of agriculture in complex ways, such as by increasing pesticide and fertilizer runoff . Pesticide and fertilization runoff is a major factor in changing agriculture patterns .
 genetically engineered crops promise further increases in agricultural productivity . But with environmental consequences that are not fully understood, scientists say .
 This gene bank in the Philippines stores rice varieties from around the world . The gene bank is located in the country's largest city, Manila .
 Genetically modified organisms are highly controversial in Europe, and this certainly includes your country . Genetically-modified organisms have been banned in Europe .
 Ireland reluctantly approved a permit for the global MNC Monsanto to grow sugar beets near Dublin in 1997 . In 1997, for example, Ireland reluctantly agreed a permit to grow beets in Dublin .
 Activists destroyed the crop in the ground before it could be harvested . After several legal attempts to halt the planting of the crop failed, activists destroyed it before it was harvested .
 Your country has quietly supported several Irish biotechnology firms in the past with joint ventures in research . Your country is quietly supporting several Irish companies with joint venture ventures .
 Ireland has a significant advantage in this field over other European states . These advances have produced a variety of advances that give Ireland a significant edge .
 MNCs stand to benefit from this research, providing you with investment and tax income . Several MNC companies stand to benefits from this report .
 Unfortunately, this ""positive but precautionary"" approach is unpopular with the public . Unfortunately, it is unpopular among the public.
 Some worry that Ireland's reputation as ""the Green Island"" will suffer, possibly posing a threat to tourism . Tourism is a major source of income for your country .
 Others join the chorus of European opposition to GMOs based on concerns over the possible environmental effects of these products . Others have expressed concerns about the possible dangers of GMOs .
 In the spring of 2004, the European Union approved an end to the moratorium on GMO product sales (with your country voting in the majority), partially under a threat from the United States to enforce a WTO ruling that found the GMO ban illegal . The EU approved the end of the moratorium under
 Other EU states combined are your most significant export market . The United States is your largest single trade partner, but other EU states are your biggest export markets .
 The balance of power in the EU shifts against GMOs with the admission of new Central European states, say experts .
 It would still be legal to grow GMO crops, but it would not be allowed to export them to EU countries . EU countries will not be able to export GMO crops to countries such as the EU .
 Your economy stands to profit from expanding GMO use through increased agricultural output and increased business activity from MNCs . Given your comparative technological advantage in this area, this area is likely to be profitable .
 The United States has no regulations concerning the importation of GMO products . The U.S. would be open to exports of these crops .
 Some environmentalists warn that GMOs could have negative effects on ecology, wildlife, and human health . Some environmentalists say they could be harmful to the environment and the public .
 Many of your EU partners will shun your GMO products, robbing you of a large export market for these goods . Many of these products will not be available in the EU .
 Rain forests benefit all the world’s states; they are collective goods . Rain forests thus benefit all of the world's states, says the author .
 International bargaining on the preservation of rain forests has made considerable progress, probably because most rain forests belong to a few states . Most rain forests in the United States are under forest control .
 International bargaining amounts to agreements to shift costs from those few states onto the broader group of states benefiting from rain forests . These few states have the power to speed up or slow down the destruction of forests .
 Although some rich states have large forests, most of the largest rain forests are in poor states such as Brazil, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Madagascar .
 Freely cutting lumher, clearing land for agriculture, and mining . Such states can benefit economically from exploiting the forests, says the author .
 Rich states are using development assistance as leverage to induce poorer states to protect forests rather than exploit them . Rich states have an interest in protecting rain forests, they say .
 Under agreements reached in the early 1990s, rich countries contribute hundreds of millions of dollars in foreign aid for this purpose .
 In some poor countries, environmentalists and bankers from rich countries have worked out “debt-for-nature swaps” in which a debt is canceled in exchange for the state’s agreement to preserve forests . Some poor countries have been burdened by large foreign debts .
 In 2006, the United States government and NGOs helped Guatemala cancel more than $20 million in debts in exchange for expanded conservation programs . The U.S. government and NGO groups have helped cancel some of the country's debts .
 In 2005, Brazil announced that deforestation had fallen 50 percent since 2003 . In 2008 it announced that it planned to end deforestation by 2015 . Brazil announced in 2008 it planned that it would end deforestation in 2015 .
 The oceans, covering 70 percent of the earth’s surface, are (like the rain forest) a key to regulating climate and preserving biodiversity . Oceans cover 70% of the world's surface and are a key part of regulating climate .
 Oceans, like forests, are attractive targets for short-term economic uses that cause long-term environmental damage . Oceans like forests like forests can be targets for economic use that cause environmental damage, experts say .
 Such uses include overfishing, dumping toxic and nuclear waste (and other garbage), and long-distance oil shipments with their recurrent spills .
 Unlike rain forests, oceans belong to no state but are a global commons . Oceans belong to the world's oceans, not states, but are global commons, say experts .
 This makes the collective goods problem more difficult because no authority exists to enforce regulations . This makes it more difficult to enforce such regulations, says the author .
 Preserving the oceans depends on the cooperation of more than a hundred states and thousands of nonstate actors . Preserving oceans is dependent on cooperation from more than 100 states, thousands of other nations .
 For example, drift nets are huge fishing nets, miles long, that scoop up everything in their path . They are huge nets that are miles long and scoop everything up in their wake .
 "They are very profitable but destructive of a sustainable ocean environment," says CNN.com.com . "They're very profitable and destructive of the environment"
 No state has the authority to go onto the high seas and stop illegal use of nets . However, no state can go on high seas to enforce the law .
 One solution involves ‘enclosing’ more of the ocean, states have pursued . One solution to the problem involves closing the ocean off the coast .
 Territorial waters have expanded to hundreds of miles off the coast of France . State sovereignty encloses substantial resources such as fisheries and offshore oil and fisheries .
 This solution has been pursued in the context of larger multilateral • • 19 negotiations on ocean management . This solution is the result of a series of multilateral negotiations .
 The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea governs the uses of the oceans . The convention was negotiated from 1973 to 1982 . It was negotiated between 1973 and 1982 .
 The United States signed UNCLOS in 1994, but has yet to ratify the treaty . After more than a decade’s delay and renegotiation of some of the deep-sea mining aspects, the U.S. still has not ratified the treaty. The U.
 Varying interpretations of economic rights leave economic rights in dispute in a number of locations . Economic rights are in dispute over whether or not economic rights have been granted in the past .
 In the East China Sea, China sent five warships in 2005 to back up its claim to an undersea gas field partly claimed by Japan . China began drilling and Japan granted drilling rights to a Japanese company .
 UNCLOS also developed the general principle that the oceans are a common heritage of humankind . The oceans are an important part of the global ocean heritage, UNCLOs says .
 The continent's strategic and commercial value is limited, however, and not many states care about it . The continent’s strategic value is . However, it is not much of a major economic and political power .
 States have been successful in reaching agreements on Antarctica because the costs were low and the players few . Thus, states have been able to reach agreements because of low costs and few players .
 The Antarctic Treaty of 1959 was one of the first multilateral treaties concerning the environment . It forbids military activity as well as the presence of nuclear weapons or the dumping of nuclear waste .
 It sets aside territorial claims on the continent for future resolution . It establishes a regime under which various states conduct scientific research in Antarctica . It also establishes an agreement to allow various states to conduct research there .
 The treaty was signed by all states with interests in the area, including both superpowers . Both superpowers signed the treaty, including Russia and China .
 Antarctica is largely a success story in international environmental politics . Antarctica is now a largely successful story in the world of Antarctica .
 Pollution generally creates a collective goods problem, but one that is not often global in scale . Pollution is not a global problem that is often a problem that affects the entire world, but it is often not global .
 Industrial smokestack emissions cause acid rain in Canada but do not directly affect distant states . With some exceptions, pollution is limited to the state where it occurs and its close neighbors .
 China's terrible air pollution kills nearly half a million Chinese a year, but few foreigners . China’s terrible air poll kills nearly 500,000 people a year but few foreign visitors .
 Even when pollution crosses state borders, it often has its strongest effects closest to the source . The effects of pollution can be seen in the state of South Carolina .
 A polluting state can seldom free-ride, and few actors are involved in it . This localized effect makes for a somewhat less intractable collective goods problem, because it's local .
 In several regions, Western and Eastern Europe and the Middle East, states are closely packed in the same air, river, or sea basins . The Middle East and Western Europe are among the most densely packed states .
 In such situations, pollution controls must often be negotiated multilateral . In such cases, the talks must often often be held multilaterally .
 State-Controlled Waters Overfishing and similar problems of managing the ""commons"" of world oceans have been addressed by enclosing the most important ocean areas under the exclusive control of states .
 Several regional agreements seek to limit acid rain, caused by air pollution . The acid rain is caused by pollution from air pollution, causing acid rain .
 European states have agreed to limit air pollution and acid rain for their mutual benefit . European forests have been heavily damaged by air pollution .
 In 1988, 24 European states signed a treaty to limit nitrogen oxide emissions to 1988 levels by 1995 . The treaty was signed by 24 European countries .
 After long negotiations, the U.S. and Canada signed bilateral agreements to limit pollution as well . The United States and Canada have also signed agreements limiting pollution in the United States .
 Industrial pollution, human sewage, and agricultural fertilizers and pesticides all tend to run into rivers and seas . Water pollution often crosses borders as well, especially because of industrial pollution and human sewage .
 In 2005, a huge chemical spill in northeast China polluted a river that flows into Russia . For instance, in 2005, in China, a chemical spill contaminated a river .
 Regional agencies that regulate shipping on heavily used European rivers now also deal with pollution . Longstanding regional agencies regulate shipping in heavily used rivers now .
 The Mediterranean basin is severely polluted and difficult to manage because of so many states border it . The Mediterranean is also severely polluted because of its borders with many states .
 In 2010, the largest oil spill in U.S. history occurred in the Gulf of Mexico .
 The spill resulted from an explosion on an oil platform, which resulted in a broken oil pipe 5,000 feet below the surface of the ocean . The spill was caused by an explosion from the oil platform .
 The leakage took months to contain and highlighted the dangers associated with deep-water oil drilling . The leak was the largest leak in the Gulf of Mexico in the world's history .
 British Petroleum agreed to set aside billions of dollars to pay damages to residents of several southern U.S. states affected by the spill . British Petroleum, the company that operated the well, agreed to pay millions of dollars in damages .
 Toxic and nuclear wastes are a special problem because of their long-term dangers . Toxic waste and nuclear waste is a problem for the U.S. Department of Energy .
 Such wastes are sent to developing countries for disposal, for a fee . But such wastes have been sent to the developing world for disposal .
 Toxic ash from Pennsylvania became material for bricks in Guinea, Guinea, and Italian nuclear waste was shipped to Nigeria . Nuclear waste from Italy was shipped from Pennsylvania to Nigeria in the 1980s .
 Norms have developed in recent years against exporting toxic wastes . The practice has been seen as exploitive of the receiving country .
 Forty more countries, in Africa, did not sign the treaty but called for a complete halt to toxic waste shipments to Africa . The treaty was signed by 40 countries, including 40 African nations .
 A multinational company tried to dispose of toxic waste from a tanker ship in the Netherlands but took it back, on finding the cost to run into hundreds of thousands of dollars . The cost of disposing of the waste from the tanker ship is estimated at around $500,000 .
 Industrial waste and sewage in the New River crosses from Mexico into California, 2003 . The New River is one of the largest rivers in the country .
 In 1986, a meltdown at the Soviet nuclear power plant at Chernobyl, in Ukraine, created airborne radioactivity that spread over much of Europe, from Italy to Sweden . The meltdown in Chernobyl created airborne radioactive radiation that spread across Europe .
 The accident exemplified the new reality that economic and technical decisions made in one state can have grave environmental consequences for other countries . The accident was the result of a decision made by one state to build a car in China .
 Soviet leaders made matters worse by failing to notify neighbors promptly of the accident . Soviet leaders also failed to inform neighbors of the crash .
 Both unilateral state actions and international agreements have often been feasible and effective, say experts . State actions and agreements are often feasible, they say .
 In recent decades, river water quality has improved in most industrialized regions . River water quality in many industrialized regions has improved .
 Market economies have begun to deal with pollution as just another cost of production that should be charged to the polluter instead of to society at large . Pollution should not be a problem for society, rather for the polluters, say experts .
 Some governments have begun to allocate “pollution rights” that companies can buy and sell on a free market . Some governments allocate ‘pollution’ rights’ that can be sold on the market .
 In the former Soviet bloc, decades of centrally planned industrialization created more severe environmental problems . In the Soviet Union, the environment has been a problem for decades .
 The economically strapped former Soviet republics had to bargain over limiting pollution and repairing the damage . With staggering environmental damage and human health effects, the economically strapped ex-Soviet republics have had to deal with it .
 For example, the Aral Sea, formerly contained within one state, the Soviet Union, is now shared by two, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan . The severely polluted Aral sea is now part of the world's most polluted region, Kazakhstan .
 Once the world’s fourth-largest inland sea, it shrank in half, its fisheries destroyed . Soviet-era mega-irrigation project to grow cotton in the desert diverted the Aral Sea's inlet rivers and polluted them with pesticides .
 Local populations suffered from widespread health effects of the disaster . After local and international political leaders failed to implement plans to address the problem, local populations suffered .
 The natural environment is not only a delicate ecosystem requiring protection, but also a repository of natural resources . Natural resources are a vital part of the environment and the environment .
 The extraction of resources brings states wealth, these resources regularly fuel international conflicts . Resources are often used to fuel conflicts in the world .
 Because they are mostly located within individual states, however, they do not present a collective goods problem . Because of individual states it does not present any collective goods problems .
 Three aspects of natural resources shape their role in international conflict . Natural resources are key to international conflict, experts say .
 First, their sources are associated with particular territories over which states may fight for control . Second, their source is associated with specific territories, such as the source of minerals .
 Natural resources tend to be unevenly distributed, with plentiful supplies in some states and an absence in others . Natural resources are uneven in the U.S. State of Natural Resources .
 Trade in natural resources is extremely profitable; much additional wealth is created by such trade . The world's natural resources are extremely valuable to the world .
 Fossil fuels account for 95 percent of world energy consumption . The fossil fuels are used to fuel the majority of the world's energy production .
 Some energy consumed as electricity comes from hydroelectric dams or nuclear power plants . But most of it comes from burning fossil fuels in electric-generating plants .
 The energy released by burning that much coal is equivalent to the amount of energy North Americans use per person per person every day . North Americans also use that much energy each day .
 Wealthier people consume more energy per person than do poorer people . 65 pounds is the average energy consumption per person, according to the study .
 The North American’s pile of coal would be five times larger than that of a person in China, 20 times that of an African . The pile is five times the size of the person in the U.S.
 The four industrialized regions of the North use much more energy per person than those of the South . The North uses more energy than the rest of the world .
 South Asia and Africa have little industry, North America uses 15 times as much per person as those two regions . North America has 15 times more per person than South Asia, Africa .
 Among industrialized countries there are differences in the efficiency of energy use—GDP produced per unit of energy consumed . In industrialized countries, GDP produced is more efficient than GDP produced in the United States .
 The least efficient are the former Soviet Republics; North America is also rather inefficient . Europe and Japan are the most energy efficient countries in the world .
 International trade in energy plays a vital role in the world economy . International trade is a vital part of the global economy .
 All forms of energy are traded internationally, including oil, the most important by far is oil . Oil is the cheapest to transport over long distances, and is the easiest to transport .
 Venezuela, Mexico and Nigeria are also major oil exporters . Venezuela and Mexico are major exporters of oil . Nigeria, Nigeria and Angola are among the other major exporter countries .
 By far the largest source of oil exports is the Middle East, especially Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq, Iran .
 The politics of world energy revolve around Middle Eastern oil shipped to Western Europe, Japan/Pacific, and North America . The Middle East is a major source of energy supply .
 The importance of oil in the industrialized economies helps explain the political importance of the Middle East in world politics . Not only is energy a crucial economic sector , but it is also one of the most politically sensitive because of the dependence of the West on energy imported from the Middle Eastern .
 To secure a supply of oil in the Middle East, Britain and other European countries colonized the area early in the 20th century . European power kept local monarchs on their thrones .
 The United States did not claim colonies or protectorates, but United States MNCs were heavily involved in the development of oil resources in the area from the 1920s through the 1960s . These United States and European oil companies kept the price paid to local states low and their own profits
 After World War II the British gave up colonial claims in the Middle East, but the Western oil companies kept producing cheap oil there for Western consumption . The Middle East has long been a source of cheap oil .
 The oil-producing Arab states of the region punished the United States for supporting Israel . In 1973, during an Arab-Israeli war, the U.S. backed Israel in support of Israel .
 The U.S. cut off their oil exports to the United States and curtailed their overall exports . They also cut off all other oil exports .
 OPEC realized its potential power and the high price the world was willing to pay for oil . OPEC realized the potential power of the oil market and realized it could be used to power the world .
 1973 oil shock had a profound effect on the world economy and world politics . Oil shock was a major event in the world's history and had profound impact on the economy .
 High inflation plagued the U.S. and Europe for years afterward . Inflation plagued the United States and Europe after the war .
 The economic instability and sense of U.S. helplessness, coming on top of the Vietnam War, seemed to mark a decline in American power and perhaps the rise of the global South . The instability and the sense of . United States helplessness came to the end of the . Vietnam
 Higher oil prices led to the expansion of oil production in new locations outside of OPEC . The North Sea, Alaska, Angola, Russia, and elsewhere have led to higher oil prices .
 By the mid-1980s, the Middle East was rapidly losing its market share of world trade in oil . The region was losing its share of oil trade in the 1980s and 1990s .
 At the same time, industrialized economies learned to be more energy efficient . In the 1970s and '90s, the U.S. learned to become more efficient and efficient .
 Oil prices dropped in the late 1980s to historic lows of less than $20/barrel . With supply up and demand down, oil prices dropped to historic low of $20 per barrel .
 The main pipeline from oil-producing Azerbaijan to the Black Sea traveled through war-torn Chechnya in southern Russia . But the main pipeline traveled through the region, which is in the region of Russia .
 Russia built bypass route around Chechnya that carries a large and growing amount of Caspian oil for export through the Black Sea . Russia then built a bypass route to carry a large amount of oil through the region .
 The Caspian Sea is the world's largest inland body of water . It is the largest inland water in the world . Dividing the sea is one of the largest bodies of water in existence .
 A lake has a joint area in the middle that can be exploited only if the countries agree on terms . It could be defined under international law as either a lake or a sea . A lake can be defined as either lake or sea .
 If the whole area is split as in the map on the right, the sectors can be defined by median lines or by a division into five sectors of equal area . Iran has a larger sector, giving Iran a larger part of the country .
 In 2010, with major oil development underway in all five countries' coastal areas, a summit meeting agreed to give each a 25-mile zone, but most of the border issues remain in dispute . Most of the five nations are still at odds over the border .
 Russia agreed with its neighbors, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, to use the median line on the seabed floor . Russia had agreed with Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan to use it .
 In 2012, Russia held joint military exercises with Kazakhstan to practice defense of oil facilities from an Iranian attack . Russia and Kazakhstan also held joint exercises to prepare for a possible attack on Iran .
 "This conflict will be resolved not through dominance, but through reciprocity," says President Barack Obama .
 Nobody benefits from a war and all five countries benefit from developing their oil resources, says President Barack Obama . The U.S. should not engage in a war, says Obama .
 Sciolino: Solutions are enormously complicated, factoring in additional elements like shipping, fishing, smuggling, and pipeline routes . reaching agreement can take a long time .
 States and oil companies built a large-capacity pipeline, costing billions of dollars, through Azerbaijan and Georgia to Turkey’s Mediterranean coast . The pipeline runs through Azerbaijan, Georgia and Georgia .
 All three countries on the new pipeline route were at war in the past decade . The pipeline route route is a route that crosses three countries at war zones .
 A dozen existing and proposed oil pipelines for Caspian Sea oil are no easier . A dozen other existing and planned oil pipelines are no longer easy .
 Turkmenistan wants to export natural gas to Pakistan, and from there to Asia, but a pipeline would have to cross war-torn Afghanistan . The pipeline would need to cross Afghanistan, but it would be a major pipeline .
 In 2003, a new $4 billion pipeline began carrying oil from Chad through Cameroon for export, promising to help both countries alleviate poverty . But as rebels based in Sudan attacked in Chad, oil money was diverted to military purposes . Meanwhile in 2003, the pipeline was used to carry oil from
 borders and geopolitics may be less important in communications and business, but they still matter greatly in such international economic transactions as oil pipelines . The world's largest oil pipeline network is in the process of transporting crude oil from Iran to Saudi Arabia .
 High prices made it profitable to burn less oil and be more energy efficient . Burning oil contributes to global warming, and high prices make it profitable, she says .
 In 2008 sales of gasguzzling SUVs dropped sharply while hybrids sold briskly . For instance, in 2008, sales of SUVs fell sharply while sales of hybrid SUVs increased .
 High oil prices increase the export earnings of oil-producing countries . Second, high oil prices also boost the export of oil from oil-rich countries .
 Countries such as Venezuela and Mexico count on oil revenues in their economic development plans and to repay foreign debts . Oil revenues are used to pay off foreign debts and help repay foreign debt .
 These countries eased their debt problems as a result of higher prices, which also played a crucial part in Russia’s economic recovery . Higher prices played a key part in the Russian economy .
 The easy money concentrated in a few hands allowed dictators to rule and extremism to flourish in states such as Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Venezuela . It has allowed the easy money to be concentrated in the hands of the few .
 High oil prices helped drive the world economy into a severe recession, curtailing demand and forcing prices back down to $40 a barrel in a matter of months . More importantly, high oil prices drove the world into a recession .
 The exporting countries and their recently rich governments suddenly found themselves cash poor . Exporporations and their governments suddenly find themselves cash-poor .
 Alternative energy sources like solar power lost support when oil prices dropped . The move suggests the start of a new cycle of dependence on oil imports in Western countries .
 States need other raw materials in addition to energy . Minerals help build infrastructure and other manufactured goods that create wealth in a national economy .
 These include metals, other minerals, and related materials extracted through mining . Mining materials extracted from mining include metals and other minerals .
 The political economy of minerals—iron, copper, platinum, and so forth --differs from that of world energy . The political economies of minerals, iron, copper and platinum, are very different, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The value of international trade in oil is many times that of any mineral . The value in international oil trade is often greater than any other mineral, experts say .
 Mineral supply is not so concentrated in one region of the world . Moreover, mineral supply isn't as concentrated in the region .
 Industrialized countries have also reduced their vulnerability by stockpiling strategic minerals . Industrialized nations have stockpiled strategic minerals to reduce vulnerability .
 Most important to industrialized economies are the minerals that go into making industrial equipment . The minerals are important to industrial economies .
 The leading producers of steel are the former Soviet Union, Japan, the United States, China, and Germany . Brazil, Italy, South Korea, France, and Britain are among the countries producing the steel .
 Some industrialized countries depend heavily on importing iron ore for their steel industry . Some countries, notably Japan, rely heavily on iron ore imports .
 Iron ore is not concentrated in one location but exported from developing and industrialized countries around the world . Iron ore exports are not concentrated at one location, but are exported to developing countries .
 For other important industrial minerals such as copper, nickel, and zinc, the pattern of supply and trade is much more diffuse than for oil . The industrialized countries are largely self-sufficient .
 China currently holds a near monopoly on the world’s supply of “rare earth’’ minerals . The minerals are vital to the production of electronics .
 Certain agricultural products have spawned producer cartels such as the Union of Banana Exporting Countries and the African Groundnut Council . The African groundnut Council is based in Africa .
 Some export crops come mainly from just a few countries . Like minerals, some export crops are mainly from a few nations .
 Producer cartels have not been very successful in boosting prices of these products, which are less essential than energy . Despite the concentrations, producer cartels have failed to boost prices, experts say .
 This need increases as a society industrializes, as it intensifies agriculture, and as its population grows . The need for food and water increases as society grows, experts say .
 World water use is 35 times that of just a few centuries ago, and grew twice as fast as population in the 20th century . Water use is now 35 times the amount of water used in the world .
 Water supplies are relatively unchanging and are becoming depleted in many places . Yet water supplies are still unchanging . Water supplies in many parts of the world have been depleted .
 One-fifth of the world’s population lacks safe drinking water, and 80 countries suffer water shortages . 80 countries have water shortages, and one fifth of them are at risk of a water shortage .
 Access to water is increasingly a source of international conflict . Water supplies --rivers and water tables -- often cross international boundaries . Access to international water supplies is increasingly an issue of conflict in the world .
 Several states share access to a single water table . Sometimes these conflicts are collective goods problems . Sometimes, as when several states share water table, it's collective goods .
 The Euphrates River runs from Turkey through Syria to Iraq before reaching the Persian Gulf . For instance, the Euphrates river runs through Syria through Syria .
 Iraq objects to Syrian diversion of water from the river, and both Iraq and Syria object to Turkey’s diversion . Both countries object to Turkish diversion of the river .
 Jordan River originates in Syria and Lebanon and runs through Israel to Jordan . Jordan River runs through Lebanon, Israel and Jordan . River is one of the world's largest rivers .
 In 1964, Syria and Lebanon tried to build dams and divert water before it reached Israel, rendering Israel’s new water system worthless . Syria, Lebanon and Syria built dams and diverted water from Israel . Israel's water system was worthless in 1964 .
 Israeli air and artillery attacks on the construction site forced Syria to abandon its diversion project . Israel’s 1967 capture of the Golan Heights precluded Syria from renewing such efforts/' Thus, the dominance principle comes into play in resolving conflicts over natural resources .
 Water contains fish and offshore oil deposits . Water also contains other resources such as fish, offshore oil and fish .
 The UNCLOS treaty enclosed more of these resources within states’ territory . But this enclosure creates new problems . The treaty also creates problems .
 Norms regarding territorial waters are not firmly entrenched; some states disagree on who owns what . Some states say they own what they own .
 Control of small islands now implies rights to surrounding oceans with fish, offshore oil, and minerals . Also, control of small islanders now implies right to surrounding waters with fish and offshore oil .
 As population growth and economic development increase the demand for water, more international conflicts arise over water rights . As population grows, water rights are increasingly important in the world .
 Many important rivers pass through multiple states, and many states share access to seas and lakes . Many of the largest rivers and lakes in the world are shared by multiple states .
 The Aral Sea was once part of the Soviet Union but now shared between Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan . It was among the world's largest lakes until it was decimated by the diversion of its water sources .
 Of course, these resources can also be directly related to international security . The resources can be used in the United States .
 IR scholars have expanded their studies of environmental politics to systematically study the relationship of military and security affairs to the environment . One side of this relationship is the role of the environment as a source of international conflict . IR scholars say the relationship is important to understand .
 We have seen how environmental degradation can lead to collective goods problems among large numbers of states . We have also seen how competition for territory and resources can create conflicts among smaller groups of states, such as small states .
 Activities in the international security realm also affect the environment . Activities in international security realms are also affecting the environment.
 Military activities, especially warfare, are important contributors to environmental degradation . Military activities contribute to the degradation caused by economic activities such as mining and manufacturing .
 During the 1991 Gulf War, Iraqi forces spilled large amounts of Kuwaiti oil into the Persian Gulf . They then blew up hundreds of wells, leaving them burning uncontrollably and covering Iraq and Iran with thick black smoke .
 Global population reached a record high today, as it does every day . Global population reaches a new record high as it continues to grow .
 World population, 7 billion in 2012, growing by 80 million each year . World population of 7 billion, 7 million in 2012 . Growing by 80million each year. World population growing by 20 million a year .
 Barring a nuclear war or an environmental catastrophe, today’s children will grow up and have children of their own . Barring nuclear war, today's children will live with their own parents, they won't have children .
 World population growth will be driven, rather mechanistically, by the large number of children in today’s populations in the global South . For the coming 20 to 30 years, world population growth is likely to be driven by large numbers of children from the South .
 The projected world population in 2030 will be 8-9 billion people, and there is little anyone can do to change that projection . The world population is projected to be 8 to 9 billion people .
 Of the increase in population in that period, 96 percent will be in the global South . 96 percent of population growth will be from the global south .
 Among the world’s poorest countries, population is expected to triple in the next 50 years . Many rich countries will see 9 O population shrinkage in that period .
 To the extent that developing countries accumulate wealth, their populations will grow more slowly . This is a subject taken up in Chapter 13 of the book .
 A second factor affecting the rate of population growth will be government policies regarding women’s rights and birth control . Government policies on birth control and women's rights will be a factor in population growth .
 New data in 2002 showed that higher women’s status and literacy are reducing population growth more than expected . 28 Kahl, Colin H States, Scarcity and Civil Strife in the Developing World .
 Thomas Malthus warned that population tends to increase faster than food supply . He predicted that population growth would limit itself through famine and disease . Two hundred years ago, the British writer warned of population growth limits itself .
 Experts warn against world overpopulation are sometimes called Malthusian . Today, experts and officials who warn against overpopulation often say they are 'Malthusians'
 Critics of this view point out that technology has kept pace with population in the past, allowing more food and other resources to be extracted from the environment even as population keeps growing .
 Population growth results from difference between rates of birth and rates of death . Population growth is based on the difference between birth and death rates . The Demographic Transition is the result of a population change .
 Death rates fall as food supplies increase and access to health care expands . Death rates drop as food supply increases and health care increases .
 Later, birthrates fall as people become educated, more secure, and more urbanized, and as the status of women in society rises . Birthrates fall when people become more secure and secure, according to experts .
 At the end of the transition, as at the beginning, birthrates and death rates are fairly close to each other, and population growth is limited . At the beginning of this transition, birthrate and death rate are fairly similar, but population growth has limited .
 When death rates fall more than birthrates, population grows rapidly . But during the transition, death rates are lower than birth rates . Population grows rapidly during transition period .
 One reason poor people tend to have many children is that under harsh poverty, a child’s survival is not assured . A child's survival in harsh poverty is not guaranteed, says CNN.com .
 Disease, malnutrition, or violence may claim the lives of many children, leaving parents with no one to look after them in their old age . Disease or malnutrition may claim many children's lives .
 As a state makes the demographic transition, the structure of its population changes dramatically . The structure of a state's population structure is changing dramatically .
 At the beginning and middle of the process, most of the population is young . At the end of the project, the population of the country will be young .
 The Demographic Transition as income rises, first death rates and then birthrates fall . Birth rates fall as incomes rise, then death rates rise as income increases .
 Early in the transition, the population contains a large proportion of children; later it contains a lot of elderly people . Early in this transition, children are more likely to be older than older people .
 Families have many children, and adults do not have a long life expectancy . Families have a lot of children and adults don't live long life expectancies .
 The large number of children in poor countries tends to slow down the accumulation of wealth . Because children are not very productive economically, they are not productive economically .
 By the end of the demographic transition, the average age of the population is much older . Because adults live longer and families have fewer children, the population will be much older than the average .
 Eventually a substantial section of the population is elderly—a different nonproductive population that the economy must support . The economy must also support the elderly, which is a different non productive population .
 The industrialized countries have completed the demographic transition and now have slow population growth . The industrialized nations have completed their demographic transition . The population growth is slowing in industrialized countries .
 Most developing countries are in the middle of the transition and have rapid population growth . Most of the world's developing countries have rapid growth in population .
 The best way to slow population growth is to raise per capita income, say experts . Yet the best way is to reduce population growth, they say . Per capita income should be raised to reflect the fact that the population is growing .
 Population growth contributes to a vicious cycle in many poor states . Population growth thus contributes to the vicious cycle of poverty in many countries .
 Where population rises at the same rate as overall wealth, the average person is no better off over time . The average person will not be better off in the long run of years .
 Even when the economy grows faster than population, the total number of poor people may increase . The average income of the average person may rise, so that the average income will rise .
 The demographic transition tends to widen international disparities of wealth, says CNN.com .
 States that manage to raise incomes a bit enter an upward spiral . As population growth slows, income levels per capita rise more, which further slows population growth . States that raise incomes enter upward spiral as income levels rise more .
 States that do not raise incomes have unabated population growth . Per capita incomes stay low, which fuels more population growth—a downward spiral . States that don't raise incomes are in a downward spiral of population growth, the authors say .
 A few countries manage to slow population growth and raise incomes while others fail to do so . Within the South, disparities are also sharpened as a few manage to raise incomes . The disparities are sharpened within South .
 Even within a single country, the demographic transition sharpens disparities . The demographic transition has sharpened disparities within the country .
 Cities, richer classes, richer ethnic groups, and richer provinces tend to have low birthrates compared to the countryside . The poorer classes, ethnic groups and provinces have the lowest birthrates .
 In countries such as France, Israel and the United States, wealthier ethnic groups have much slower population growth than poorer ethnic groups . Wealthier ethnic groups are more likely to have a slower rate of population growth .
 The first group, including China and India, entered the phase of the demographic transition marked by falling birthrates in the 1970s . In nearly 70 other poor states, death rates kept falling faster than birthrates, leading to accelerating population growth .
 Population trends contributed to disparities within the global South that emerged in the 1990s, notably between Africa and Asia . These population trends contributed .
 The policies that governments adopt influence the birthrate . Economic and demographic conditions and birth rates are important factors in population growth . The birthrate is dependent on the birth rate .
 China uses strong government control to try to enforce a limit of one child per couple . At one extreme, China has tried to impose a limit on how many couples can have one child .
 Penalties for having a second child include being charged for services that were free for the first child . Penalties include charging for services provided free for first child for having second child .
 China has started to encourage wealthy and more educated families to have two children . In some Chinese cities such as Shanghai, coupies are allowed two-child families .
 China’s policy has lowered growth rates considerably in the cities but less so in the countryside, where most people still live . Growth rates have been much lower in China's rural areas than in the country's countryside .
 China's fertility rate fell from 6 children per woman to about 2.5 in a decade . Still, in a single decade, China’s fertility rate has fallen from about 6 children to 2.4 children .
 In some cases, Chinese peasants have reportedly killed newborn daughters so they could try for a son . Some Chinese peasants reportedly killed their newborn daughters to try and get a baby .
 Simply bribing or paying fines became more common routes around the one-child policy in the 1990s .
 Parents in China are using information technology to determine their fetus’s gender and abort it if female . Most often, parents in China use ultrasound scans to determine the gender of their fetus .
 China’s 2000 census showed the percentage of female births at 0.85 per boy, rather than the normal 0.95, a difference that amounts to a million ‘missing’ girls per year . The difference is a million "missing” girls a year .
 In recent years, hundreds of thousands of young women have been kidnapped and sold as brides . Hundreds of thousands have been sold and kidnapped in recent years .
 Controlling population growth helps economic development and vice versa . Control population growth is key to controlling economic development, experts say .
 Various countries use a wide range of population policies to curb population growth . China's one-child policy for urban couples is one of the world's most restrictive .
 Dutch babies enter a society well through the demographic transition, with plentiful resources for relatively few babies . The Dutch baby boomers enter the country well through its demographic transition . Dutch babies are expected to be born in the next few years .
 The birthrate fell from nearly 6 per woman to about 4-7 in the 1970s and about 2 in 2011 . Birthrate fell to 2 per woman in 2011, down from 6-7 per woman . The birth rate fell from about 6 per . woman in 1970s to about
 India’s government, strongly committed to birth control, has tried to make information and means widely available . But as a democracy it does not have extreme government control over society . As a democracy, India does .
 Countries with somewhat higher incomes than India or China can succeed more easily . Countries with higher incomes are more likely to succeed than those with lower incomes . India and China have the highest incomes in the world .
 Traditionally, many governments have adopted such policies because population was seen as an element of national power . The population is seen as a national element in national power.
 Only a few governments have strongly pronatalist policies, but many do not make birth control or sex education available to poor women . Birth control and sex education is often not available in poor women's homes .
 In some states, population is not considered a problem . In other states, the government simply cannot afford effective measures to lower birthrates . In some such states, government simply can't afford to reduce birth rates .
 In cultures that traditionally see women as valuable only in producing babies, great pressures exist against women who stop doing so . Women who stop producing babies are often pressured to do so .
 Many women do not use birth control because their husbands will not allow them to . Many women are not allowed to use it because of their husbands' refusal to .
 These husbands may think that having many children is proof of their manliness . Having many children may be proof of your manliness, these husbands say .
 As women’s status improves and they can work in various occupations, own property, and vote, women gain the power as well as the education and money necessary to limit the size of their families . However, as women's status improves, they can also own property and own property
 According to the UNFPA, improving the status of women is one of the most important means of controlling world population growth . The UN says improving women's status is one way to control population growth in the world .
 Government policies about women's status vary from one state to another . Government policies on women's rights vary from state to state .
 International programs and agencies are working to address this issue on a global scale . International programs such as the UN Commission on the Status of Women, are working on this issue . The UN Commission is working to help women in the Philippines .
 Population growth is determined by the death rate as well as the birthrate . Disease population growth is based on death rate and birth rate .
 In poor countries people tend to die younger, often from infectious diseases . In richer countries, people live longer and die more often from cancer and heart disease . In poorer countries people die from infectious disease .
 The proportion of babies who die within their first year is the infant mortality rate . Infant mortality rate is based on the death rate of babies born in the first year .
 This rate is an excellent indicator of overall health because it reflects a population’s access to nutrition, water, shelter, and health care . This rate reflects access to food, shelter and shelter .
 Death rates vary greatly from one state or region to another . Overall trends are stable from decade to decade . Death rates are stable in most states and regions .
 Wars, droughts, epidemics, and disasters have an effect locally but hardly matter globally . Wars and disasters often have an impact on the world, but hardly matters globally .
 In the poorest countries, which are just beginning the demographic transition, the death rate has declined from 30 deaths per thousand population in 1950 to less than 15 since 1990 . The death rate in poorer countries has declined since 1990, experts say .
 In the industrialized countries, the death rate bottomed out around 10 per thousand by 1960 . It now stands around 7 in 32 in 32 .
 The death rate is not a means by which governments or international agencies can affect population growth . Worsening poverty may cause famine and a rising death rate, but not a realistic way to control population growth, experts say . Governments and international agencies should not be able to use this to control
 It would mean moving backward through the demographic transition, which would wreck any chance of lowering birthrates . The demographic transition would wreck the chance of lower birthrates, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 In short, most of the world is already at or near the end of the transition in death rates . The key question is how long birthrates take to complete the transition .
 HIV/AIDS, other infectious diseases, and smoking deserve special attention because they exact very high costs even if they do not much affect global population trends .
 In these cases, actions taken in the short term have long-term and often international consequences . "Once again there are short-term costs and long-terms benefits," she says. "In these cases there are both short and international consequences"
 One state’s success or failure in limiting the spread of HIV affects infections in other states as well . HIV/AIDS is an AIDS epidemic that has spread throughout the world . In the worldwide AIDS epidemic, one state's success can be traced to its success in limiting HIV infections in
 AIDS spreads internationally—through business, tourism, migration, migration and military operations . It reflects the interdependence of states, reflecting their interdependency .
 By 2009, the HIV/AIDS epidemic had already killed more than 30 million people . An estimated 33 million more were infected, though most of them did not know it .
 Population and AIDS by World Region, 2012 Region 3 Population Population Growth Rate 1991-2010 HIV Infections World 7,000 1.2% 34 Global North 1,405 0.3% Global North 0.4% HIV Infection Rate 1.5% . Region 3 population population
 In 2007, UNAIDS corrected earlier estimates, resulting in a significant drop in infection rates . The drop in rates was due to a significant change in the world's HIV-AIDS epidemic .
 AIDS has emerged as one of several powerful forces driving the region backward into deeper poverty . In Africa, already the world’s poorest region, it is already among the poorest in the world .
 About 5 percent of adults are infected with HIV, more than half of them women . More than half those infected are women, according to experts .
 Infection is also rampant in African armies, with direct implications for international security . Infection also rife in Africa's military, with implications for national security .
 In Angola, the end of a long civil war opened borders and increased traffic with neighboring states that had high HIV infection rates . The end of the civil war in Angola opened borders to neighboring states with high rates of HIV .
 As Angola’s infection rate began to climb, military officers took the initiative to set up education programs and HIV testing within the army .
 Angola’s aggressive program kept the rate as low as in the general population, below 10 percent . In contrast to other African states with high military infection rates, Angola's aggressive program keeps the rate down .
 In North America and other industrialized regions, new drug therapies (which keep the virus in check for years) dramatically lowered the death rate from AIDS starting in the late 1990s . New drug therapies have kept the virus alive for years .
 These treatments are too expensive to help much in Africa and other poor regions . But these treatments could help much more in Africa than other poor countries .
 India and Brazil began to export cheap generic versions of these drugs, violating patent rights of Western drug companies . The drug companies say they are violating their patent rights to patent their drugs .
 The United States government threatened to punish South Africa and other countries if they allowed import of these drugs without compensating U.S. corporations holding patents . South Africa was threatened with sanctions if it allowed import without compensation .
 AIDS activists demonstrated loudly and mobilized public opinion to get the policies changed . In response, AIDS activists demonstrate loudly and mobilize public opinion .
 Drug companies began offering lower prices to poor countries, but delivery of the drugs to millions of poor people remained painfully slow . Meanwhile, drug companies offered lower prices but delivered the drugs slowly .
 The international community finally initiated the large-scale delivery of antiviral drugs to AIDS patients in poor countries . In 2004, the international community began the large scale delivery of AIDS patients .
 Global-level problems such as AIDS are making 10s such as WHO more important . The worldwide effort to slow AIDS, coordinated by the World Health Organization, illustrates how global-level issues such as HIV are making more important to WHO .
 International efforts focus on trying to get antiviral medicines to more of the world's 40 million infected people . Currently, international efforts are focused on getting antiviral medicine to more than 40 million people .
 Annan: G8 states responded with pledges of more than $1 billion but not enough . Annan says the pledges were "laudable" but "not enough" in Annan's view .
 In 2003, President Bush pledged $15 billion over five years to help slow AIDS in Africa . Bush pledged the money in 2003 to help fight the disease .
 Between 2009 and 2014, the U.S. government has pledged $48 billion to combat AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria . The United States government has spent $48 million to combat HIV, tuberculosis and malaria in the last five years .
 In 2006, five countries agreed to raise $300 million a year to buy medications for children with AIDS, TB, and malaria . France, Britain, Norway, Brazil, Brazil and Chile agreed to do so .
 Around 12 million children orphaned by AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa have been orphaned . More work remains to be done to care for the estimated 12 million orphaned children .
 The 2001 UN session also revealed sharp differences between Western, secular states and Islamic states that objected to any reference to gay people . Islamic states objected to mention of gay people in the 2001 session .
 Catholic authorities worldwide have objected to programs that encourage condom use . Catholic authorities in the U.S. have objected .
 As these examples show, some of the most effective prevention measures are culturally and politically sensitive issues . Public education, outreach to at-risk groups, condom distribution, free needles to drug users are culturally sensitive issues, experts say .
 States must cooperate with each other if they are to bring the epidemic under control . States must work together to stop the spread of HIV-AIDS .
 International efforts are coordinated primarily by WHO and funded mainly by the industrialized countries . WHO is coordinating the international efforts to combat the problem .
 WHO budget is equivalent to that of that of a midsize hospital in the global North . WHO budget for the WHO is roughly $1.5 billion . WHO has a budget of $3 billion, compared to $1 billion for the U.S.
 WHO depends on national governments to provide information and carry out policies . WHO says governments have been slow to respond to requests for information .
 Many governments are reluctant to condone or sponsor sex education and distribution of condoms because of religious or cultural taboos . Some governments falsify statistics to underreport the number of cases .
 HIV has spread rapidly in South Asia, China, and Russia/Eastern Europe, where prostitution and drug use are growing . In recent years, HIV has also spread in China, Russia and Russia .
 Thailand was especially vulnerable because of its huge prostitution industry, acceptance of male promiscuity, and large tourism industry . Thailand is especially vulnerable due to its prostitution industry and acceptance of men's promiscuality .
 It was one of the first developing countries to develop an effective anti-AIDS program . The program focuses on public education, and it dramatically lowered the infection rate in the 1990s .
 Stigma prevents effective identification or treatment of HIV-positive population in China . In China, the government has been slow to act, and stigma still prevents effective treatment .
 Unscrupulous cash-for-blood businesses, especially in one rural region, caused massive HIV infection . Cash for blood businesses caused massive infection in rural areas .
 AIDS Surge Is Forecast for China, India, and Eastern Europe, says Lawrence K. Altman . Altman, Lawrence K AIDS Surge is forecast for China and India .
 60 percent of China’s population has had hepatitis B, compared with 1 percent in the U.S. and Japan . China had an estimated 1 million infected people in 2011 .
 AIDS illustrates the transnational linkages that make international borders less meaningful than in the past . AIDS illustrates how transnational linksages are becoming less meaningful in the world .
 Effective international cooperation could save millions of lives and significantly enhance the prospects for economic development in the poorest countries in the coming decades, says the UN .
 Once again, a collective goods problem exists regarding the allocation of costs and benefits . But once again, it's not clear how much of the cost and benefits are shared .
 A dollar spent by WHO has the same effect regardless of which country contributed it . WHO spent the same amount of money as it did any other country contributing to WHO funding .
 In 2009, H1N1 influenza spread rapidly across much of the world, testing the small and poorly funded international institutions devoted to global health, such as the World Health Organization . The World Health Organisation is one of the few few organizations dedicated to global global health .
 In Mexico City in 2009, the flu epidemic shut down normal life for weeks . The baptism went on but with flu precautions taken . In 2009, Mexico City was hit hard by the flu .
 TB, malaria, hepatitis, dengue fever, and cholera have all reemerged or spread in recent decades, often mutating into drug-resistant forms . HIV, AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other diseases have all been wiped out in recent years .
 Malaria sickens hundreds of millions of people and kills more than a million per year, nearly all in Africa . Malaria is the world's deadliest form of disease and kills millions a year .
 New campaigns have distributed millions of mosquito nets in Africa to reduce malaria . The nets are a proven, cost-effective measure to reduce the disease .
 Pneumonia, influenza, diarrheacausing diseases, and measles all continue to be major problems but are not growing or spreading to the same extent . Meanwhile, new and poorly understood diseases have emerged, including HIV, Ebola virus, hantavirus, and hepatitis C .
 Vaccination programs have reduced the incidence of both polio and measles in recent years . Vaccinations have also reduced the number of measles cases in the United States .
 A measles vaccination campaign now reaches 85 percent of infants worldwide, reducing deaths by 80 percent since 2000 . Measles deaths have been reduced by 80% since 2000, according to experts .
 Taliban militants cut short polio vaccination drive in Pakistan in 2012 after Taliban militants killed health workers, claiming the vaccine was a Western plot to sterilize Muslim children .
 Iodine deficiency has historically received little attention although it affects as many as 2 billion people worldwide . As many as two billion people suffer from the deficiency, it affects many of them .
 Even moderate deficiencies in fetuses can lower intelligence by 10 to 15 I.Q. points . Serious deficiencies can stunt growth and cause mental health problems, says Rosenthal .
 For about 5 cents per person yearly, iodine can be added to salt and completely prevent the deficiency . Many countries in the global South and former Soviet bloc still do not do so .
 International campaign has increased the use of iodized salt from 25 percent of households worldwide in 1990 to 66 o o o percent in 2006 .
 Currently, scientists fear that bird flu could mutate and spread person to person, sparking a global pandemic that could potentially kill millions . Scientists fear that a pandemic could kill millions of people .
 This strain of swine flu was found in many countries, many of which adopted quarantine policies for patients . Many of these countries adopted quarantine procedures for patients, including quarantine .
 Worldwide, more than a billion people smoke, five-sixths of them in developing countries, and 5 million people a year die from tobacco-related disease .
 States that fail to curb the spread of nicotine addiction face high future costs in health care . The cost of health care is just beginning to come due in many poor countries .
 The costs are largely limited to the state itself; its own citizens and economy pay the price . The costs of the state are limited to state itself, but the costs are not limited to its citizens .
 Tobacco companies’ marketing campaigns targeting women in the global South could produce a huge increase in smokers in that group, according to the World Health Organization . Tobacco companies' recent marketing campaigns could increase smokers in the group .
 In the United States, about 24 percent of men smoke compared to 18 percent of women . In the U.S. about 24 per cent of people smoke, compared to about 18 per cent for women .
 Member states pledge to ban tobacco advertising and are encouraged to raise taxes on tobacco 5 percent a year above inflation rate . Member states pledged to ban advertising and increase tobacco taxes .
 The United States, alone among the world’s major powers, still had not ratified the treaty in 2011 . The U.S. was alone among world's major powers .
 Population issues are sometimes portrayed as simply too many people using up too little food and natural resources . Population issues often portrayed as using too much food and resources . People in the U.S. are using too little resources and using too many resources .
 The idea that overpopulation is the cause of hunger in today’s world is not really accurate . However, it is not the only reason for overpopulation in the world to be hungry .
 There is enough food, water, petroleum, land, and so forth—but these are unequally distributed . There are enough food and water, but not enough land and land . There is more than enough oil and gas, but these are distributed unequally .
 This unequal distribution is directly related to the gap between the global North and the global South . The unequal distribution of income inequality is linked to the rise in inequality in the world .
 Strains on the environment and on natural resources are global in scope, yet in the North they arise from industrialization . In the South they are more affected by growing populations . Strains in the South are affected more by population growth .
 These differences in environmental impacts are by no means the only such North-South difference . These differences are not the only differences in the North and South .
 The large number of actors involved in global environmental problems make them more difficult to solve . The large numbers of people involved in environmental problems are difficult to deal with, experts say .
 The industrialized states are much more responsible for the problem than are developing countries . Developed countries such as China and India also contribute to the problem .
 Solutions are difficult to reach because costs are substantial and dangers are somewhat distant and uncertain, experts say . Solutions to reach are difficult because of substantial costs and dangers, they say .
 Unlike global warming, the costs of solutions to the problem are much lower and the problem is better understood . The costs of global warming are also lower than global warming .
 An international treaty on biodiversity and an agreement on forests aim to reduce the destruction of local ecosystems . Costs of the biodiversity treaty are spread among states, with costs spreading among states .
 Oil prices rose dramatically in the 1970s but declined in the 1980s as the world economy adjusted by increasing supply and reducing demand . Oil prices dropped dramatically in 1980s but rose again in the 1990s .
 Prices spiked around 1991 and 2007-2008 before collapsing in 2008 . Prices spiked again around 1991-2008 and again around 2007-2009 .
 This area has long been a focal point of international political conflict . Consequently, this area has been a focus of international conflict .
 Death rates have fallen throughout the world, but birthrates will fall proportionally only as per capita incomes go up . Per capita incomes will also fall proportionately only if per capita income goes up . Death rates are also falling proportionally across the world .
 The faster the economies of poor states develop, the sooner their populations will level out . The faster they develop, poor states will help their populations level out, experts say .
 Effective policies are those that improve access to birth control and raise the status of women in society . Effective policies include better access to contraception and women's status as a result .
 Actual policies vary from China’s very strict rules on childbearing to pronatalist governments that encourage maximum birthrates and outlaw birth control .
 Currently 33 million people are infected with HIV, and 30 million more have died . 30 million people have died from the disease .
 Most infections are in Africa, but new infections are growing rapidly in Asia and Russia . Most are in Asia, but most are in Russia .
 Few effective international agreements have been reached to solve the problem of global warming . Few effective global warming agreements have yet to be reached .
 Some politicians call for the U.S. to be more self-sufficient in energy resources in order to reduce dependence on oil imports from the Middle East . Western industrialized countries, including the United States, have called for more energy resources .
 Kyoto Protocol has been the strongest attempt to control the pollutants that lead to global warming . The Kyoto Protocol was the strongest effort to control pollutants that cause global warming to date .
 Protocol has been in effect for only a few years, it has already generated tremendous controversy . Protocol has generated a lot of controversy .
 Kyoto uses a market mechanism to allocate caps on the amount of emissions that can come from various countries . Kyoto also allocates caps on how much emissions can be emitted from each country .
 Only developed countries are required to meet the targets under Kyoto . Yet, only developed countries need to meet Kyoto targets .
 Some countries, such as the United States, object to the nonbinding targets for developing countries . The U.S. says the targets are nonbinding .
 The United States objects to China's classification as a developing state that does not need to abide by the limits of the treaty . The U.S. objects to the classification of China as developing states that don't abide by treaty limits .
 It claims that China will be allowed to pollute while the United States pays a high economic cost to reduce global warming . The U.S. is paying an economic cost for reducing global warming, it says .
 The costs could run into the hundreds of billions of dollars over the long run . These costs could reach hundreds of billion of dollars .
 Question of who pays is again at the forefront of discussions . New global warming treaty to replace Kyoto Protocol expires when it expires in 2012 .
 Developing countries contribute to warming, so they should pay . Developing nations should pay their share to stop global warming, says Climate Change expert .
 Developing countries contribute large amounts of carbon dioxide to the global atmosphere . Developing nations contribute to the world's highest carbon dioxide emissions . Developed countries contribute to carbon dioxide in the atmosphere .
 They should not be allowed to free-ride on the efforts of the wealthy states who want to slow down global warming . The UK is one of the fastest-growing countries in the world .
 The cost to slowdown global warming will be high initially, but over time technology will help states keep costs low while lessening emissions . The cost of slowing global warming is expected to be very high initially .
 One should not be overly concerned that the costs of policy change in developing states will be overwhelming . Thus, one should not worry that the cost of changing policy in developing countries is overwhelming .
 Developing countries could benefit economically from Kyoto-type agreements, experts say . Developing nations could benefit from Kyoto type agreements, they say .
 If Kyoto agreement is extended or future agreements have similar market-based mechanisms as Kyoto, developing countries could benefit economically . Developing countries could also benefit economically from the Kyoto agreement .
 If these countries can bring emissions down enough to sell their extra cap space, they could recoup some of the costs of implementing the agreement .
 Only Developed countries should pay to stop global warming . The costs to developing countries will undermine development, argues David Cameron .
 Placing even some of these costs on developing countries will lead to economic hardship, which will further undermine development, which could then increase emissions . These states would have no money to invest in better technologies or to develop cleaner industries .
 For many years, developed countries paid little attention to the environment as they built industries, achieved economic growth, and became successful . Developed countries pay little attention as they build industries and become successful .
 Western states want to place limitations on how other states can develop and how they can treat the environment . India and China threatening to become economically successful, Western states say .
 Non-Western states should be allowed the same development path as Western states, says John Defterios . He says non-Western countries should be given the same opportunity to develop as Western nations .
 Many of the emissions come from industries that have been shipped from developed states . Developed countries do their fair share of polluting, many of them come from developing states .
 Western states did not want these polluting industries in their backyards, so they sent them abroad . Western states now demand that the host countries pay the bill for the cleanup .
 Houser, Trevor, Rob Bradley, Britt Childsman, Jacob Werksman, and Robert Heilmayr. The game is scheduled for Thursday night .
 It develops the theories of imperialism introduced in Chapter 3 . It tries to explain this gap in terms of historical colonization of the South by the North .
 Chapter 13 discusses international aspects of economic development in the South . Chapter 13 of the South's economic development includes international aspects .
 IR scholars do not agree on the causes or implications of poverty in the global South, nor on solutions to the problem . IR scholars say poverty is not a solution, nor are solutions to it .
 They are concentrated in Africa, where income levels have lagged for decades . Income levels have been lagging for decades in the continent .
 Economic growth in South Asia has greatly reduced extreme poverty . Two decades ago, the concentration was as strong in Asia as it was in the U.S. South Asia .
 The bottom line is that every five seconds, somewhere in the world, a child dies as a result of malnutrition . Although billions of people are rising out of poverty, the number of very poor people still remains about the same .
 The world produces enough food to nourish these children, but their own families or states do not have enough income . The world is producing enough income to afford the children, the children's parents say .
 In that same five seconds the world spends $270,000 on military forces, a thousandth of which could save the child’s life . Meanwhile, in that same 5 seconds, the world spent a thousand times more on the military forces .
 People lack water, shelter, health care, and other necessities because they cannot afford them . Likewise, people lack water and shelter because they are unable to afford it . People also lack food, shelter and health care because of their lack of money .
 The widespread, grinding poverty of people who cannot afford necessities is less visible than the dramatic examples of starvation triggered by war or drought, but affects many more people .
 UN in 2000 adopted the Millennium Development Goals, which set targets for basic needs measures to be achieved by 2015 and measured against 1990 data . The Millennium Development goals were set by the UN and were adopted in 2000 .
 The first of the eight goals is to cut in half the proportion of the world’s population living in “extreme poverty,” defined as income of less than $1.25 per day . “Extreme poverty” is defined as living in poverty with less than
 Africa lagged far behind Asia in cutting poverty in 2010 . This goal was met ahead of schedule in 2010, but Africa lags behind Asia's goal .
 For the global North overall, GDP per capita is $30,000 . China South Asia Africa Africa Middle East Latin America $10,000 GDP per Capita .
 The Middle East is about as developed as China in terms of GDP per capita, but growing at only half the rate . The region is growing at a slower rate than China, but still has the most developed economy .
 The world’s regions vary on both income and growth, with the two dimensions not correlated . Chapter 13 will explore the reasons for these differences in economic growth .
 Experts disagree about how much poverty and inequality have decreased . Some argue that poverty has been halved through rapid economic growth . Others argue that the global distribution of income is shifting from having rich and poor extremes to having a bell curve distribution of middle incomes .
 Between 1990 and 2008, incomes per person in the global South as a whole rose from about $3,000 to about $5,500 . The global South's incomes rose between 1990 to 2008, and 2008 .
 Some countries in the global South have made rapid progress in raising incomes, but others are caught in a cycle of poverty . Some countries have made significant progress but others have remained in poverty .
 Until incomes rise, the population will not move through the demographic transition . Population growth will remain high and incomes low, says David Cameron .
 People need food, shelter, and other necessities of daily life in order to feel secure, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 As long as people in the global South blame imperialism for a lack of basic needs, extreme poverty fuels revolution, terrorism, and anti-Western sentiments . Furthermore, as long . people in . the global . South blame . imperialism . for lack of . basic needs .
 In particular, education allows a new generation to meet other basic needs and move through the demographic transition . Education allows the new generation of young people to meet basic needs, say experts .
 UNESCO defines as the ability to read and write a simple sentence . Literacy is the key component of education, UNESCO says .
 A person who can read and write can obtain a wealth of information about farming, health care, birth control, and so forth . A person can also obtain information on farming and health care .
 Some poor countries have raised literacy rates substantially; others lag behind . Some poor nations have raised their literacy rates significantly .
 Primary-school attendance in 2008 was more than 90 percent in most world regions, though only 76 percent for Africa . Primary school attendance in most countries is more common in Africa .
 In the North, about 90 percent of secondary-age children are enrolled, but in most of the global South, fewer than two-thirds are . About 90 percent are enrolled in primary schools in the global south .
 UNICEF: In 2008 in the global South, one in four children suffered from malnutrition . One in seven lacked access to health care, and one in five had no safe drinking water . In 2008, UNICEf: One in four kids suffered malnutrition .
 AIDS epidemic is undoing progress made in reducing child mortality and increasing education . The AIDS epidemic threatens to undo progress made over decades in reducing children's mortality .
 In both cases, achievement of these basic needs for children roughly correlates with the region’s respective income levels . In both case, achievement is roughly equal to the regions’ respective incomes .
 Effective health care in poor countries is not expensive—less than $5 per person per year for primary care . The cost of primary care in poorer countries is about $5 a year for basic care .
 UNICEF has promoted four inexpensive methods credited with saving millions of children each year . UNICEf has promoted inexpensive methods that together, together, have saved millions of lives each year. For instance, four inexpensive ways to save children's lives .
 Experts estimate that regular weighing and advice can prevent half of all cases of malnutrition . Experts say regular weighing can prevent 50% of all malnutrition cases .
 A second method is oral rehydration therapy, which stops diarrhea in children before they die from dehydration . A third method is Oral Rehydration Therapy, which can stop diarrhea before children die .
 Nearly a billion people in the global South live in abject poverty, lacking safe water, housing, food, and the ability to read . Most of them are in Africa and South Asia .
 Natural disasters, droughts, and wars can displace subsistence farmers from their land and make matters worse . Natural disasters and wars may have displaced subsistence farmers, experts say .
 Sustained advances in health care are bringing dramatic improvements to Ivory Coast . But sustained advances are still needed to improve the quality of care .
 The third method is immunization against six common deadly diseases: measles, polio, tuberculosis, tetanus, whooping cough, and diphtheria . World Bank. World Bank .
 In recent decades, the number of children immunized in poor countries has risen from 5 percent to more than 50 percent . In poor countries, immunization rates have risen to over 50 percent in recent decades .
 By 2010, the number of children immunized at least once against measles had climbed to 85 percent . The measles immunization rate was 85 percent, according to experts .
 Since 1990, despite the daunting problems of war and the HIV/AIDS epidemic, public health in the global South registered some important gains . Despite the challenges of war, the South has registered important gains since 1990 .
 Infant tetanus deaths were halved, and access to safe water was extended to a billion more people . Access to the world's water supply has been extended to more than a billion people . Infants died from infant tetanus, and the number of deaths from it was halved
 Deaths of children under five worldwide hit a record low, below 8 million in 2010, down from nearly 12 million in 1990 . Deaths of under five children in the world dropped to 8 million worldwide in 2010 .
 Measles 1 0 deaths dropped by three-quarters in just ten years, 2000-2010, a striking success . Deaths from measles, measles, tuberculosis and other diseases dropped by 90% in ten years .
 The disparities in access to health care are striking globally, globally, are striking . Still, the disparities are striking, according to CNN.com .
 75 percent of world’s people living in the global South have about 30 percent of the world's doctors . The 75 percent . of the people . living in . the global . South have the most doctors in the world .
 AIDS, acute respiratory infections, diarrhea, TB, malaria, and hepatitis are the biggest killers in the world . The biggest killers are AIDS and acute respiratory infection, diarrhea .
 Because people with such diseases are poor, there is often not a large enough market for drug companies in the industrialized world to invest in medicines for them . Yet, because of such diseases, there are often not large enough markets for such medicines .
 In many rural locations, people must walk miles every day to fetch water . People in rural areas often walk miles a day to get water .
 Access to water does not mean running water in every house, but a clean well or faucet for a village . Note that access to water is not running water, but it means access to clean wells and faucets .
 In 1990— 2010, the number without access fell by half, meeting the MDG target early . But one in six people worldwide still lack safe drinking water . In 1990-2010 the number of people who had access to water fell by .
 Some 2 billion people, a third of the world’s population, do not have access to sanitation . Some 2. billion people in the world have not been able to access sanitation .
 Millions of children each year die of diarrhea, which kills millions of them each year . The result is recurrent epidemics and widespread diarrhea .
 Poor sanitation in Haiti allowed a cholera epidemic to kill thousands in 2010-2013 . The epidemic was introduced by visiting Nepalese peacekeepers, sent to help Haiti . Thousands died in Haiti from the epidemic .
 About 1 billion people lacking safe water and more than 2 billion without adequate sanitation . Despite the tremendous progress the world has made in improving water and sanitation, with population growth there are still a billion people without safe water .
 Of the world’s seven billion people, about one in six lives in substandard housing or is homeless altogether . Of those seven billion, about 1 in 6 lives under poor housing or homeless altogether, says CNN.com .
 For indicator after indicator, we find about a billion people left behind with nothing, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com . "For indicator after indicators, we found about a . billion people ... left behind"
 The different indicators do not overlap perfectly, but basically the bottom billion of humanity, most living in rural areas, are in desperate poverty . Most of the world's poorest people live in poverty .
 The most important factors keeping people in poverty appear to be civil war, corruption, and landlocked locations without ready access to trade . The “resource curse’s” appears to be the most important factor in poverty .
 In theory, providing basic needs should give poor people hope of progress and should ensure political stability, says David Cameron . But that's not true, he says, and it's not a good idea .
 Children are a main focus of efforts to provide basic human needs in the global South . In Sri Lanka, a children are a major focus of . efforts to . provide basic . human needs .
 Education is critical to both economic development and the demographic transition . It is also critical to the economic development of the country's population .
 Girls worldwide receive less education than boys, and in Afghanistan under Taliban, they were banned from schools altogether . Girls are banned from school altogether .
 This math class in Kandahar, Afghanistan, in 2002 followed the Taliban's fall .
 The policy showed that even a very poor country could meet basic needs at low levels of per capita income . The policy was shown to show that even very poor countries could meet their basic needs .
 The war became more and more brutal, with death squads and indiscriminate reprisals on civilians . It consumed the progress Sri Lanka had made, with the deaths of thousands of civilians .
 War in the global South—both international and civil war—is a leading obstacle to the provision of basic needs . War is both an obstacle to providing basic needs in the region, says the UN .
 War causes much greater damage to society than merely the direct deaths and injuries it inflicts . War causes more damage than merely death, injury, but also the damage it does to society . War is not only a war, but a war is a war that damages society .
 In war zones, economic infrastmcture such as transportation is disrupted, as are government services such as health care and education . Economic infrastuments such as transport and government services are disrupted .
 Wars drastically reduce the confidence in economic and political stability on which investment and trade depend . Wars reduce confidence in the confidence of the economy and the world's economy .
 The worldwide pattern somewhat resembles the map of wars in progress on page 154 . The pattern is similar to that of a map of war in progress in the world .
 War is often part of a vicious circle for states unable to rise out of poverty . War is part of the vicious circle of poverty in the U.S.
 Haiti is already the poorest country in the Western hemisphere, with annual GDP of $1,300 per person . The fragility of life in poor countries was demonstrated all too starkly in 2010 when a major earthquake devastated Haiti .
 Because of poor construction, many buildings collapsed, many survivors faced desperate conditions . Survivors faced poor health and sanitation facilities, survivors faced .
 Haitians could only hope that international aid would help them rebuild from scratch . Haitians hope international aid will help rebuild them from scratch in the coming years .
 Of all the basic needs of people in the global South, the most central is food . Food is the most basic human needs in the world, especially in the South .
 Malnutrition refers to the lack of needed food including protein and vitamins . Malnutrition is a lack of necessary food, such as vitamins and minerals .
 The term hunger refers broadly to malnutrition or outright undernourishment — a lack of calories . The term "hunger" is used to refer to malnutrition, or under-nutrition .
 Hunger does not usually kill people through outright starvation, but it weakens them and leaves them susceptible to infectious diseases that would not ordinarily be fatal . Hunger is not usually fatal but weakens people through starvation, leaving them vulnerable to diseases such as infectious diseases .
 Their potential contribution to economic accumulation is wasted because they cannot do even light work . They are wasted because of their inability to do light work, they say . Their potential contributions to economic growth is wasted, they argue .
 They are a potential source of political instability, including international instability, as long as they stay hungry . And they are also a source of instability, especially in the Middle East .
 World leaders adopted a goal to cut hunger in half by 2015 . At the World Food Summit in 1996, world leaders adopted the goal . World leaders also adopted a plan to end hunger in the world by 2030 .
 Chronic undernourishment means failing to consume enough food on average over a year to maintain body weight and support light activity . Chronic undernutrition is a form of chronic underweightiness that affects the body .
 A quarter of the world’s children under age 5—and nearly half those in India—were underweight . Nearly half of the children in India were underweight, according to the report .
 Traditionally, rural communities have grown their own food . Subsistence farming is a form of farming in rural areas .
 Colonialism disrupted this pattern, and the disruption has continued in postcolonial times . Colonialism has continued to disrupt the patterns of colonial rule in Africa .
 States in global South shifted from subsistence to commercial agriculture . States in the global South shift from subsistence-to-commercial agriculture .
 Small plots were merged into big plantations, often under the control of wealthy landlords . Small plots of land were often merged into large plantations .
 By concentrating capital and orienting the economy toward a niche in world trade, this process is consistent with liberal economics . This process would have a positive effect on the global economy, economist says .
 Commercial agriculture relies on machinery, commercial fuels, and artificial fertilizers and pesticides, which must be bought with cash and often must be imported . Commercial agriculture often relies on cash and imports .
 Big farms grow cash crops to pay for crops produced for export to world markets . To pay for these supplies, big farms grow crops that produce for export . Big farms use cash crops for cash crops .
 Such crops typically provide little nutrition to local peasants . Examples include coffee, tea, sugar cane, and sugar cane .
 When a plantation is built or expanded, subsistence farmers end up working on the plantation at very low wages or migrating to cities in search of jobs . Subsidiary farmers often migrate to cities to find jobs in cities .
 Higher food prices in 2007-2008 have provided increased income for farmers in rural areas, yet at the cost of many being unable to afford food . Ironically, the higher food prices have provided income for many farmers in the rural areas .
 The threat of major food shortages threatened Pakistan after devastating floods in the summer of 2010 . Floods in Pakistan also threatened food shortages in 2010 following devastating floods .
 Nearly 2 million acres of crops were lost in the Pakistan flood, leaving food in short supply for people and farm animals . The UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization says nearly 2 million acreage of crops was lost .
 States, IGOs and NGOs rushed food to Pakistan after the floods, hoping to avert a major humanitarian catastrophe . International food aid itself can sometimes contribute to these problems .
 If an international agency floods an area with food, prices on local markets drop . That may force even more local farmers out of business and increase dependence on handouts from the government .
 People in a drought or famine often have to travel to feeding centers to receive the food, halting their work on their own land . Also, people in drought and famine often travel to feed centers to get the food .
 The displacement of peasants from subsistence farming contributes to a massive population shift that typically accompanies the demographic transition . Rural and Urban Populations of rural and urban populations are often followed by a population shift .
 More and more people move to the cities from the countryside . Urbanization is a key part of the urbanization process .
 There is no standard definition of when a town is considered a city . This is hard to measure exactly, but it's hard to define exactly exactly .
 industrialized states report that about 70 to 90 percent of their populations live in cities . But industrialized states say about 70-to-90 percent of the population live in urban areas .
 Urbanization is not caused by higher population growth in cities than in the countryside . Urbanization in cities is not due to higher growth in urban areas than the countryside, experts say. Urbanization was caused by high population growth, they say .
 In cities, people are generally better educated, with higher incomes . In cities people are better educated and have higher incomes, the study finds .
 They are further along in the demographic transition and have lower birthrates than people in the countryside . People in the rural areas have a lower birthrate than those in rural areas .
 The growth of urban population is caused by people moving to the cities from the countryside, rather than people moving out of the countryside .
 They do so because of the higher income levels in the cities, economic opportunity, and the hope of more chances for an exciting life . They say they are doing so because they want to live a better life .
 Population growth in the countryside stretches available food, water, arable land, and other resources . They also move because population growth stretches available resources, officials say .
 In many cities, the influx of people cannot be accommodated with jobs, housing, and services . The influx of new migrants has created problems in many of the world's cities .
 Many states have considered policies to break up large land holdings and redistribute land to poor peasants for use in subsistence farming . Land reform is a form of land reform in the United States .
 The main opponents of land reform are large landowners, who often wield great political power because of their wealth . Landowners often wield international connections to markets, MNCs, and other sources of hard currency .
 Sub-istence farmers displaced from their land risk chronic hunger and sometimes starvation . Sub-sistence farmers are at risk of chronic hunger or starvation .
 These villagers in eastern Democratic Congo flee new fighting in 2012 . sporadic political violence has continued for more than a decade in the country's capital .
 Economic development in poor countries is closely tied to the status of women in those societies . Women in Development is closely linked to women's status in poor societies .
 Most attention for decades had focused on men as supposedly the main generators of capital . This is a relatively recent revelation; most attention has been on the men .
 Governments and international reports concentrated on work performed by male wage earners . Governments and . international reports focused on work done by men .
 Women's work, by contrast, often is not paid for in money and does not show up in financial statistics . Women’s work is often not paid in money .
 Women in much of the world work harder than men and contribute more to the economic well-being of their families and communities . But women in many countries work more than men, and contribute to their communities .
 Women key to efforts to improve the lot of children and reduce birthrates . Women are key in efforts to reduce birthrate rates .
 Women are central to providing the basic needs of people in poor countries . In nutrition, education, health care, and shelter, women are key to providing basic needs . Women's role in providing basic food, shelter and shelter is vital to poor people .
 When food is in short supply, men and boys often eat first, with women and girls getting what is left . Men and boys eat first when food is short supply . Women and girls get what's left, with men and women getting what the left .
 Women are central to rural economies, to population strategies, and to the provision of basic human needs, including education . Women are also central to population growth strategies, population growth and education .
 Women's cooperative in Mauritania makes small loans to its members . The cooperative is based in the country's capital, capital city, Nou Nou Nouarar .
 Only in Latin America do women’s literacy rates approach those of men . Across the global South, literacy rates are lower than men's across the globe .
 In Pakistan, three-quarters of boys but little more than half the girls receive primary education . Pakistan's education system is largely dominated by boys .
 Throughout Asia, Africa, and the Middle East, more boys receive education, especially at the secondary level, though the gap has closed considerably in recent years .
 Taliban regime in Afghanistan banned all girls from school and women from paid work . Taliban regime banned all women from all paid work and banned girls from all schools . The Taliban regime took extreme measures against women's education .
 These issues occupied the 1995 UN women’s conference in Beijing, China, attended by tens of thousands of state and NGO representatives .
 International agencies help women organize small businesses, farms, and other income-producing activities . For example, women in the U.S. can organize small business, farms and other activities .
 UNICEF has helped women get bank loans on favorable terms to start up small businesses in Egypt and Pakistan . The charity has also helped women start up cooperative farms in Indonesia and Egypt as well .
 Women have organized cooperatives throughout the global South, often in rural areas . Women produce income through weaving and other textile and clothing production, retail stores, agriculture .
 In the slums of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, women heads of household with no land for subsistence farming had been forced into begging and prostitution . Women heads of households had no land .
 Women taking part in the Integrated Holistic Approach Urban Development Project organized income-producing businesses in areas such as cloth weaving, food processing, cloth weaving and garment production .
 These profitable businesses earned income for the women and helped subsidize health and sanitation services in the slums .
 The home state is not under any obligation to let such people leave, and, more important, no state is obligated to receive migrants . No state should be obligated to let migrants leave the country, and no state should receive migrants, says David Cameron .
 As with any trade issue, migration creates complex patterns of winners and losers . Migration is a complex issue, with winners being losers, winners, losers . Migrants to the U.S. are a key part of the economy .
 Immigrants often provide cheap labor, benefiting the host economy overall . Immigrants compete for jobs with citizens of the host country . Immigration often provides cheap labor but also compete with citizens .
 Most industrialized countries try to limit immigration from the global South . Most industrialized states try to keep immigration from global South out of their borders . Most of the world's most industrialized nations try to restrict immigration .
 Despite border guards and fences, many people migrate anyway, illegally . Despite border security, many migrants still make their way to the border .
 In the United States, such immigrants come from all over the world, but mostly from Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean . In the U.S. such immigrants are mostly from nearby Mexico and Central America .
 Some Western European leaders worry that the loosening of border controls will make it harder to keep out illegal immigrants . In Western Europe, they come largely from North Africa, Turkey, and Eastern Europe .
 In 2004-2006, tens of thousands of migrants and refugees from sub-Saharan Africa came to Morocco and climbed over razor-wire fences to enter two tiny Spanish enclaves .
 Once on Spanish soil, they could not be sent home if they kept authorities from determining their nationality . Once in Spain, they were not allowed to be deported if they were found to be British citizens .
 The increase in migrants trying to reach the enclaves in Morocco followed Spanish efforts to stem the flow of migrants crossing in boats from North Africa to Spain itself .
 Africans set out in boats and rafts to reach the Spanish-owned Canary Islands in the Atlantic off Morocco . Spain cracked down on the crossings at the Moroccan enclaves .
 International law and custom distinguish migrants from refugees, people fleeing to find refuge from war, natural disaster, or political persecution . Migrants are not refugees .
 International norms oblige countries to accept refugees who arrive at their borders . International norms are obliged to do so by accepting refugees .
 Refugees from political persecution may be granted asylum to stay in the new state . Refugees from persecution may also be granted permission to stay .
 Acceptance of refugees and the question of which states must bear the costs is a collective goods problem . Acceptance and the cost of accepting refugees is an issue of collective goods, says Julian Zelizer .
 Refugees are both a result of international conflict and a source of conflict . Refugees are the result of conflict in the world and a cause for conflict .
 Hundreds of thousands of people each year cross borders as sex and labor slaves . Thousands of people cross borders each year as sex slaves .
 Refugees crossing from war-torn Libya into Tunisia in 2011 show their Bangladesh passports . The refugees crossed into Tunisia from Bangladesh in 2011 .
 Includes refugees, asylum seekers, returned refugees, and internally displaced people . Includes asylum seekers and returned refugees .
 The problem came into sharp focus in 2011 when tens of thousands of refugees from Tunisia and Libya poured into Italy, from which they could pass freely into other nearby countries . France stopped accepting them, and EU leaders reviewed their freemovement rules .
 The number of international refugees in the world was about 10 million in 2012 . About 10 million international refugees are refugees worldwide, according to UNHCR .
 About 15 million more people were displaced within their own countries . 15 million people are displaced in their countries .
 Three-fourths of internally displaced persons reside in Colombia, Congo, Somalia, Sudan, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Syria . Three-fifths of these internally displaced people reside in the U.S.
 The majority of refugees and IDPs have been displaced by wars, most recently by the civil war in Syria . 600,000 refugees in Turkey and Jordan, and 2. million internally displaced persons, all fleeing violence in general and sexual violence in particular .
 Jordan declared it would take no more refugees in a new Syrian crisis beyond 200,000 already there in 2013 . Jordan declared in 2013 that no more Syrian refugees would be needed in the country .
 They live in “camps’ that have become long-term neighborhoods, mainly in Jordan, Lebanon, and the Palestinian territories of Gaza and the West Bank .
 The poverty of the refugees in turn fuels radical political movements among the inhabitants . The poverty in the refugee camp fuels political movements .
 The question of Palestinian refugees’ right to return to what is now Israel has challenged every attempt at a comprehensive peace settlement for years . The question has been debated for years over the issue of returning refugees .
 It is not always easy to distinguish a refugee fleeing war or political persecution from a migrant seeking economic opportunity . It is difficult to distinguish between refugees and migrants seeking economic opportunities .
 Illegal immigrants may claim to be refugees in order to be allowed to stay, when really they are seeking better economic opportunities . Illegal immigrants claim they are refugees to stay in the United States .
 In recent decades this issue has become a major one throughout the North . It has been a major issue in the North for decades . The North is now a major source of tension in the region .
 In Germany, France, Austria, and elsewhere, resentment of foreign immigrants has fueled upsurges of right-wing nationalism in domestic politics . In France, France and Austria, resentment has fueled a rise in nationalism .
 Remittances are money sent home by migrants to relatives in their country of origin . A crucial aspect of migration and immigration is remittances, money sent back to relatives .
 Zimbabwe's neighbor to the east, Zimbabwe, has undergone years of political, economic, and social turmoil . Zimbabwe's economy has been in a state of crisis for years .
 Most recently, a contested presidential election set off waves of violence and protest in Venezuela . The country has seen waves of protests and violence in recent years .
 A food shortage crisis affects up to half of the 12 million inhabitants of Zimbabwe . Besides the political violence, the food shortage is also a major problem .
 Zimbabwe has experienced several outbreaks of cholera, which have killed thousands who lack basic health care in the midst of the crisis . Cholera has killed thousands of people in the country .
 Zimbabwe's political, social, and economic conditions have led many to flee Zimbabwe looking for temporary relief from the conditions in that country . Many of those who have fled Zimbabwe are seeking temporary relief in the country .
 Your own political and economic situation, however, is quite different . Your own situation may be very different .
 Over the past decade, your country has gone from being one of the poorest in Africa to one with a per capita GDP of $15,000 per person . The country's GDP has grown from one of Africa's poorest to one of its highest in Africa .
 The economic situation of your country is solid and the political situation is relatively stable . The political situation in your country should be relatively stable, says CNN.com .
 While your political and economic situation is certainly better than Zimbabwe's, it is not clear that you would be able to provide assistance or refuge for the tens of thousands of Zimbabweans fleeing to your country .
 Zimbabwe's health care system is already strained by AIDS and cholera . Cholera refugees would strain the system, which is already stretched by AIDS, would strain it .
 Your own public has some tolerance for a limited number of refugees, they would oppose accommodating all Zimbabweans who want assistance . And while your own public have some tolerance, they are opposed to all refugees .
 Another cholera outbreak occurs, which spurs tens of thousands of additional refugees to pour into Botswana . Tens of thousands more refugees are then forced to flee to Botswana.
 Your health minister implores you to shut down the border because of the cholera threat . The border has been closed since the outbreak of the disease in March .
 Government under pressure from international community to accept refugees, says Syrian leader .
 This could lead to resentment on the part of your own population if the refugees take jobs, drain food supplies, or burden your health care system . The refugees could also drain your own food supplies and burden your own health care .
 Remittances are not transferred between companies or wealthy individuals, but usually between families . Unlike FDI, remittances do not go to companies, but to families, but between family members .
 They also are not handed out by governments and thus, not subject to corruption or governmental waste . They also do not have to be given away by governments .
 Remittances are not subject to conditions from donors . Unlike foreign aid, remittances do not have to be subject to donor conditions . Also, unlike foreign aid it does not come under conditions of donors .
 These characteristics of remittances make them important, yet also difficult to study . Remittances are important but difficult to understand, says the author .
 They have helped some poorer states improve their investment ratings and sell bonds, luring more foreign direct investment . The Philippines and Bangladesh are among the poorer states to improve their ratings and bond sales .
 Remittance levels are very vulnerable to economic downturns in wealthy countries . However, remittance levels remain very low in the world's most wealthy countries.
 Remittances also continue the cycle of dependency of poor states on wealthy ones, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 Should wealthy states close their borders or expel migrant populations, this would create hardships for individual families as well as the economies of developing countries . This would create hardship for individuals and developing nations .
 In addition to migration and refugees, a growing number of people are trafficked across international borders against their will . Trafficking is estimated at about 700,000 people annually .
 They include both sex slaves and labor slaves, with each category including females and males, adults and children . Each category includes females, males and adults .
 Perhaps 20,000 of these people are trafficked to 28 Singer, David A Migrant Remittances and Exchange Rates in the Developing World .
 Wars and disasters regularly displace millions of people from their homes, as they seek safety and survival by fleeing . The Well-Being of Refugees is based on the experiences of refugees .
 Not infrequently, they show up at an international border seeking to cross and find refuge on the other side . They often find refuge at the border .
 With most wars happening in poor regions of the world, the neighboring countries often lack the resources to provide for refugees . The refugee populations often come from poor countries .
 There is thus a temptation to free-ride and turn refugees away at the border . There is also a temptation .
 The identity principle can play a role, as when refugees cross the border into a country where their ethnic group is a majority . Identity principle plays a role when refugees are a persecuted minority, as well as when they cross border .
 Singer David Singer, David A Migrant Remittances and Exchange Rate Regimes in the Developing World . Singer: Migrant remittances, Exchange Rates and Exchange Rates in Developed World .
 In 2010, the United States State Department listed 13 countries making insufficient efforts to stop human trafficking, including Kuwait, Malay'l O.Sia, and Saudi Arabia .
 The main approach, however, is reciprocity—neither expecting countries to take in refugees just from the goodness of their hearts, but also not threatening them or forcing them to do so . It is not only expected countries to accept refugees, but not to threaten them or force them to
 The world's refugee regime is a reciprocity-based set of rules that the world’s states have agreed to . It is reciprocity based on the rules agreed to by the world's states .
 All states are supposed to follow the same rules, which require them to take in war refugees . All states must take in refugees .
 The UN High Commissioner for Refugees helps take care of refugee populations . In order to help the host countries, the international community has an international organization, the UN .
 UNHCR funding is itself a collective goods problem, and the agency often runs short of desperately needed supplies when the good is not provided . UNHCR funding has been a major problem for the UNHCR since it was founded .
 Refugees from Kyrgyzstan are separated when Tajikistan closes the border, 2010 . Tajikstan closed the border to allow refugees to cross into the country .
 There are two contrasting theories of wealth accumulation, based on more liberal and more revolutionary perspectives . There are several very different approaches to these questions . We will concentrate on the contrasting theories .
 A view of the problem from the perspective of capitalism is based on liberal economics . Liberal economics stresses overall efficiency in maximizing economic growth . Economic Accumulation .
 This view sees the global South as merely lagging behind the industrialized North . This view is based on the view that the South has lagged behind the North .
 More wealth creation in the North is a good thing, and more in the South is not in conflict . Wealth creation in North and South are good things, but conflict is not a problem .
 A different view of things, from the perspective of socialism, is concerned with the distribution of wealth as much as the absolute creation of wealth . A different point of view is that socialism is concerned about the distribution rather than the absolute wealth creation, says David Cameron .
 It sees the North-South divide as more of a zero-sum game in which the creation of wealth in the North most often comes at the expense of the South .
 Politics gives politics more of a role in redistributributributing wealth and managing the economy than does capitalism . It also gives politics a more powerful role than capitalism, says David Cameron .
 socialists see economic classes rather than states as main actors in the political bargaining over the distribution of the world’s wealth . But socialists see the economic classes as the main players in political bargaining .
 Mercantilism promotes the idea of concentrating wealth, while socialism promotes the broader distribution of wealth . And mercantillism promotes concentration of wealth, not socialism .
 For socialists, international exchange is shaped by capitalists’ exploitation of cheap labor and cheap resources . Using states to help create the political conditions for this exploitation, states create the conditions for exploitation .
 Socialists see economic interests as driving political policies . Mercantilists see political interests driving economic policies . The socialist view of the economy is that of the mercantilist .
 In Latin America in recent years, several states have elected leftist presidents committed to changing course away from free market capitalism and toward a socialist philosophy with more state-owned industries . Several states in Latin America are changing course toward socialism .
 Capitalist and socialist approaches are rather incompatible in their language and assumptions about the problem of poverty and its international implications . Capitalist, socialist approaches to poverty are incompatible in terms of language, assumptions .
 This chapter somewhat favors socialist approaches, focusing on the past history of imperialism as a central cause of the North-South divide . This chapter focuses on revolutionary strategies and massive redistribution of wealth as solutions to it .
 Almost all countries have some form of mixed economy that includes both private and state ownership . Almost all of the world's largest economies have mixed economy, including private ownership .
 In most capitalist countries the government balances the inhuman side of capitalism by redistributing some wealth downward . In most countries, the government redistributes some of the world's most wealth downward to the bottom .
 In the 2008-2009 financial crisis, some of the largest capitalist economies found themselves spending money to buy portions of private companies, such as insurance companies, automakers, and banks, to keep these businesses from going into bankruptcy .
 Economic development is based on capital accumulation . Capital accumulation is the creation of standing wealth such as buildings, roads, and factories . Economic development in China is a form of economic development .
 In order for human populations and their capital to grow, they must produce an economic surplus by using capital to produce more capital . Human populations must produce a surplus by producing more capital to increase their wealth .
 This is done by investing money in productive capital rather than using it for consumption . Investing money into productive capital is the key to success in the world .
 The more surplus an economy produces, the more resources are available for investment above the minimum level of consumption needed to sustain human life . The most surplus economies produce more resources than the minimum amount of consumption .
 Industrial Revolution of several centuries ago greatly accelerated the process of world accumulation, drawing on large amounts of energy from fossil fuels . The Industrial Revolution was the result of the Industrial Revolution .
 Industrialization has occurred very unevenly across the world regions . But industrialization is unevenly unevenly distributed across the globe .
 Information technology now is making fuel-burning infrastructure less important in advanced economies . Information technology is making it less important to fuel infrastructure, experts say .
 The countries of the global South may need to pass through a phase of heavy industrialization, as countries in the North did . Or perhaps they can develop economically along different paths, using new technology .
 While a generation of students in industrialized countries go online, poorer countries still struggle to extend literacy to rural populations . Poor countries struggle to reach out to rural people in rural areas .
 Production in the global South uses relatively little capital and much labor, reflecting an early stage of industrialization . Production in South Asia is a relatively low-capitalized economy . Production is based on relatively low capital and labor .
 To develop economically, poor countries must generate self-sustaining capital accumulation . Poor nations must generate capital accumulation in order to develop economically . Poor countries must also generate self sustaining capital accumulation.
 Agriculture, energy, and textiles are classic export products from the global South . Agriculture and energy are relatively low-capital and labor-intensive . The South is the most populous region in the world .
 In Morocco, textiles are a major source of export revenue . Textiles such as these for sale in Morocco are a big source of revenue .
 The global system of regional class divisions has been seen by some IR scholars as a n 1 1 ___ world-system or a capitalist world economy . The World-System is seen as a world-capitalist world economy or a global class division .
 This view is Marxist in orientation (focusing on economic classes; see Chapter 3) and relies on a global level of analysis . See Chapter 3 below .
 Industrialized regions mostly manufacture goods—work that uses more capital, requires more skilled labor, and pays workers higher wages . Industrialization regions are mostly manufacturing goods, which use more capital .
 Conflicts among great powers, including the two world wars and the Cold War, result from competition among core states over the right to exploit the periphery . Conflicts between great powers are basically result of competition between core states .
 The semiperiphery is an area in which some manufacturing occurs and some capital concentrates, but not to the extent of the most advanced areas in the core . The concentration of capital and the scale of wages each form a continuum .
 Eastern Europe and Russia are commonly considered semiperipheral, as are some of the newly industrializing countries such as Taiwan and Singapore . Eastern Europe, Russia and Taiwan are also semiperiperipherals .
 The semiperiphery acts as a kind of political buffer between the core and periphery . Poor states can aspire to join it instead of aspiring to rebel against domination by the core . Poor countries can aspire instead to join the semipersiphery instead of rebels against domination .
 Over time, membership in the core, the semiperiphery, and the periphery changes somewhat, but the overall global system of class relations remains . Over time membership of the core and semiperiperiperiiphery changes somewhat .
 Areas that once were beyond the reach of Europeans, such as the interior of Latin America, become incorporated as periphery . Areas such as Latin America become incorporated into the periphery of Europe .
 Areas of the periphery can become semiperiphery and even join the core, as North America did . Areas of North America can join up with the core of the world .
 Core states can slip into the semiperiphery if they fall behind in accumulation, as Spain did in the late 16th to early 17th centuries . Core states slip into semiperiperiperiiphery, like Spain in the 16th and 17th century .
 World-system theory provides only general concepts but not firm definitions of what constitutes the core, semiperiphery, and periphery . It's hard to say exactly which states belong to each category, says world-system theorist .
 The actual patterns of world trade support world-system theory to some extent, according to the author of the book World Trade .
 The industrialized West fits the profile of the core, exporting more than it imports in machinery, chemicals, and similar heavy manufactured goods . The West has a long history of exporting heavy manufacturing to the West .
 In the 1990s, all the other regions imported more than they exported in such goods . In the 90s, the U.S. exported more goods than they did in such exports .
 China (and other Asian countries) also became a net exporter of heavy manufactured goods . But in the 2000s, China also became an exporter in heavy manufacturing .
 Asia still still has a niche in exporting light manufacturing including textile production . Asia also still has an export niche in light manufacturing .
 The shift of export-oriented manufacturing from the industrialized countries to Asia reflects globalization . The shift in manufacturing from industrialized countries reflects globalization, experts say .
 The industrialized West’s net imports of energy are an enormously important type of trade and another indication of globalization . The West's net imports are a sign of globalization, the author says . The industrialized world's net energy imports are very important, he says .
 The Middle East specializes in exporting oil, and Russia, Latin America, and Africa all export energy on balance as well . Russia and Latin America export energy .
 These regions’ patterns of specialization must be kept in perspective, however, however . These patterns must be seen in context, however.
 The net exports listed in the table amount to only a small part of the world’s total trade . All regions both import and export all these types of goods, and the net exports are only a fraction of the trade .
 Three regions that engage with the globalizing world economy primarily as rawmaterial exporters are growing more slowly . The three regions are growing slowly as raw material exporters, according to CNN.com .
 The problems of basing economic growth on resource exports have been called the o C resource curse . Having exportable natural resources would seem a big plus for an economy .
 Even in a middle-income country, Chile's main export commodity, copper, in 2003-2006 was a mixed blessing . The quadrupling of the price of the copper in Chile was a huge boon for the country .
 Protesters demanded that the billions of dollars be spent on social services for the poor . President Obama warned against spending what could be a temporary windfall .
 High export earnings strengthened Chile’s currency, making it harder for other industries to export their products . Meanwhile the high export earnings strengthen Chile's currency, weakening other industries' export earnings .
 In late 2008, the global recession caused a crash in copper prices, drastically cutting Chile’s income . The global recession in late 2008 also cut Chile's income by more than a quarter .
 Both the disparities in wealth between the global North and South and the regions’ export specializations have long histories . Imperialism has a long history in the world .
 In Chapter 3 we discussed Marxist theories of imperialism . Marxist theories give a particular kind of explanation for how the North-South gap evolved .
 Imperialism affected the South over the centuries and its aftereffects are still felt around the world . Here we review how imperialism affected the Southerners over the years .
 Imperialism, especially in the 16th to mid-20th centuries, structured world order starkly around dominance principle . Imperialism was structured around the dominance principle, with masters and slaves, conquerors and conquered peoples with their land and labor .
 At the same time, imperialism depends on the identity principle to unite the global North around a common racial identity that defines nonwhite people as an out-group . The identity principle is important for imperialism, but it is also important for the U.S.
 Other civilizations existed in other world regions for centuries before Europeans ever arrived . European civilizations existed before Europeans arrived in Europe .
 These cultural traditions continue to exert an influence on IR, especially when the styles and expecncncn H tations of these cultures come into play in international interactions .
 Africa Kingdom of Ghana Yoruba, Mali, Benin slave trade — Congo Zimbabwe Buganda Ashanti -CD O c European -§ colonialism . “O Middle East Mesopotamia, Egypt, Persia; Jews, Christians; Greeks/Romans; Islam Crusades Arah pm
 Today’s North American population is overwhelmingly descended from immigrants . North America's population is mostly descended from immigrant ancestors .
 In most of the world, European empires incorporated rather than pushed aside indigenous populations . European empires incorporate rather than push aside indigenous people .
 Today’s populations are descended primarily from indigenous inhabitants, not immigrants, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 These populations are more strongly rooted in their own cultural traditions and history than are most Americans . The populations of these populations are therefore more deeply rooted than most Americans are .
 European civilization evolved from roots in the Eastern Mediterranean—Egypt, Mesopotamia , and especially Greece . European civilization has roots in Egypt and Mesopotamia .
 By that time, states were carrying out sophisticated trade relations and warfare with each other in a broad swath of the world from the Mediterranean through India to East Asia . By the time of the 17th century, the world was a point of contention .
 In the “warring states’ period, at about the same time as the Greek city-states, sophisticated states (organized as territorial political units) first used warfare as an instrument of power politics .
 China under the T’ang dynasty was a highly advanced civilization quite independent of Western influence . By aboutd.0, when Europe was in its ‘dark ages’ and Arab civilization in its golden age, China was a very advanced civilization .
 Japan isolated itself from Western influence under the Tokugawa shogunate for several centuries . The Meiji restoration began industrialization and international trade after 1850 .
 In Africa, the great kingdoms flowered after aboutd.00 (as early as d.00 in Ghana) and were highly developed when the European slave traders arrived on the scene around 1500.00 .
 Arab caliphate of aboutd. to 1200 plays a special role in the international relations of the Middle East . The Arab caliphate is a special play of international relations .
 Almost the whole of the region was once united in this empire, which arose and spread with the religion of Islam . The empire was once unified in the Middle East .
 In the 16th to 19th centuries, the Eastern Mediterranean came under the Turkish-based Ottoman Empire . The Empire gave relative autonomy to local cultures if they paid tribute .
 History of empires continued to influence the region in the 20th century . This history of empires continues to influence in the region .
 Pan-Arabism, especially strong in the 1950s and 1960s, saw the region as potentially one nation again, with a single religion, language, and identity . Pan Arabism was strong during the 1960s and 1980s .
 Iraq’s Saddam Hussein during the Gulf War likened himself to the ruler who drove away the Crusaders a thousand years ago . The Crusaders were driven away by Saddam Hussein .
 The strength of Islamic fundamentalism throughout the region today, as well as the emotions attached to the Arab-Israeli conflict, reflect the continuing importance of the Arab caliphate, writes the author of the book .
 Italian city-states of the period rediscovered the rules of interstate power politics, as described by Sun Tzu . City-states also rediscovered rules of state power politics . The Italian city states rediscovered their role in state politics .
 European monarchs put cannons on sailing ships and began to ‘discover’ the world . The cannon cannonies were used to explore the world for the first time . The cannons were put on ships by monarchs in the 1800s .
 The development of the international system, of imperialism, of trade and war, were all greatly accelerated by the Industrial Revolution after about 1750 .
 European imperialism got its start in the 15th century with the development of oceangoing sailing ships in which a small crew could transport a sizable cargo over a long distance . Ultimately the European conquest of the world brought about a single world civilization .
 Europeans gained control of coastal cities and of resupply outposts along major trade routes . Europeans had superior military technology, with superior technology, to take advantage .
 In the 16th century, Spain and Portugal had extensive empires in Central America and Brazil, respectively . Portugal and Spain ruled the region for centuries .
 The imperialists bought slaves in Africa and shipped them to Mexico and Brazil, where they worked in tropical agriculture and in mining silver and gold .
 The wealth produced was exported to Europe, where monarchs used it to buy armies and build states . The wealth was used to build armies and buy armies, and to build states in Europe .
 These empires decimated indigenous populations and cultures, causing immense suffering . The empires were decimated by their conquests, causing suffering .
 Over time, the economies of colonies developed with the creation of basic transportation and communication infrastructure, factories, and so forth . Over time the economies developed .
 The economies were often molded to the needs of the colonizers, not the local populations . But these economies are often molded in the way of the colonialists, not locals .
 Decolonization began with the British colonists in the U.S. who declared independence in 1776 . The U.K. declared independence from the British colony of the United States .
 The new states in North America and Latin America were, of course, still run by the descendants of Europeans, to the disadvantage of Native Americans and African slaves . New states in Latin America and the U.S. were, for the benefit of Europeans .
 India became Britain’s largest and most important colony in the 19th century . India was Britain's most important and largest colony .
 Latecomers such as Germany and Italy frustrated to find few attractive territories remaining in the world when they tried to build overseas empires in the late 19th century .
 Japan began building its own empire, as did the United States, at the end of the 19th century . The U.S. and Japan both began building their own empires in the early 20th century.
 China became weaker and its coastal regions fell under the domination, if not the formal control, of European powers . China's coastal regions became under the control of the European powers.
 Africa c e es Independence er.) rp Slave Lrade Q o LU Angola, |p ortU g U ese) Mozambique Scramb for colon (Brit., Fr. f C Middle East Ottoman Fmnirp British & French mandates A| 9 er
 In Latin America, most of the 19th century was absorbed with wars, border changes, rise and fall of dictatorships and republics . European powers and the U.S. tried to recover debts from Latin America .
 In the wave of decolonization after World War II, indigenous populations in Asia and Africa won independence . Not local colonists (as in the Americas) but indigenous populations won independence in Asia .
 Decolonization continued through the mid-1970s until almost no European colonies remained . Decolonizations continued through mid-70s until no European colony remained .
 Most of the newly independent states have faced tremendous challenges and difficulties in the postcolonial era because of their colonial histories . Most of these countries have faced enormous challenges because of colonial history .
 Most states in the global South have history of having been colonized by Europeans . Colonialism is central to their national identity, foreign policy, and place in world .
 International relations revolves around asymmetrical power relationships with industrialized states . For these states, it's important to maintain power relations with industrialized nations .
 The inhabitants are forced to speak the language of the colonizers, to adopt their cultural practices, and to be educated at schools run under their guidance . They are also forced to adopt cultural practices .
 The inhabitants are told that they are racially inferior to the foreigners . The inhabitants of the town are told they must be racially inferior .
 White Europeans in third world colonies in Africa and Asia were greatly outnumbered by native inhabitants . They maintained power by a combination of force and (more important) psychological conditioning . White Europeans kept power by force and conditioning .
 After generations under colonialism, most native inhabitants either saw white domination as normal or believed that nothing could be done about it . After generations of colonialism, many native inhabitants saw it as normal . Most native inhabitants now see it as a normal thing .
 The whites often lived in a bubble world separated from the lives of the local inhabitants . The whites were often isolated from their lives from the local .
 The best farmland was planted in export crops rather than subsistence crops . Export crops were sometimes overworked and eroded and eroded .
 The infrastructure that was built served the purposes of imperialism rather than the local population . Railroads went straight from mining areas to ports, rather than mining areas .
 The education and skills needed to run the economy were largely limited to whites . The education needed for running the economy is largely white, says the historian .
 It was in the colonial administration’s interest to foster local cycles of capital accumulation . The colonial administration's interest was in fostering local cycles, says historian .
 Much of the infrastructure that exists today in many third world countries was created by colonizers . The infrastructure that today exists today is created by colonialists, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In some cases, colonization combined disparate communities into a cohesive political unit with a common religion, language, and culture, thus creating more opportunities for economic accumulation . colonization created more opportunities to accumulate wealth .
 In some cases, the local political cultures replaced by colonialism were themselves oppressive to the majority of the people . In some of the cases, colonialism was oppressive to many people .
 Areas of White Minority Rule in Africa, 1952-1994 . Formal colonialism was swept away over 40 years ago .
 Through the 1960s, a wave of successful independence movements swept from one country to the next, as people stopped accepting imperialism as normal or inevitable . People stopped accepting imperialism as normal and inevitable .
 Many third world countries gained independence around the same time . The methods by which they did so varied varied .
 Nonviolence broke down in the subsequent Hindu-Muslim civil war, which split India into two states . India mostly with Hindus, and Pakistan mostly with Muslims, split from Muslims .
 Algeria and Vietnam won independence through warfare to oust their European masters . Others won it peacefully by negotiating a transfer of power with weary Europeans .
 France abandoned its colonial claims in Algeria in 1962 only after fighting a bitter guerrilla war . In Algeria, France left colonial claims only after a long guerrilla war in 1962 .
 Some colonial liberation movements fought guerrilla wars based on communist ideology . Some of these guerrilla wars were based on the ideology of the British colonial era .
 The Viet Minh defeated the French occupiers in 1954 and established communist rule in all of Vietnam by 1975 . The French occupied Vietnam in the 1950s and '60s .
 The Soviet Union supported many such movements, and the United States opposed them . The United States supported them .
 In most cases the appeal of liberation movements was the general theme of anticolonialism rather than communist ideology . But in most cases, liberation movements appealed to liberation movements rather than communists .
 Across the various methods and ideologies of liberation movements in the global South, one common feature was reliance on nationalism for strong popular support . A common feature of the movement was the use of nationalism as a source of popular support for the movement .
 Nationalism was only one idea that these movements took from Europe and used to undermine European control . Others included democracy, freedom, progress, and Marxism, among others .
 Leaders of liberation movements often had gone to European universities . They often went to universities in Europe to learn about liberation movements .
 Under European control many states also developed infrastructructures, educational and religious institutions, health care, and military forces based on the European model . Under European influence many states developed infrastructure, educational institutions, and health care .
 Europe’s conquest of the global South thus contributed tools to undo their conquest . Europe‘s conquest’ of the . global South was a key to undoing their conquest, writes Peter Bergen .
 A few states, such as Singapore, have accumulated capital successfully since becoming independent . Singapore is one of a few states to accumulate capital successfully .
 Many African states seem to be going backward, with little new capital accumulating to replace the old colonial infrastructure . But others, including many African states, seem to seem to go backward . Many African nations seem to have been going backward .
 Under colonialism, the training and experience needed to manage the economy was often limited to white Europeans . This left a huge gap in technical and administrative skills after independence .
 As colonies, their economies had been narrowly developed to serve the needs of the European home country . Another problem faced by newly independent states was that as colonies, they had to develop their economies narrowly developed .
 Zambia, El Salvador, Botswana and El Salvador have been mining hotspots for decades . For Zambia it was copper ore; for El Salvador it was coffee; for Botswana it was diamonds . Zambia is the only African nation to produce diamonds .
 Such a narrow export economy would seem well suited to use the state’s comparative advantage to specialize in one niche of the world economy . The state's comparative advantage would seem to be well suited for such an export economy .
 The liberal free trade regime based around the WTO corrected only partially for the North’s superior bargaining position in North-South trade . North-south trade is only partially compensated for the gap between North and South .
 It is not easy to restructure an economy away from the export of a few commodities, says President George W. Bush . Bush says it's not easy for the economy to be restructured away from commodity exports .
 Coffee plantations and copper mines take time and capital to create, and they represent capital accumulation . In any case, coffee plantations and mines cannot just be abandoned .
 In addition, local inhabitants’ skills and training are likely to be concentrated in the existing industries . In addition to the local knowledge, local people’ skill and training will be concentrated .
 Infrastructure such as railroads most likely was set up to serve the export economy . Furthermore, railroads were most likely to be set up in order to help the export industry .
 The newly independent states inherited borders that were drawn in European capitals by foreign officers looking at maps . They inherited borders from European capitals drawn in Europe's capitals .
 Internal rivalries of ethnic groups and regions make it difficult for new states to implement coherent economic plans . As a result, especially in Africa, the internal rivalries have made it very difficult for the new state to implement a coherent economic plan .
 Ethnic conflicts within former colonies led to civil wars, which halted or reversed capital accumulation . In a number of cases, ethnic conflicts within ex-colonies led to a halt or reverse capital accumulation.
 Governments of many postcolonial states did not function very effectively, creating another obstacle to accumulation . Finally, governments of several postcolonial countries did not work very effectively .
 In other cases, governments tried to impose central control and planning on their national economy, based on nationalism, mercantilism, or socialism . In some cases, the centralist government was trying to impose control on the economy .
 In sum, liberation from colonial control did not change underlying economic realities . In fact, liberation of colonial control didn't change underlying realities .
 Main trading partners of newly independent countries were usually their former colonial masters . The main trading partners for newly independent nations were usually former colonial powers .
 The administrative units and territorial borders were those created by Europeans . The European borders were created in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The state continued to occupy the same peripheral position in the world-system after independence as it had before . The state was still a peripheral position after independence .
 In some cases it continued to rely on its former colonizer for security . And in some cases, it still relied on the help of the former colonizers .
 Colonial times shaped the borders and infrastructure in the region . Despite the independence of Angola and Namibia, colonial times still shaped the region's borders .
 This concept also covers the relationship of the global South with the United States, which was not a formal colonizer . The U.S. did not colonize the South, but colonized the entire region . This concept is also covered by the concept of the relationship between the U.
 Latin American relations of Latin American states have been independent for almost two centuries . And it covers the North-South international relations of the continent's nations .
 Marxist IR scholars have developed dependency theory to explain the lack of accumulation in the third world . Dependency theory has been developed by IR scholars to explain lack of accumulated wealth .
 Scholars define dependency as a situation in which accumulation of capital cannot sustain itself internally . This is a situation that cannot be sustained by capital accumulation, scholars say .
 A dependent country must borrow capital to produce goods; its debt payments then reduce the accumulation of surplus . A dependent nation borrows capital to make it more secure in the long run of its surplus . The debt payments reduce the production of surplus in a dependent country .
 The development (or lack of development) of a third world state depends on its local conditions and history, though it is affected by the same global conditions as other countries located in the periphery . The development of third world states depends on their local conditions .
 One historically important configuration of dependency is the enclave economy . Foreign capital is invested in a third world country to extract a particular raw material in a particular place .
 The cycle of capital accumulation is primed by foreign capital, fueled by local resources, and completes itself with the sale of products on foreign markets . The cycle is primed and fueled by foreign investment and local resources . It is also fueled by the local resources and sells its products in foreign markets,
 Angola’s Cabinda province, located up the coast from the rest of the country, is a classic enclave economy . Cabinda is located in Cabinda Province, a coastal province that is located off the coast of Angola's coast .
 Chevron pumps oil from a large field of offshore wells in Angola . The money goes to Angolan government officials, who spend some on weapons and pocket large sums in flagrant acts of corruption .
 The people of Cabinda, aside from a tiny number who work for Chevron, live in poverty with crumbling infrastructure, few government services, few jobs and few jobs .
 Inside the Chevron compound, U.S. workers drive on paved roads, eat American food, and enjoy an 18-hole golf course . Inside the compound, however, United States workers drive .
 They spend 28 days there, working 12-hour days, then fly back to the U.S. for 28 days of rest . They then fly home to rest in the United States .
 Chevron reportedly surrounded with land mines . Americans rarely leave the fenced compound, which Chevron reportedly surrounds with mines . Traveling the 12 miles to the airport by helicopter .
 European colonialism promoted values and norms implying that the colonizer's culture was superior to the indigenous culture . European colonialism worldwide promoted values that suggested that the colonialist's culture is superior to that of the indigenous .
 Girl displaced by violence in Kenya, a former British colony, plays with a light-skinned doll, 2008 .
 A different historical pattern is that of nationally controlled production, in which a local capitalist class controls a cycle of accumulation based on producing export products . A different history pattern is . that of . national controlled production . in which the local capitalists control a cycle . of accumulation . based on . producing
 The profits accrue to the local capitalists, building up a powerful class of rich owners within the country . The cycle still depends on foreign markets, but the profits are local .
 They are not unpatriotic, but their interests tend to converge with those of foreign capitalists . "They're not unPatriotic. They’s interests converge with their foreign capitalists," says President Obama .
 Workers want to keep local wages as low as possible, to produce cheap goods for consumers in rich countries . For instance, they want local wages to be low enough to produce cheaper goods .
 The local capitalists, in alliance with political authorities, enforce a system of domination that ultimately serves the foreign capitalists . The system is in place of the local capitalists in order to protect their interests, the author says .
 After World War II, a third form of dependency became more common—penetration of national economies by MNCs . After the war, the world's economies were more dependent on the MNC . The U.S. has a history of dependency on the economy .
 The capital is provided externally (as with enclaves), but production is for local markets . The capital in the enclaves is provided outside of the capital .
 The cycle of accumulation depends on local labor and local markets, but because MNCs provide the foreign capital, they take out much of the surplus as profit . The cycle is dependent on foreign capital and local labor .
 According to dependency theory, the particular constellation of forces within a country determines which coalitions form among the state, the military, big landowners, local capitalists, foreign capitalists, and foreign governments . The state, military, local . capitalists and foreign . governments, foreign governments, and middle classes
 On the other side, peasants, workers, and sometimes students and the church form alliances to work for more equal distribution of income, human and political rights, and local control of the economy .
 These class alliances and the resulting social relationships are not determined by any general rule but by concrete conditions and historical developments in each country . The social structure of class alliances is not a general rule, it is said .
 Marxist theory pays special attention to class struggle as a source of social change . Like other Marxist theories, dependency theory focuses on class struggle in order to change social systems .
 Some people think that under conditions of dependency, economic development is almost impossible . Economic development can't be achieved under such conditions, they say . Some people believe that under these conditions it is impossible to develop .
 Others think that development is possible under dependency, despite certain difficulties . Some think that dependency is possible despite difficulties .
 Poverty and lack of access to basic human needs are prime causes of revolutions, especially when poor people see others living much better . Poverty is a prime cause of revolutions .
 Most revolutionary movements espouse egalitarian ideals—a more equal distribution of wealth and power . Most revolutionary movement espouses egalitarian ideals . This is not the case in the U.S.
 During the Cold War years, the classic revolutionary movement was a communist insurgency based in the countryside . During the 1950s and '60s, the communist insurgency was based in rural areas .
 Usually “ United States imperialism” or another such foreign presence was viewed as a friend of the state and an enemy of the revolution . Usually U.S. imperialism’s presence was seen as a good friend of state and enemy of revolution .
 Sometimes the United States government gave direct military aid to governments facing such revolutionary movements . Sometimes the U.S. government provided direct military assistance to governments .
 In a number of countries, U.S. military advisors and even combat troops were sent to help put down the revolutions and keep communists from taking power . In a few countries, the United States was involved in the revolutions .
 For its part, the Soviet Union often armed and helped train the revolutionaries . The Soviet Union helped train and armed the revolutionaries in the early years .
 Domestic politics of poor countries became intertwined with great power politics in the context of the North-South gap . Thus, domestic politics and power politics have become intertwined .
 Many governments and revolutions had little to do with global communism, capitalism, or imperialism . In reality, many of these governments and revolutionists were not involved in global communism or capitalism .
 Local power struggles were local power struggles, sometimes between the haves and the have-nots . Great powers were drawn into great powers into which great powers are drawn .
 By the early 1990s, these communist revolutions seemed to have played themselves out—winning in some places, losing in others, and coming to a stalemate in a few countries . The revolution in some countries seemed to be playing itself out, but not all of them .
 The end of the Cold War removed superpower support from both sides . The collapse of the Soviet Union and the adoption of capitalist-oriented economic reforms in China undercut the ideological appeal of communist revolutions .
 Several Marxist revolutionary movements linger, however, including in Colombia, Peru, and Peru . Theda. 3 Skocpol, Theda, is the name of a Polish town where the city is located .
 In Nepal, Maoist rebels fought for a decade until a 2006 peace agreement, then won elections and became the country’s governing party . Maoists fought for the country's government for more than a decade before peace agreement .
 In foreign policy, revolutionary governments often start out planning radically different relationships with neighbors and great powers . Revolutionary governments often plan radically different approaches to neighbors and powers .
 The pattern of international alliances often shifts after revolutions, as when a Cold War client of one superpower shifted to the other after a change of government .
 The new government usually discovers that, once it holds power, it has p, the same interest as other states in jfSSi j Sf.Mj promoting national sovereignty .
 The rules of the international system now work for the revolutionaries instead of against them, once they control a state . The rules are now working for the revolutionists once they have control of a state, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 Their state also has the same geographical location tij M as before, the same historical conflicts H j l * with its neighbors, and the same ethnic ties .
 Mandela had unusual success in making from a revolutionary government as the difficult transition from revolutionary to state leader, and then leaving office peacefully . So it is not unusual over time to South Africa's former president, Nelson Mandela, to find similar foreign policies .
 He had the advantage of coming to power nonviolently (relatively speaking), enjoying tremendous world respect, and leading a country that is rules of international relations have tended to triumph over revolutionary challenges .
 North-South relations show how difficult it has become to separate political economy from international security . North-south relations show that it is difficult to separate economic and security relations .
 The original political relations contained in European imperialism led to economic conditions in the South . This led to political movements for independence, and later to revolutions . The South's population growth, urbanization, and concentrations of wealth led to independence movements .
 The various aspects of the NorthSouth gap include hunger, refugees, and the structure of commodity exports . The North-South gap contains both economic and political-military aspects .
 Marxists emphasize that the economic realities of accumulation lie beneath all the political struggles related to global North-South relations . Marxists say the economic reality of accumulation or the lack of accumulation lies beneath all political struggles .
 Marxists’ strategies—from armed revolutions to self-reliance to state ownership— have not been successful at changing those realities . Marxists have not succeeded at changing that reality, says Julian Zelizer .
 Chapter 13 turns in depth to the question of how economies in the South can develop the accumulation process and what role the North can play in that process .
 About a billion live in extreme poverty, without access to adequate food, water, and other necessities . About a third of the world's poorest live without basic necessities, including water .
 Third world states have had mixed success in meeting their populations’ basic needs . Third world countries have had some success in providing basic food and shelter .
 The most important cause is displacement of subsistence farmers from their land . War, population pressures, and conversion of agricultural land into plantations growing export crops .
 Huge slums have grown in the cities as poor people arrive and cannot find jobs . Slums are growing in cities across the world, with poor people unable to find work .
 International agencies based in the North have started taking women’s contributions into account in analyzing economic development in the South . Women's contributions to economic development are taken into account .
 War and repression in the South have generated millions of refugees seeking safe haven . Millions of refugees seek safe haven in the U.S. South .
 Under international law and norms, states are generally supposed to accept refugees but not migrants . States do not have to accept migrants, however, under international law .
 Almost all the wars of the past 50 years have been fought in the global South . Almost all of the wars in the world's most recent wars have been won by the global south .
 Capitalism emphasizes overall growth with considerable concentration of wealth . Socialism emphasizes a fair distribution of wealth. Capitalism emphasizes growth with a large share of wealth, not socialism .
 State ownership has not been very successful in accumulating wealth . However, state ownership has failed to accumulate wealth in recent years .
 Many states have been selling off state-owned enterprises, especially in Russia and Eastern Europe . State-owned companies have been sold off in recent years .
 In this theory, capitalists in the North exploit the South economically and use the wealth thus generated to buy off workers in the South . The North and the South exploit each other economically and buy off each other in exchange for the South's workers .
 Revolutions thus occur in the South and are ultimately directed against the North . Revolutions are often directed towards the North, resulting in a Southward revolution .
 Today’s North-South gap traces its roots to the past colonization of the southern world regions by Europe .
 This colonization occurred at different times in different parts of the world, as did decolonization . Decolonization is a form of colonization that occurred in different times, as well as decolonizing .
 A wave of successful independence movements after World War II in Asia and Africa . These culminated in a wave of success in Asian and African countries .
 Over time, however, old national interests and strategies tend to reappear . "Old national interests" tend to be reappear in the United States .
 The zones of the world economy as described by world-system theorists treat the North as a core and the South as largely a periphery . The zones include the North, South and the North .
 In North and South America, independence from colonialism from colonialism was won by descendants of the colonists themselves .
 In Asia and Africa, it was won mainly by local populations with a long history of their own . In Africa and Asia, the election was won by local people .
 If you lived in an extremely poor slum in the global South and had no money or job, you retained all the knowledge you now have, it's possible to do so much .
 Currently incomes in the global North are five times as high, per person, as in a global South . Income in the North is five times higher than per person in the world .
 The movement of people across borders is one of the important issues that blends domestic politics and international relations . Movements across borders blend domestic politics with international relations, argues the author .
 A variety of international factors shape the incentives of individuals to migrate, including global economic conditions, political conditions in neighboring states, and the status of military conflicts within and between states .
 Immigration policy must balance empathy for those abroad with responsibility for those already here . Immigration policy should balance empathy with those already in the U.S. and responsibility for others .
 Immigration policy is always a matter of intense debate . War refugees in Africa, economic immigrants in Europe, or victims of natural disasters in Latin America . The debate is over war refugees and economic immigrants .
 The question of immigration policy has become one of extremely divided opinions in the U.S. The debate has divided opinions that cross traditional ideological and political party lines .
 Illegal immigrants often do not pay income taxes, they are a large untapped source of tax revenue . Illegal immigrants are an untapped tax revenue in the United States .
 Many of these immigrants use social services, such as education, so allowing them to earn citizenship will allow them to ""pay"" for these services through taxes . Many of the immigrants use education and social services such as health care .
 Workers who earn money in the U.S. often send significant portions of it back to their home countries . Workers in the United States often send substantial portions of their earnings .
 This money helps stabilize home countries economically, providing opportunities for family members and improving their quality of life . This money is used to stabilize countries economically and stabilize their economies .
 Some industries (agriculture and construction) would experience labor shortages, driving up prices for all Americans . Without the presence of these working immigrants, some industries would have labor shortages . The cost of living in the U.S. would be higher than in other countries .
 There is already a legal path to citizenship that has been taken by millions of Americans . The path is already taken by many of those who want to become a citizen .
 It would be unfair to reward those who illegally entered the country after so many Americans had to undergo a long, arduous process to earn their rights .
 During economic downturns, layoffs increase and jobs are harder to come by . During the recession, layoffs are more likely to occur in the U.S.
 This competition is especially damaging to Americans of lower socioeconomic status, who are already threatened in other ways by the economic downturn . Americans of low socioeconomic status are especially threatened by the recession .
 Increases in immigration resulting from the policy would create security risks, the government says . The U.S. government says it will take up to 60 per cent of the vote on immigration in 2015 .
 If a path to citizenship encourages surges in future immigration, it will be difficult to keep U.S. borders secure, leading to security risks . The U.N. should be able to keep its borders secure .
 Any factor increasing the large numbers of individuals passing across state borders can threaten a state's security . In this age of global terrorism, any factor increasing numbers of people passing across borders is a security risk .
 Givens, Terri E. Freeman, Gary P Freeman, and David L Leal, eds. eds . The book is published in "Givens"
 Chapter 12 discussed the situation in the global South and how it came to be . Chapter 12 takes up the question of what to do about it . Watch the video below .
 Economic development refers to the combined processes of capital accumulation, rising per capita incomes (with consequent falling birthrates) and increasing skills in the population . Economic development is defined as the development of a society and economy .
 The concept of development has a subjective side that cannot be measured statistically . The judgment of whether a certain pattern of wealth creation and distribution is good for a state and its people can be made by a state .
 Per capita GDP is the amount of economic activity per person per person . GDP is a measure of economic development in the United States. GDP is per capita GDP . GDP per person is based on economic activity .
 By this measure, we can trace the successes and failures of the South as a whole and, more important, its regions and countries . The South has a history of success and failure, and the South has its own problems .
 The latter is more important because it contains the seeds of possible lessons and strategies that could build on the South’s successes in the future . The South has a long history of success in the South .
 Per capita GDP decreased in the 1980s in Latin America, Africa, and the Middle East . Only China grew robustly in the 80s, with only China growing robustly .
 In the 1990s, real economic growth returned across much of the South—about 5-6 percent annual growth for the South as a whole, and even higher for China, compared to 2-3 percent in the global North . China's economic growth is higher than the North's,
 China stood out among the regions of the South as making rapid progress toward economic development . China is one of the fastest-growing economies in the South .
 China and South Asia together contain the majority of the population in the global South, this development is very important . China and the South Asia have the most of the world's population in South Asia .
 This new growth shows that it is possible to rise out of poverty to relative prosperity, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The 2008-2009 global economic crisis threatened the developing world . Most states in the global South have emerged more quickly than their wealthy counterparts in the North .
 NICs quickly resumed growth and have developed much further and faster than most of the global South . NICs have developed far faster than any other region in the world . But NICs are still struggling to cope with a slowing economy .
 Each succeeded in developing particular sectors and industries that were competitive on the world markets .
 These sectors and industries can create enough capital accumulation within the country to raise income levels among the small elite but across the population more broadly .
 Scholars do not know whether the NICs are just the lucky few that have moved from the periphery to the semiperiphery of the world-system . Scholars say success can eventually be replicated throughout the world .
 Taiwan also used a strong state industrial policy, specializing in the electronics and computer industries . Taiwan also focused on the electronics industry and other light manufacturing .
 Hong Kong --controlled by China since 1997 -- has world-competitive electronics and other light industries . Its greatest strengths are in banking and trade, but its greatest strength is in banking .
 Singapore is a trading city located at the tip of the Malaysian peninsula . The city is convenient to the South China Sea, the Indian Ocean, and Australia .
 For different reasons, each of these states holds a somewhat unusual political status in the international system . Each state has a somewhat unique political status .
 South Korea and Taiwan were hot spots of international conflict that came under the U.S. security umbrella during the Cold War . The two countries served under the United States security umbrella .
 Both were authoritarian states intolerant of dissent that later became democratic . Both were militarized, authoritarian states that later become democratic .
 U.S. spending in East Asia during the Cold War benefited South Korea and Taiwan . United States spent much of its Cold War effort to counter the threat of North Korea .
 City-states are more city-states than nation-states, and their cities are trading ports and financial centers . They are more of a city-state than a nation state .
 Hong Kong and Singapore were not as repressive or as militarized as South Korea and Taiwan during the Cold War era . They were not democracies either . Hong Kong was not a democracy in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Hong Kong was ruled by a British governor (and since 1997 by the government in Beijing), and Singapore by a dominant individual . Singapore has been ruled by dominant individuals since the 1960s .
 China ended doubts that the successes of the NICs could be replicated elsewhere and on a larger scale, China ended those doubts .
 China has 1. billion people, and this size alone makes China’s efforts to generate self-sustaining accumulation worthy of study . China's 1.2 billion people are estimated to be the world's largest economic growth potential .
 China has had the world’s fastest-growing economies over the past two decades . But China has also had the most rapid growth in the past 20 years .
 China's economic policy emphasized national self-sufficiency and communist ideology . The Cultural Revolution of the late 1960s was the era of Chairman Mao Zedong . China's economy was heavily influenced by the Cultural Revolution .
 The state controlled all economic activity through central planning and state ownership . The state owned all of the country's economic activity .
 After Mao died in 1976, China under Deng Xiaoping instituted economic reforms . The southern coastal provinces became free economic zones open to foreign investment and run on capitalist principles . After Mao's death, China's southern provinces were transformed into free zones .
 Peasants worked their own fields, instead of collective farms, and got rich if they did well . Peasant farmers worked themselves, not collective farms . Peasant farmers got rich by working their fields and getting their own crops .
 Foreign investment flooded into southern China, taking advantage of its location, cheap labor, and relative political stability . Foreign investment took advantage of southern China's location and cheap labor .
 Other areas of China gradually opened up to capitalist principles as well as other areas . China is gradually opening up to capitalism .
 State required more industries to turn a profit and gave more initiative to managers to run their own companies and spend the profits .
 China has re-created some of the features of capitalism that Mao’s revolutionaries had overturned . However, China has also re-created some of those features of the revolution that Mao's revolutionaries overturned .
 New class disparities emerged, with rich entrepreneurs driving fancy imported cars while poor workers found themselves unemployed . Rich entrepreneurs drove fancy cars and poor workers were unemployed .
 Unprofitable state-owned industries laid off 10 million workers in the 1990s . More than 10 million people were laid off each year in the '90s .
 Most frustrating for ordinary Chinese is widespread official corruption accompanying the get-rich atmosphere . Official corruption is widespread in China, but it is not uncommon for ordinary people .
 Even after a 1997 financial crisis, their growth has made them prosperous by the standards of the global South . Even after the setback of a 1997 economic crisis, they have been prosperous .
 No single, simple lesson applicable to other states emerges from the NICs, says CNN.com.com . The NICs are the state's largest NICs .
 Authorities used the military to violently suppress the protests, killing hundreds of people . Hundreds of people were killed in the crackdown . The government is determined to maintain tight political control while economic reform proceeded .
 China weathered the 1997 Asian financial crisis despite widespread problems with bad bank loans, money-losing state industries, and corruption . China then weathered its widespread problems, including bad loans, corruption .
 MNCs’ foreign investments primed rapid growth in Chinese exports to $250 billion in 2000 and over $2 trillion in 2012 . China’s foreign investments have grown to $1 trillion in value .
 In the coming years, it is poised to join the United States, Japan, and Germany as a major automobile exporter . The U.S. and Germany are also major exporters .
 In 2012, a new generation of Chinese leaders took charge, led by President Xi Jinping . New generation of leaders have taken charge of China since 2012 .
 China sustained its rapid economic growth year after year, even after the 2008 global economic downturn hurt Chinese exports, with the help of large government infrastructure expenditures . China's rapid growth has been fueled by large government spending on infrastructure .
 Growing inequality and widespread corruption threatened the legitimacy of the Communist party . Growing inequality threatened the party's legitimacy, but growing inequality and corruption threatened it .
 Despite efforts to clamp down on political expression, China’s version of Twitter is wildly popular microblogging sites . China's version of the social media site is China's equivalent of Twitter .
 In rural villages, peasants openly protested land seizures, taxes, pollution, and corruption by local officials . Protesters openly protested against land seizures and taxes .
 President Xi declared the battle against corruption a top priority, while continuing to discourage protests and writings that target party officials engaging in corrupt practices . President Xi continues to discourage anti-corruption protests .
 With China now in the WTO and its citizens wired to the Internet, the economy gains great advantages, but citizens can also bypass government-controlled information . China's citizens are also able to bypass the government's information control .
 Some observers expect economic integration to inexorably open up China’s political system and lead to democratization . Others think that as long as Chinese leaders deliver economic growth, the population will have little appetite .
 China’s economic success has given it both more prestige in the international system and a more global perspective on international relations . China's economic success gives it more prestige and a global perspective .
 In 2004-2006, President Hu and other Chinese leaders made high-profile visits to resourcerich areas of the global South, notably Africa and Latin America, making large-scale deals for minerals and energy .
 In 2009, the large Western economies announced that they would not be exempt from the U.S. tax system .
 China's rapid economic growth has raised incomes dramatically for a growing middle class . many Chinese citizens expressed their views not only in strikes and CAR CULTURE .
 These successes followed China's opening to the world economy and adoption of market-oriented reforms . China's success followed the opening of the world market to the economy .
 China must develop domestic market and consumer spending rather than relying so heavily on exports to fuel growth . However, as exports slow down in a global recession, China needs to develop its domestic market . China must rely heavily on domestic spending to fuel economic growth .
 700,000 Chinese consumers mob the Shanghai auto show in 2011, hoping to get in on China's growing infatuation with that ultimate big-ticket consumer item .
 For years it appeared that China’s huge population would supply limitless cheap labor to foreign investors making goods in China . China's huge population was supposed to supply cheap labor .
 China's continuing growth is the leading example of success of economic development in the global South . China's continued growth is an example of the success of the global south, says China's expert .
 MNCs have begun to move some light manufacturing to other Asian countries with even cheaper labor, such as Vietnam . The move is due to be part of a trend in light manufacturing .
 China’s economic miracle did hit a bump in the 2008-2009 economic crisis . China's economic miracle was hit by the economic crisis of the late 1990s .
 China’s investments in the United States, made with the trade surpluses China had accumulated over the years, lost a substantial fraction of their value in the financial meltdown .
 Chinese leaders announced a major stimulus package aimed at spurring domestic consumption in China . But this faced problems in the short term, including the cultural problem of getting people with a history of poverty to spend instead of saving .
 Despite these dangers and risks, China’s economy has forged ahead out of the economic crisis . Yet, despite these dangers, China's economy is forging ahead ahead of the crisis .
 Chinese exports quickly returned to pre-recession levels after a drop in 2009 and kept growing . For example, Chinese exports returned quickly after the recession .
 It is unclear what lessons China’s economic success over the past decade holds for the rest of the global South . China's economic success has not been seen as a model for the South .
 These topics are being debated vigorously as China navigates its new era of rising prosperity and rising expectations . Other poor states look to China’s experience for lessons .
 India, like China, deserves special attention because of its size and recent robust growth . India is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world .
 India’s average annual growth rate exceeded 7 percent between 1996 and 2012 . From 1996 to 2012, India's growth rate has exceeded 7 per cent .
 India's decade of success still does not compare to China's nearly three decades . India’s GDP per person is still not much more than half of China’�s . India's GDP per capita is still less than half the China's .
 India's success has started it toward what could be a repetition of China’s rise out of poverty . But India has started its own way toward a repeat of China's rise from poverty .
 India’s economy was for decades based loosely on socialism and state control of large industries . The economy is now based on private capitalism in agriculture and consumer goods . India's economy is based on agriculture, consumer goods and agriculture .
 The state subsidizes basic goods and gives special treatment to farmers . The state gives farmers subsidies and gives them special treatment .
 India has a democratic government, but a fractious one, with various autonomy movements and ethnic conflicts . Unlike China, India's democratic government is fractious and democratic .
 India’s government has suffered from corruption, although this has improved in recent years . The government has been plagued by corruption, but it has improved recently .
 India has grown rapidly in recent years, using its large, well-educated, Englishspeaking population to generate export revenues in the service sector . Software companies, call centers serving U.S. customers, and professional services in such areas as accounting, architecture, engineering, and medicine .
 Radiologist in Bangalore, India, reads body scans from a U.S. hospital sent via the Internet . He discusses the results by phone with the patient's doctor in Connecticut, Connecticut, 2004 .
 12 years after a fertilizer plant was built, it employed 3,000 workers but had not produced any fertilizer . 12 years later, the plant was still producing no fertilizer . The plant is located in the heart of Texas, Texas .
 In the 1990s, China received many times the foreign investment that India did . China received much more foreign investment than India did in the 90s .
 The 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union—India’s major trading partner—threw India into a severe economic crisis that nearly caused it to default on its international debts . India nearly defaulted on international debts in 1991 .
 India saw robust economic growth return in the late 1990s . Reforms were imperfectly carried out, but the country saw robust growth in the 1990s.
 Recent economic growth comes despite continuing corruption and bureaucracy in India’s government . Indians joke that the economy grows at night while the government is asleep . India jokes that the country's economy grows during the night while government sleeps .
 In the era of globalization, India’s niche in the globalized world economy is in the service and information sectors . In the past decade, India has seen growth in the information and service sectors .
 South Korea specialized in exporting heavy manufactured goods and China in light manufactured goods . India specializes in exporting information products such as software and telephone call center services . South Korea is exporting heavy and light manufacturing goods .
 Each country uses its labor force to add value to products that are exported worldwide, especially to the large American market . Each country's labor force adds value to its exports .
 India also uses its location to advantage by working during the nighttime hours in North America . The country is located in the United States and Canada .
 Software companies hand off projects daily for the India shift to work on overnight . American hospitals can send medical notes for overnight transcription . Software companies can also hand off medical notes to American hospitals .
 MNCs widely use India’s labor force to answer phone calls from around the world, such as technical support calls . The country's labor force is used to answer calls for the company's products from abroad .
 India's future success or failure will bear strongly on several competing theories about economic development . India’s future success will bear strong on competing theories of economic development, says Ravi Agrawal .
 In particular, China has had success under a harsh, centralized political system . India has a free-wheeling democracy .
 If India continues to succeed, authoritarian government is not a precondition . But clearly authoritarian government isn't a pre-condition for India's success, it says .
 In both cases, China was able to make dramatic improvements very quickly because of its authoritarian government . China's authoritarian government extended control of every village and every bedroom .
 In the 1950s, China ordered mass campaigns in which citizens exterminated pests and set up sanitation facilities . China has a history of mass campaigns to exterminate pests and clean the country .
 In the 1960s China’s rates of epidemic diseases such as cholera and plague dropped, and so did the infant mortality rate . As a result, in China, rates of epidemics and infant mortality rates also dropped .
 In the 1970s, with its heavy-handed one-child policy, China forced down the fertility rate . In the 1980s, China's one-year-old policy forced down its fertility rate.
 China relied on the dominance principle to force individuals to take actions that were in society’s interest . The dominance principle was used to make individuals take actions in society's interest .
 Its successes in improving public health and lowering fertility provided a foundation for China’s subsequent economic success, although obviously at a cost to individual freedom . China's success in improving health and fertility provided the foundation for its economic success .
 India, by contrast, has relied more on the identity principle, getting people to change their preferences and want to have fewer children and help improve public health .
 Without a dictatorship to force compliance, India’s progress has been slower . The country's progress has also been slower without a dictatorship, experts say .
 Over time India is moving toward the same results as China, albeit decades later, but not giving up its own national identity as a democracy . However, over time India has moved to the same result as China's .
 Fertility Rate *Replacement level, steady-state population . Other sizable developing countries have pursued various development strategies, with mixed successes and failures .
 The five highest-income countries come from three of the four regions and vary from zero to 9 percent growth rate . The five countries have the highest growth rates in the world .
 The fastest-growing countries at 7-9 percent are at the lower end of the income scale . The fastest growth is at the lowest-end of the country's economic growth .
 China is developing faster than the other 15 large countries of the global South, although all posted solid growth, 5-9 percent for most . China is the fastest-growing country in the South .
 The five regions of the global South can be mapped onto single contiguous zones on this figure . This shows that whole regions are moving together in distinct patterns . The fact that the five regions have been mapped onto a single contiguous zone on the figure shows that the region is moving together .
 In Asia, three of the first to try to follow the NICs were Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand . The NICs are based in Jakarta, Indonesia and Malaysia .
 It fell short of that goal, but made some progress in attracting foreign investment . The country's economy has been hit hard by the recession .
 Indonesia has had to import oil since 2004 because of decreasing production of oil . Indonesia has been forced to import crude since 2004 due to decreasing production .
 After navigating the 1997 crisis smoothly, the Philippines got onto a growth curve, currently about 5 percent a year, that is positive but not fast enough to address poverty in the country . The country's growth curve is about 5% a year but not enough to tackle poverty .
 Malaysia also set out to follow closely in the footsteps of the tigers . Malaysia is aiming to become one of the world's most successful tigers .
 Malaysia focused its export industry heavily on electronics . Although it exports oil and gas, Malaysia has a strong electronics industry . Malaysia is the world's largest exporter of crude oil .
 It was hit hard by the information sector dot-com crash of 2001-2002, but came back to grow at 5-7 percent per year in 2004-2008 . The information sector grew at a rate of about 7 percent a year in the late 2000s .
 Malaysia has successfully risen to a middle-income level . With income per person of $15,000, Malaysia has achieved a middle income level . Malaysia has a population of 6,000 people .
 It received enormous foreign investment in the 1980s and created a sizable middle class . The country is now home to a large middle class of its own .
 Growth masked serious problems revealed in 1997 financial crisis . But its growth masked serious financial problems in 1997 .
 Thailand recovered and posted strong growth, despite continuing problems with bad loans . Thailand's economy has been hit hard by a series of bad loans in the past decade .
 Coup in 2006, and political instability, have made Thailand less attractive for foreign investment . But a coup in 2006 has made Thailand somewhat less attractive to foreign investors .
 These factors held back the economic development of the would-be NICs of Southeast Asia .
 Vietnam is a communist state following a reform model modeled on China’s . Vietnam is the most populous communist state in the world, following a model of reform . Vietnam's reform model is modeled on that of China's .
 Vietnam has few worries about terrorism and was largely unaffected by the 2008 economic crisis . Like China, Vietnam has little worries about terror and has few economic worries .
 This period of fast growth follows liberalization of the economy, which had been held back by decades of devastating war and centralized communist rule .
 Vietnam did a good job at meeting basic human needs at very low average income levels . Vietnam has reduced extreme poverty despite remaining a poor country . As with China, Vietnam has cut extreme poverty in Vietnam .
 The large Asian states of Bangladesh and Pakistan are more deeply mired in poverty and have dimmer prospects for capital accumulation in the coming years . Bangladesh is the most deeply-mired state of poverty in the world . Pakistan and Bangladesh are the more deeply- mired states of poverty and
 At the end of 2008, Bangladesh emerged from emergency rule with fair elections . The elections brought new hopes for development and the curtailing of corruption .
 Pakistan, by contrast, continued to struggle with instability in areas bordering Afghanistan . Pakistan is still struggling to find stability in the region .
 Pakistan’s prospects hinged on finding political stability in 2013 . The government and judiciary in open conflict in 2013 in Pakistan . Pakistan's prospects in 2013 hinging on finding stability .
 Latin America's major countries start from higher income levels but lower growth rates than in China and South Asia . In Latin America, the major countries have higher growth rates but lower income levels than China and Asia .
 Brazil built up a sizable internal market by concentrating income in a growing middle and upper class . Brazil's internal market has been a growing source of income in the growing middle class .
 Its cities are ringed with huge slums filled with desperately poor people . However, its cities are still ringed by huge slum areas filled with people .
 A decade ago, the election of a leftist president, Lula da Silva, raised fears that spending on social programs would undermine Brazil's financial position . Instead he reined in spending, brought down inflation, and stabilized Brazil’s financial position—proving that in Brazil, as
 Brazil enjoyed a rare combination of high growth, democracy, and shrinking inequality in 2012 . By 2012, Brazil had a model for others to emulate . Brazil's economy is now the world's fastest growing economy .
 Brazil hopes its selection to host the 2014 soccer World Cup and 2016 Olympic games will increase its economic and political prestige . Brazil will host the 2016 Olympic Games and the 2014 World Cup .
 Mexico has pockets of deep poverty and a sizable foreign debt but, unlike Brazil, has oil to export . Like Brazil, Mexico has deep poverty, but has plenty of opportunities to export its oil .
 Mexico has also enjoyed relative political stability, though corruption is a problem . Mexico has enjoyed relative stability, but corruption is still a problem in the country .
 A reformist president was elected in 2000, though the long-standing ruling party regained power in 2012 . The long-time ruling party was elected to power again in 2012, but has since regained power .
 Drug-related violence has claimed 60,000 lives and undercuts political and economic stability . However, it has also undermined political, economic stability in the country .
 In Africa, Nigeria is the largest country and, with oil to export, should be one of the less impoverished . Nigeria is one of Africa's largest and should be able to export its oil .
 At $2,600 per person, the country's income is quite low, and corruption takes a toll on the economy . Corruption takes a steady toll on corruption, but corruption is still a problem .
 Oil provides 95 percent of export earnings and pays two-thirds of the government’s budget . Oil provides three-quarters of the country's export earnings .
 After years of military dictatorship, elections were held in 1999 . Nigeria enjoyed more political stability in the new century . A cease-fire with armed rebels in the oil-rich south was followed by an upsurge of Islamist terrorist bombings .
 Nigeria reached an agreement with the IMF in 2000, but broke it in 2002 after failing to meet targets . Nigeria reached the agreement in 2000 but broke the deal in 2002 . Nigeria's economy has been hit hard by corruption since then .
 Ethiopia and Democratic Congo are growing fast but starting from great poverty . Elsewhere in Africa, Ethiopia, Democratic Congo and Ethiopia are also growing fast, but growing from poverty .
 Democratic Congo was poised to recover from decades of war, but persistent violence threatens progress . Violence threatens progress in the country's long-suffering capital .
 A few African countries, such as Kenya and Mauritius, are emerging as model information-sector economies with bright prospects .
 In the Middle East, Israel has developed economically in an unusual manner . In the past, Israel's economy has been a model for the Arab world .
 German reparations, U.S. foreign aid, and contributions from Zionists in foreign countries . It received sustained infusions of outside capital from several sources .
 This outside assistance was particular to the history of German genocide against Jews during World War II and the efforts of Jews worldwide to help build a Jewish state afterward .
 Few if any developing countries could hope to receive such outside assistance (relative to Israel’s small 5 MacLeod, Dag. MacLeod and others) could .
 The small countries with large oil exports have done well economically . Small countries such as iaudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Bahrain and the United Arab mirates have thrived economically .
 Oil-rich nations are in a pecial class, but they are not one that others withut oil can follow . But they're in a special class; their experience will not be one of the best examples .
 Iran began to grow robustly and to tract foreign investment after the Iran-Iraq War ended in 988 . Iran began growing robustly after the war and began to ttract foreign trade after 988.
 Islamic radicalism creates frictions with Western owers and makes investors wary . In ddition, Islamic radicalists create frictions and make investors wary.
 Turkey was somewhat successful in developing its conomy without oil revenues . Turkey's conomy was developed without oil revenue . Turkey has a history of developing its own conomy in spite of oil wealth .
 Turkey was an authoritarian state for many years but has allowed political liberalization since the 1990s . Like South Korea and Taiwan, Turkey has been liberalized in recent years . Turkey was once a state of authoritarian state .
 It has developed under the U.S. security umbrella . It has received considerable foreign aid from the United States in recent years .
 Turkey suffered recession in 2000-2001 and received a $30 billion IMF bailout . Turkey received the IMF bailout in 2001 . Turkey is one of the most successful economies in the world .
 Since 2003, Turkey’s economy has grown solidly and its debt position has improved . However, exports suffered during the recent financial crisis . Turkey's exports suffered from the recent economic crisis .
 Egypt is mired in poverty despite substantial U.S. aid since the late 1970s . Egypt has received substantial aid from the United States since the 1970s, including substantial aid to Egypt .
 The state owns much of the industry, operates the economy centrally, imposes high import tariffs, and provides patronage jobs and subsidized prices in order to maintain political power . The state operates a centrally-run economy that imposes high tariffs .
 Reforms in the 1990s brought economic growth, but remain problems include high unemployment, a trade deficit, and widespread corruption . Reforms brought growth in 1990s, but problems remain high unemployment and corruption .
 After the overthrow of its authoritarian ruler in 2011, Egypt looked forward to restarting its economy . Egypt's economy was seriously disrupted by the instability of the Arab Spring . The country's economy has been hit hard by the unrest in the past .
 Globalization is creating winners and losers while sharpening income disparities . Globalization creates winners, losers while sharping income disparities, experts say .
 Debt, currency crises, IMF conditionality are among the sources of upheaval and poverty in many poor countries . Debt and the privatization of state-owned enterprises are some of the causes of poverty in poor countries.
 After lethal factory fires, these garment workers protest unsafe working conditions in Bangladesh . Workers protest unsafe conditions in exportoriented factories in Bangladesh, 2013 .
 The largest developing countries are following somewhat different strategies with somewhat different results . Watch the video of Kenya's Developmental Challenge at MyPoliSciLab .
 These themes concern trade, the concentration of capital, and corruption . These themes also concern trade and corruption, the author says .
 South states are trying to use international trade as the basis of accumulation . Import Substitution and Export-Led Growth is key to growth in the global South .
 For the reasons discussed in Chapter 8, a policy of self-reliance or autarky is at best an extremely slow way to build up wealth . Autarky may be a slow way of building up wealth, but it is not the best way to get rich .
 A state can accumulate hard currency and build industry and infrastructure . But through the creation of a trade surplus, a state can build industry, infrastructure . A trade surplus can also be a source of hard currency .
 This might seem to be a good policy for reducing dependency, especially on the former colonial master, while shrinking a trade deficit or building a trade surplus . But it's not a good enough to reduce dependency on former colonial masters, especially in China .
 It is against the principle of comparative advantage and has not proven effective in most cases . But it has not proved effective in many cases, it has been argued .
 Some scholars think import substitution is a useful policy only at a very early phase of economic development, after which it becomes counterproductive . Import substitution is useful only at the very early stage of the economic development .
 More and more states have shifted to a strategy of export-led growth, the NICs say . The NICs' strategy is a strategy used by many states .
 This strategy seeks to develop industries that can compete in specific niches in the world economy . This strategy is based on a strategy that seeks to compete in niche niches .
 These industries may receive special treatment such as subsidies and protected access to local markets . These industries are often given special treatment by local governments .
 Exports from these industries generate hard currency and create a favorable trade balance . Exports of these industries create hard currency for the U.S.
 The state can then spend part of its money on imports of commodities produced more cheaply elsewhere . The state then spends part of the money on importing commodities produced elsewhere .
 It leaves poor countries vulnerable to sudden price fluctuations for their exports . Poor countries are left vulnerable by sudden price fluctuation .
 States have looked to exporting manufactured goods, rather than raw materials, as the key to export-led growth .
 A developing country must compete against industrialized countries with better technology, more educated workforces, and much more capital . However, in seeking a niche for manufactured goods, developing countries must compete with industrialized countries .
 It is not enough to subsidize and protect an industry until it grows in size . It has to be able to stand its own ground in a competitive world or it will not bring in a trade surplus .
 To invest in manufacturing, these countries must concentrate what surplus their economies produce . To invest, they must concentrate on what surplus they produce, says CNN.com .
 Money spent building factories cannot be spent subsidizing food prices or building better schools . Money spent on factories will not be used to subsidize food prices, say experts .
 Concentration of capital for manufacturing can sharpen disparities in income . The concentration of capital is a form of inequality in income inequality .
 Home markets for manufactured goods do not come from poor peasants in the countryside or unemployed youth in city slums . But home markets for manufacturing goods are not only from poor people, but also from unemployed youth .
 Wealth must be concentrated in a middle class that has the income to buy manufactured goods, rather than wealth concentrated in the middle class .
 These disparities may result in crowds rioting in the streets or guerrillas taking over the countryside . These disparities could result in guerillas taking control of the countryside.
 Capital for manufacturing can come instead from foreign investment or foreign loans, but this reduces the amount of surplus available to the state in the long term . Foreign investment or loans can also come from foreign investors or foreign lenders .
 Another way to minimize capital needs is to start out in low-capital industries . Start out in small-scale industries such as manufacturing and construction .
 These industries can begin generating capital, which can then be used to move into more technologically demanding and capital-intensive kinds of manufacturing . These industries will be able to start generating capital .
 The industry is fairly labor-intensive, giving an advantage to countries with cheap labor . The industry does not require huge investments of capital to get started . It is labor intensive, giving the industry an advantage .
 In 2005, textile tariffs were removed worldwide, so textile exporters in developing countries gained access to Western markets but faced intensified competition from China . Textile exporters faced increased competition from Chinese textile companies .
 The borrowers are organized into small groups and take responsibility for each other's success, including repaying the loans . Borrowers are organized in small groups to take part in the project .
 Repayment rates have been high, and the idea has spread rapidly in several regions . Repayments rates are high, with the idea spreading rapidly across the world .
 Village women use small loans to start businesses renting cell phone time . Village women used small loans for small businesses to rent time .
 Rural farmers use the phone time to find out market conditions before making a long trek to sell their products . Rural farmers used the phone call to talk about market conditions in order to get to market conditions .
 Bringing the information revolution to isolated villages raised incomes for the farmers and the women alike, and the bank got its loans repaid .
 Tens of millions of families have received loans from thousands of institutions worldwide . Tens of thousands of families receive loans from banks and government institutions .
 Microcredit is the opposite of a trickle-down approach . It injects capital at the bottom of the economic hierarchy . Microcredit has been dubbed the "anti-trickle-down" approach .
 A loan to buy a goat or cell phone may do more good, dollar for dollar, than a loan to build a dam . A loan for a goat, cell phone or a cell phone is more important than a bank loan . A small amount of money can be used to help people
 In line with liberalism, capitalists favor development paths that tie developing countries closely to the world economy and international trade . Capitalists favor developing countries that are closely tied to the global economy and trade .
 They argue that although such development strategies defer equity, they maximize efficiency . They say such strategies are not only deferting equity but also maximizing efficiency .
 Once a state has a self-sustaining cycle of accumulation under way, it can better redress poverty in the broad population . The state can also benefit from its own self-insistence, says the author .
 The same concept applies broadly to the world’s development as a whole, as well .
 From a capitalist perspective, capital accumulation is concentrated in the North . Capital accumulation in the north is concentrated on the North, writes David Frum .
 This unequal concentration creates faster economic growth, which ultimately will bring more wealth to the South as well . The unequal concentration of wealth in the South is creating more wealth for the South .
 There is no practical way, in this view, to shift wealth from the North to the South without undermining free market economics . Free market economics is responsible for global economic growth .
 Socialists argue that meaningful economic development should improve the position of the whole population and of the poor . Socialists, by contrast, argue that progress should be made to the poor sooner rather than later .
 socialists tend to advocate a more equitable distribution of wealth . They dispute the idea that greater equity will impede efficiency or slow down growth .
 A strategy based on equity will speed up the demographic transition and lead more quickly to sustained accumulation . Rather, by raising incomes among the poorer people, the strategy will raise incomes among poorer people .
 Socialists do not see NorthSouth disparities as justified by global growth benefits . On a global level, socialists do not think the benefits are justified by growth .
 They favor shifting income from North to South in order to foster economic growth in the South . They favor political actions to shift income from the North to the South to foster growth .
 Such redistribution, this view, would create faster, not slower, global economic growth, it says . Such redistribution would create more balanced and stable growth, the author says .
 The capitalist theory that unequal income distributions are related to higher economic growth is only weakly supported by empirical evidence . Capitalism theory that inequality of income distribution is linked to higher growth is not strong enough to support it .
 There are cases of relatively equitable countries that grow slowly and inequitable ones that grow rapidly . But there are also cases of inequitable countries growing slowly and growing rapidly .
 Foreign investment, international debt, and domestic inequality all can help concentrate the necessary capital for manufacturing, the World Bank says . The World Bank is committed to investing in manufacturing .
 Microcredit is very small loans made directly to very poor people . Microcredit provides a way to use capital more diffusely . microcredit is a way of using capital to make money more easily distributed .
 A woman in Recife, Brazil, runs her own convenience store in 2010 with help from a microloan .
 Microcredit, Barefoot Banking, and the Business Solution for Ending Poverty. Microcredit is the business solution for ending poverty.
 The Bank recommends extending access to health care, education, and jobs to the poorest people in societies of the global South in order to spur faster economic growth . The Bank says access to education, health care and jobs will spur faster growth .
 Corruption is an important negative factor in economic development in many states . Corruption is also a negative factor for economic growth in some states .
 Corruption centers on the government as the central actor in economic development, especially in its international aspects . Corruption is a major problem in the country's economy, especially its international aspect .
 Through foreign policy, the government mediates the national economy’s relationship to the world economy . The government is mediating the country's relationship with the global economy .
 It enforces worker discipline, calling out the army if necessary to break strikes or suppress revolutions . The army can call out the government if necessary, to suppress strikes or revolutions .
 It sets tax rates and wields other macroeconomic levers of control over the economy . Tax rates are among the most important levers of power in the world .
 In most developing countries, it owns a sizable stake in major industries . In some cases, it has a monopoly in some industries .
 Corruption adds another player, the corrupt official, to share the benefits . Corruption adds to the problem of corruption in the United States .
 Foreign oil company can pay off an official to award a favorable contract, and both can profit . For instance, a foreign oil company pays off a foreign official to get a favorable deal .
 In 2003, U.S. prosecutors indicted a Mobil Oil executive for paying $78 million to two senior officials in Kazakhstan to secure Mobil’s billion-dollar stake in a huge oil field there .
 He pleaded guilty to tax evasion, received a prison sentence, and had to pay taxes on the $2 million . He was sentenced to prison, and must also pay taxes .
 Corruption has a deeper effect in poor countries, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Corruption is a problem for poor people, he says, but it's not a problem in poor nations .
 First, because there is simply less surplus to keep economic growth going; accumulation is fragile . Second, because of the lack of surplus to boost the economy . Third, because it's not as easy to accumulate as much as it is in the world .
 In developing countries dependent on exporting a few products, revenue arrives in a very concentrated form . Large payments in hard currency presents a greater opportunity for corruption . In a more diversified economy, the revenue comes in a more concentrated form, the author says .
 Corruption is a major impediment to economic development in both rich and poor countries . Corruption is more devastating to economies in the global South and to transitional former communist economies . In developing countries incomes are often so low that corrupt officials are more tempted .
 In India, widespread corruption has held back economic development and equality for years . Corruption is a major problem for India's economic growth .
 Delhi supporters of hunger-striking anti-corruption activist Anna Hazare hold a ""key" to corrupt officials' Swiss bank locker, 2012. to accept payments . Hazare supporters hold a key to the Swiss bank .
 Corruption in the global South presents a collective goods problem for states and MNCs in the 8 World Bank countries . Corruption is a collective problem for the eight World Bank members of the South . The World Bank says corruption in the South is a global problem .
 There is an incentive to clamp down on corruption only if other industrialized states do likewise . Therefore, there is a strong incentive for other countries to do so, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 The United States in recent decades has barred U.S. companies from making corrupt deals abroad, but other countries of the North had not done so until recently . Germany and Canada allowed their companies to deduct foreign bribes on their taxes .
 Berlin-based NGO called Transparency International pushed successfully for action to stem corruption in international business deals . Transparency International was founded by Transparency International in 2007 .
 The group publishes annual surveys showing the countries that business executives consider most corrupt .
 The top five on the list in 2012 were Somalia, North Korea, Afghanistan, Sudan, and Burma . Somalia was the most populous country in the world, followed by North Korea .
 The world’s 29 leading industrialized states agreed to forbid their companies from bribing foreign officials in 1997 . In 1997, the world's 29 leading countries agreed to ban bribing their companies . The agreement was part of an agreement to forbid the practice .
 Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative fights corruption in especially vulnerable oil, gas, mineral sectors . It gets companies to release information on payments they make to developing countries .
 In 1999, ExxonMobil led a consortium led by ExxonMobil and backed by World Bank loans struck a deal to build a $4 billion oil pipeline in Chad . Oil revenues going through a Citibank account in London to avoid corruption .
 Chad’s government pulled out of the deal to use the money for its military, and the World Bank suspended its loans . The World Bank says the money will be used to pay for the military .
 Capital from the global North moves to the South and potentially spurs growth there in several forms—foreign investment, debt, and foreign aid . J Watch the Video ""Fair Trade Coffee"" at MyPoliSciLab .
 The rest of this chapter discusses these capital flows from North to South . This chapter discusses capital flows between the North and South .
 Poor countries have little money available to invest in new factories, farms, mines, or oil wells . Poor countries need to make sure they have the money to invest into new factories .
 Foreign investment has been crucial to the success of China and other Asian developing countries . Foreign investment is crucial to China's success in developing countries such as China .
 Overall, private capital flows to the global South were about $500 billion in 2012 . That's four times the amount given in official development assistance . Private capital flows are four times as much as official assistance .
 Foreigners who invest in a country then own the facilities . The investor by virtue of its ownership can control decisions about how many people to employ, whether to expand or shut down, what products to make .
 Many governments in the global South have feared the loss of control that comes with foreign investments by MNCs . Because of past colonial experiences, many governments have feared a return of control .
 Sometimes the presence of MNCs was associated with the painful process of concentrating capital and 10 World Bank data . World Bank says MNC companies are often associated with concentration of capital .
 Foreign investors are able to infuse capital and generate more surplus . Although such fears remain, they are counterbalanced by the ability of foreign investors to invest .
 By the 1980s and 1990s, as models based on autarky or state ownership were discredited and state ownership gained success, many poor states rushed to embrace foreign investment . By the 1990s and 2000s, the NICs gained success .
 States have sought to soften the loss of control through joint ventures . Joint ventures include companies owned partly by foreign MNC and partly by local firm or the host government .
 Sometimes foreign ownership in joint ventures is limited to some percentage . This is to ensure that ultimate control rests with the host country . Foreign ownership of joint ventures can be limited to a small percentage .
 The percentage of ownership is usually proportional to the amount of capital invested . If a host government wants more control, it must put up more of the money . Host governments often have more control of the country .
 MNCs invest in a country because of some advantage of doing business there . MNCS invest in countries because of the advantages it offers to do business .
 Some states have better absorptive capacity than others because of more highly developed infrastructure and a higher level of skills among workers or managers . Some states are able to put investments to productive use because of highly developed infrastructructures .
 The funneling of investments to states with high absorptive capacity tends to sharpen disparities within the global South . As these are most often middle-income states, the investments are often in middle-class states .
 MNCs also look for a favorable regulatory environment in which a host state will facilitate, rather than impede, the MNC’s business . The host state is a state that will facilitate and not impede the business of a major MNC .
 MNC decisions about foreign investment also depend on prospects for financial stability, especially for low inflation and stable currency exchange rates . MNC decision to invest in foreign investments also depends on prospects of financial stability and low inflation .
 If a currency is not convertible, an MNC will not be able to take profits back to its home state or reinvest them elsewhere . An MNC cannot take profits from abroad or reinvesting them elsewhere if not convertible currency .
 Banks and MNCs conduct political risk analyses to assess the risks of political disturbances in states in which they might invest . Banks say political risk analysis is necessary to assess risk of political unrest in states .
 A foreign investor producing for local markets wants to know that the host country’s economic growth will sustain demand for the goods being produced .
 Whether producing for local consumption or export, the MNC wants the local labor supply to be stable . Whether semiskilled labor or just cheap, it's important to keep a stable labor supply .
 Foreign investors often look to international financial institutions, such as the World Bank and IMF, to judge a state’s economic stability before investing in it . The IMF and World Bank are often used to judge the stability of a state .
 Foreign investment is an important source of capital for economic development in the global South . Foreign investment has been a key source of investment for the region's development .
 The relationship between foreign investors and host countries transcends economics and draws in culture, politics, and identity . The relationship of foreign investors transcends economic and cultural ties .
 Honda has invested $400 million in India in the past decade . Honda executives visit their Honda factory in India for the first time in 2008 . Honda has also invested in the country's second largest economy .
 The state may try to get its own citizens into the management and professional workforce of factories or facilities created by foreign investment . The state could use citizens to manage foreign investment facilities .
 Not only can physical capital accumulate in the country, but so can the related technological base for further development . Not only physical capital can accumulate in China, but also technological base can be developed . China is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world .
 Most poor states seek to build up an educated elite with knowledge and skills to run the national economy . Most poor state leaders seek to have educated elite to run national economies .
 One way to do so is to send students to industrialized states for higher education . The U.S. should send students abroad to study higher education, experts say .
 Borrowing money is an alternative to foreign investment as a way of obtaining funds to prime a cycle of economic accumulation . North-South Debt is a form of financing that can be used to prime an economic cycle .
 If accumulation succeeds, it produces enough surplus to repay the loan and still make a profit . If it succeeds, the bank will make enough profit and repay the debt .
 It keeps control in the hands of the state and does not impose painful sacrifices on local citizens, at least in the short term . It is not the first time the state has taken control of the local government in the past .
 The borrower must service the debt—making regular payments of interest and repaying the principal according to the terms of the loan . The borrower has to make regular payments to repay the principal .
 Debt service is a constant drain on whatever surplus is generated by investment of the money . Debt service will drain whatever surplus created by investment, says the IMF .
 With foreign direct investment, a money-losing venture is the problem of the foreign MNC; with debt, it is the state, which must find the money elsewhere . With debt, the borrowing state must find money elsewhere, the problem is the government .
 Often, a debtor must borrow new funds to service old loans, slipping further into debt . Often, the debtors are forced to borrow more money to keep up with their debts .
 Debt service has created a net financial outflow from South to North in recent years . South has paid billions more in interest to banks and governments in the North than it has received in foreign investment or development aid .
 Failure to make scheduled payments, called a default, is considered a drastic action because it destroys lenders’ confidence and results in cutoff of future loans . Failure to pay scheduled payments destroys lenders' confidence and can lead to cutoff of loans . Default is considered drastic action .
 Rather than defaulting, borrowers usually attempt debt renegotiation . Borrowers usually attempt to renegotiate the terms on which a loan will be repaid .
 Borrowers seek a mutually acceptable payment scheme to keep at least some money flowing to the lender . By renegotiating their debts with lenders, borrowers seek to keep some of the money flowing .
 If interest rates have fallen since the loan was first taken out, the borrower can refinance . The borrower can now refinance a loan that has fallen in interest rates since its first loan .
 Borrowers and lenders can also negotiate to restructure a debt by changing the length of the loan or the other terms . Lenders can also change the length, length or other terms of a debt .
 State-to-state loans are written off altogether, for political reasons, as happened with U.S. loans to Egypt after the Gulf War .
 North-South debt encompasses several types of lending relationships, all of which are influenced by international politics . North-south debt is one of the most common types of debt relationships .
 The borrower may be a private firm or bank in a developing country, or it may be the government itself . The borrower is the government .
 Loans to the government are somewhat more common because lenders consider the government less likely to default than a private borrower . Loans to government are less common than private loans to private borrowers .
 The lender may be a private bank or company, or a state (both private banks or companies) The lender is a state .
 Usually banks are more insistent on receiving timely payments and firmer in renegotiating debts than are states . States are more likely to renegotiate debts with banks than they are states, states say .
 Some state-to-state loans are made on artificially favorable concessionary terms, in effect subsidizing economic development in the borrowing state . Some state to state loans make artificially favorable terms, such as those made on favorable terms .
 Debt renegotiation has become a perennial occupation of the global South . The South's debt renegotiation is one of the world's most enduring challenges .
 Such renegotiations are complex international bargaining situations, like international trade or arms control negotiations, such as international trade .
 If a borrowing government accepts terms that are too burdensome, it may lose popularity at home . A borrowing government could lose popularity in the UK if it accepts too many burdensome terms .
 If the borrowing state does not give enough to gain the agreement of the lenders, it might have to default . The borrowing state could default if it does not gain enough support from lenders .
 State creditors meet together periodically as the Paris Club, and private creditors as the London Club, to work out their terms . To solve this problem, state creditors meet with private creditors in London to discuss terms .
 Through renegotiations and the corresponding write-offs of debts by banks, developing countries have largely avoided defaulting on their debts . Through such renegotiations, the debt-freezing process has allowed developing countries to avoid default .
 By then, financial institutions had adjusted psychologically to the reality that Argentina could not pay its debt . Argentina's debt crisis began in 2008 .
 Argentina's economy has grown 9 percent a year since 2001 . In 2005, Argentina offered its creditors a take-it-or-leave-it deal for repayment of less than 30 cents on the dollar . Argentina recovered— its economy grew 9 percent in 2001 .
 Default is a risky course because of the need for foreign investment and foreign trade to accumulate wealth . Still, default is a risk for default because of foreign investment, foreign trade . Default is still a risk, but default is necessary for the U.S. economy, experts say .
 Lenders too have generally proven willing to absorb losses rather than push a borrower over the edge and risk financial instability . Lenders also have shown they are willing to accept losses from borrowers .
 In 2010-2012, these debt problems jumped to the global North as the euro zone grappled with the heavy indebtedness of some of its poorer members . Greece, as well as Portugal, Spain, and Ireland, are among the countries in the region with heavy debts .
 In a 2011 bailout agreement, bankers holding Greek debt had to accept 50 cents on the dollar . In the 2011 deal, the banks holding the Greek debt were forced to accept only 50 cents per cent .
 In 2011-2013, Greek voters expressed anger toward budget cuts required to meet conditions for each stage of the bailout . Even so, in 2011 and 2013, voters were angry about the budget cuts needed to meet the conditions .
 Despite stabilization, developing countries have not yet solved the debt problem . Developed countries still have a long-standing debt problem, experts say .
 Latin American debt service absorbs almost a third of the entire hard-currency export earnings in Latin America . Latin America is the region most affected by the debt service .
 International Monetary Fund, Statistical Appendix to World Economic Outlook, April 2011 . IMF: Economic Outlook: Economic Prospects for 2011 .
 G7 members in 2005 agreed to eliminate all debts owed by 37 very poor countries to the World Bank and IMF . The deal cut almost in half in half the poorest countries’ estimated $200 billion in debt . The G7 agreed to cut the debt to 37 countries .
 The first $40 billion, owed by 18 countries, began to be written off in 2006 . The debt is now worth more than $100 billion . It is the largest debt owed to the U.S. since World War II .
 This capital plays an important role in funding early stages of accumulation in developing countries and in helping them get through short periods of great difficulty . This capital is important for the development of developing countries .
 IMF can make funds available on favorable terms, IMF says . IMF is a political entity rather than a bank, it can make money available . IMF has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 IMF scrutinizes developing countries’ economic plans and policies, withholding loans . IMF withholds loans until it is satisfied that the right policies are in place . IMF has been criticized for not giving loans to developing countries .
 IMF makes loans to help states through the transitional process of implementing IMF-approved policies . Then it makes loans for states to help them implement the IMF's policies .
 Its approval of a state’s economic plans is a “seal of approval” that bankers and MNCs use to assess the wisdom of investing in that state . Its approval is a "seal of approval" to bankers and investors .
 IMF wields great power to influence the economic policies of developing countries . The IMF is the world's largest body of economic and political power .
 An agreement to loan IMF funds on the condition that certain government policies are adopted is called an IMF conditionality agreement . Implementation of these conditions is referred to as a structural adjustment program .
 Dozens of developing countries have entered into such agreements with the IMF in the past two decades . Dozens of such agreements have been made with the Fund in recent years .
 IMF demands that inflation be brought under control, which requires reducing state spending and closing budget deficits . IMF demands state spending be reduced and closing budgets deficits .
 These measures often spur unemployment and require that subsidies of food and basic goods be reduced or eliminated . Subsidies of food, basic goods are often seen as a reason for unemployment in China .
 Short-term consumption is curtailed in favor of longer-term investment, says CNN.com editor .
 Surplus must be concentrated to service debt and invest in new capital accumulation . Surplus should be spent on debt and service debt, the IMF says .
 It also wants to ensure inflation does not eat away all progress and that the economy is stable enough to attract investment . The government also wants inflation not to eat away progress .
 The pain inflicted by conditionality agreements is often politically unpopular in the global South . Because of the pain inflicted on conditionality deals, such deals are often unpopular in South .
 On quite a few occasions, a conditionality agreement has brought rioters into the streets demanding the restoration of subsidies for food, gasoline, and other essential goods .
 Sometimes governments have backed out of the agreement or have broken promises under such pressure . Sometimes governments back out of such a deal .
 An annual subsidy of $3.3 billion provides a supply of bread at one-third its real cost for Egypt’s large and poor population . Egypt's bread subsidy is one third the real cost of bread . The subsidy is estimated at $3 billion a year .
 The costs distort the free market, encouraging Egyptians to eat more bread than they otherwise would . They drive up the need for imported wheat, and offer widespread opportunities for corruption by diverting subsidized flour or bread to black markets .
 When the government tried to raise the price of bread in 1977, street riots forced a reversal . Street riots forced the government to reverse its decision to raise bread prices .
 In 1996, the government began secretly mixing cheaper corn flour into statemilled wheat flour . The government has subtly changed the size and composition of loaves .
 Iceland was forced to make fundamental reforms to its banking sector . After receiving a $6 billion rescue package from the IMF, Iceland made fundamental reforms . Iceland received $6bn bailout package from IMF .
 Greece agreed to eliminate several paid holidays while cutting wages of all public workers by 3 percent . Greece received over $133 billion from the IMF . Greece is expected to receive over $100 billion in bailout money .
 Most states of the global South see their future economic development as resting on a close interconnection with the world economy, not on national autarky or regional economic communities . Because of the need for capital and the wealth created by international trade, the South sees its future as resting with the
 The WTO trading regime sometimes works against poor states, however, relative to industrialized ones . The WTO trade regime is sometimes used to help poor states in particular .
 A free trade regime makes it harder for poor states to protect infant industries in order to build self-sufficient capital accumulation . Free trade regime means it is hard for poor countries to protect their infant industries, says economist .
 A poor state can be competitive only in low-wage, low-capital niches, such as tropical agriculture, extractive industries, and textiles . The state is competitive only if it uses natural resources that are scarce in the North .
 World trade deals concentrated on free trade in manufactured goods, which states in the North have comparative advantages . Instead of free trade deals, the North has comparative advantages, the deals focus on manufacturing .
 Some developing countries had to open their home markets to foreign products, against which home industries were not competitive, yet see their own export products shut out of foreign markets . As a result, some developing countries have opened their own markets to foreigners .
 Current WTO negotiations are attempting to remedy this inequity, but so far without success . WTO negotiations have failed to find a solution to the inequity .
 IMF conditionality agreements often call for reducing subsidies for food, transportation, and other basic needs . IMF: Subsidies are often reduced for basic needs such as transportation, food and housing . IMF conditionsality agreements call for reduced subsidies for basic food and transportation subsidies .
 In Egypt, bread prices are heavily subsidized, forcing the government to use hard currency to import wheat . Egypt's bread prices have been heavily subsidized by the government . The government has been forced to import hard currency in hard currency .
 Public resistance to bread price increases is so strong that the government has not brought itself to cut the subsidy . The government is not bringing itself to reduce the subsidy. But public resistance remains strong to the government .
 Few states in the global South can afford this legal process, and therefore few use it to help their own industries knock down unfair barriers to trade . Few states are able to afford this process, but few are willing to use it for themselves .
 Even if a state wins a WTO dispute, it gains only the right to place tariffs on the offending country’s goods in an equal amount . Recall that even if a . state wins, it only gains the . right to put tariffs on . offending country's goods in equal amount
 For small states, this retaliation can inflict as much damage on their own economies as on the economies of the offending states . Small states can inflict more damage on themselves as well as those of offending states, experts say . For small countries, retaliation can be as much as economic retaliation .
 The Lome conventions are exceptions to the overall rules of trade, intended to ensure that participation in world trade advances rather than impedes development . EU states relaxed tariffs on goods from the global South . These and other measures are meant to ensure participation in the global trade advances .
 Critics claim poor states are the losers in the overall world trade regime . Nonetheless, critics claim that poor states lose out in the trade regime.
 Countries in the South have responded in several ways to these problems with world economic regimes . The South has responded to the problems of the world's economic regimes in recent years .
 OPEC shifted the terms of trade for oil in the 1970s . It brought huge amounts of capital into the oil-exporting countries . OPEC shifted terms of oil trade to bring capital to the countries of the world .
 In the 1970s, poor and middle-income states tried to form a broad political coalition to push for restructuring the world economy . The coalition was formed to make North-South economic transactions more favorable to the South . Also in the 70s, many poor countries tried to push to make
 NIEO proposal calls for the promotion of industrialization in the global South . NIEO also calls for increased development assistance from the North . The proposal also called for an increase in industrial development assistance .
 The NIEO never became much more than a rallying cry for the global South, partly because of the South’s lack of power and partly because disparities within the South created divergent interests among states .
 Countries in the South pursue proposals to restructure world trade to benefit the South . Countries in South continue to pursue proposals for restructure of world trade .
 UN Conference on Trade and Development meets periodically but lacks power to implement major changes in North-South economic relations . These efforts now take place mainly through the UN conference on trade and Development .
 China sometimes uses the South-South solidarity argument in wooing new friends in Africa . China often uses the issue of solidarity to woo new African friends .
 Your economy suffered from the recent global recession but has emerged from that crisis in strong shape . Your economy was hit hard by the global recession, but has recovered from it .
 Your country has undergone extensive privatization over the past decade, as you sold ownership in key industries to private investors . Your country is undergoing extensive privatization in the past 10 years .
 Most major manufacturing industries in your country are now privately owned, a significant change from 20 years ago . Indeed, most of your country's manufacturing industry is now privately-owned .
 Much of this privatization was encouraged by the International Monetary Fund after a significant economic crisis in 2001 . Much of the privatization is expected to be privatized by the IMF .
 One area of your economy that has not liberalized as fast as the industrial sector is the financial and banking sector . The banking sector is one of the key areas of the economy that hasn't been liberalized so fast .
 The financial and banking industries are still protected by extensive regulation that limits foreign ownership . Foreign ownership is still tightly regulated in the financial industry .
 These regulations discourage foreign direct investment from wealthy EU states, the United States, and Japan . These regulations have discouraged foreign direct investments .
 You are an incredibly popular prime minister, having recently won an unprecedented third term in office . You are the prime minister .
 Much of your popularity, however, is based on the economic success you have engineered, says President Obama . Much of that success is based upon the success of your economic success, he says .
 Voters have continued to support your privatization and economic liberalization efforts . Turkey's economy has remained strong, especially in recent years, says Erdogan .
 Business elites continue to support strong regulation efforts to insulate Turkey from international economic crises . Business elites, however, continue to back strong regulation in the finance and banking sector .
 These regulations protect their own advantageous financial positions within the Turkish economy . These regulations also protect Turkish banks' own advantageous positions .
 International investors want more freedom to invest in these sectors of your economy . International investors. however, would like more freedom from investing in your economy. International investors .
 The EU continues to struggle with debt crisis issues in Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Italy . Now imagine that one of the key sources of capital for your economy, the EU, is struggling to cope with the crisis .
 As a result of these EU struggles, FDI to your country declines precipitously . FDI is down to around $1.5 billion .
 Exports fall due to declining economic fortunes in your key trading partners in Europe . Moreover, exports fall because of declining economies in key European countries .
 The economy that bolstered your popularity and international standing is now becoming a major problem for your administration, President Obama says . The president's popularity is now a problem for his administration .
 One potential solution to your economic problems would be to loosen the regulatory controls in the finance and banking sector, says David Cameron . The UK should loosen its regulatory controls, he says .
 Western observers and the IMF have suggested that such a policy change will provide a much needed injection of capital into your economy . Turkey could lift the Turkish economy out of its current downturn, says the IMF .
 Different kinds of development assistance have different purposes, which often overlap . Different types of assistance are different kinds of assistance .
 Some are humanitarian, some political, some are economic . Others are intended to create future economic advantages for the giver . Some are political, others are intended for future economic benefits .
 The state that gives assistance is called a donor; the state receiving the aid is the recipient . The state or organization that gives aid is called the donor . The recipient is the state or state that receives it is a recipient .
 Foreign assistance creates, or extends, a relationship between donor and recipient that is political and cultural as well as economic . Foreign aid creates a relationship that is simultaneously political, cultural and economic . The relationship between donors and recipients can be political and economic, and political .
 Foreign assistance can be a form of power in which the donor seeks to influence the recipient, or it can be interdependence in which it creates a mutually beneficial exchange . Foreign aid can be an attempt to influence a recipient's power, but it can also be a beneficial exchange between the
 The remainder of this chapter examines the patterns and types of foreign assistance, the politics involved, and the potential impact on foreign assistance . This chapter includes the patterns, types of assistance and the political implications of foreign aid .
 Large amounts of foreign assistance come from governments in the North . The North is the source of most foreign assistance in the region .
 Of the roughly $130 billion in governmental foreign assistance provided in 2012, more than 90 percent came from members of the Development Assistance Committee . The committee consists of states from Western Europe, North America and Japan/Pacific .
 Transition economies became a net “exporter” of financial aid in 2003 . Several oil-exporting Arab countries provide some foreign development assistance . Transition economies are a net "exporter" of financial assistance .
 Three-quarters of the DAC countries’ government assistance goes directly to governments in the global South as state-to-state bilateral aid . The rest goes through the UN or other agencies as multilateral aid .
 DAC countries have set themselves a goal to contribute 0.3 percent of GNPs in foreign aid . DAC countries set themselves to contribute to 0.9 percent of their GNPs .
 Only Norway, Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg meet the target . Only five countries in the world have a target of 100 per cent of the population .
 Oxfam International reported that industrialized countries’ aid dropped from 0.48 percent of income in 1960-1965 to 0.34 percent in 1980-1985 . Oxfam said industrialized countries' aid dropped 0.24 percent in 2003 and 0.4 percent in 2000 .
 After the 2001 terrorist attacks, Britain proposed a $50 billion increase in foreign aid, nearly doubling current levels . The United States raised its aid budget sharply after the attacks .
 In 2002, rock star Bono took United States treasury secretary Paul O’Neill on a two-week tour through Africa to argue for increased U.S. foreign assistance . Bono toured the continent in 2002 to advocate for increased foreign aid to Africa .
 A Comparative Analysis of Democracy Assistance and PolitF cal Conditionality. A Comparable Analysis of democracy Assistance. Assistance and Politics Assistance and Conditionality . The analysis was based on a comparison of democracy assistance assistance and political conditions .
 UN programs focus on concentrating capital, transferring technology, and developing workforce skills for manufacturing . UN programs also focus on transferring technology and transferring technology .
 UN programs such as UNICEF, UNFPA, UNESCO, and WHO focus on basic needs . But most UN programs focus on meeting basic needs, such as those of the world's poorest .
 Governments and citizens tend to perceive the UN as a friend of the global South, not an alien force, a threat to sovereignty, or a reminder of colonialism . One reason is that governments and citizens often see UN as friend of global South .
 UN workers may be more likely to make appropriate decisions because of their backgrounds . Second, UN workers are more likely than those who have backgrounds, she says .
 UN workers who come from the global South or have worked in other poor countries in a region may be more sensitive to local conditions and to the pitfalls of development assistance than are aid workers from rich countries . UN workers are more sensitive than aid workers who work in rich countries, say experts .
 Third, the UN can organize its assistance on a global scale, giving priority to projects and avoiding duplication and the reinvention of the wheel in each state . The UN can also give priority attention to projects .
 A major disadvantage faced by UN development programs is that they are funded largely through voluntary contributions by rich states . UN programs are funded by voluntary contributions from rich states, UN officials say .
 Each program has to solicit contributions to carry on its activities . The contributions can be abruptly cut off if the program displeases a donor government .
 The UN complained in early 2005 that only 5 percent of the $500 million pledged for southern Sudan had actually been paid . The UN said in 2005 only 5 per cent of the money had been paid out .
 UN programs have a reputation for operating in FIGURE 13 . UN programs are often criticized for their lack of transparency and transparency . UN officials say they have no obligation to be secretive about their work .
 Foreign Assistance as a Percent of Donor's Income, 2011 and 1960-2011 . Sweden Norway Luxembourg Luxembourg Denmark Netherlands United Kingdom Belgium Finland Ireland France Switzerland Germany Australia Canada Spain Portugal New Zealand Austria United States .
 Grants are funds given free to a recipient state, usually for some stated purpose . Grants are usually given to the recipient state of state .
 Technical cooperation refers to grants given in the form of expert assistance in some project rather than just money or goods . Technical cooperation is a form of technical assistance in a project . Technical Cooperation grants are often given in form of expertise assistance .
 Credits are grants that can be used to buy certain products from the donor state . Credits are given out to buy products from donor states . Credits can also be used in the purchase of certain products by the state .
 The U.S. regularly gives credits that can be used to purchase United States grain . For instance, the United States gives credits to buy grain from other countries .
 If people in recipient countries become accustomed to products from the donor state, they are likely to buy those same products in the future . People in a recipient country will likely buy the same products from that donor state .
 Government-to-government development loans are often made on concessionary terms, with long repayment times and low interest rates . Unlike commercial loans, these loans are made on concessionsary terms . Government to government development loans often make long repayment periods and low rates .
 Although still an obligation for the recipient country, such loans are relatively easy to service . Such loans are still a relatively low-cost option for recipient countries .
 Loan guarantees are promises by the donor state to back up commercial loans to the recipient . They are often used only occasionally .
 If the recipient state services such debts and ultimately repays them, there is no cost to the donor . The recipient state will not have to pay back the debts . If the state does not repay the debts, it will not be able to do so .
 If the recipient cannot make the payments, the donor has to step in and cover the debts . But if the recipient can't pay the debt, the recipient has to cover the debt .
 Military aid is not normally included in development assistance, but in a broad sense belongs to the aid budget . Military aid does not normally include military aid, but it is a broad form of aid .
 It is money that flows from North to South, from government to government, says David Cameron . It does bring a certain amount of value into the economies of the global South .
 Getting them free from a donor state frees up money that can be used elsewhere in the economy . If a country is going to have a certain size army with certain weapons, getting them free is a good idea .
 Of all the forms of development assistance, military aid is one of the least efficient and most prone to impede rather than help economic development . However, of all the ways military aid can be used to help develop countries, it has been claimed .
 It is geared almost exclusively to political alliances rather than actual development needs . It is aimed at political alliances instead of actual development need .
 The main agency dispensing U.S. economic assistance is the State Department’s Agency for International Development . The State Department works mainly through the United States embassy in each recipient country .
 Major recipients of U.S. foreign aid include Israel, Egypt, and Turkey . Israel and Egypt are important strategic allies in the volatile Middle East .
 Governments provide more than $50 billion annually in foreign assistance . Private donors contribute $10 billion in additional aid to the U.S.
 In the West, the United States gives among the least amount of foreign aid as a percentage of GDP . Despite recent increases in aid, the U.S. gives the least as much as it does in the West .
 Helping out an inefficient, bureaucratic manner, without cohesion and the cohesion and resources that governments and MNCs in the North take for granted . The North is being helped out in an inefficient and bureaucratic manner .
 Started by President Kennedy in 1961, Peace Corps now sends nearly 8,000 volunteers to 76 countries . Peace Corps volunteers participate in projects affecting about a million people .
 In foreign aid, the donor must have the permission of the recipient government to operate in the country . The donor must also have permission from the recipient country to operate there .
 This goes back to the principle of national sovereignty and the history of colonialism, says the minister . "This is a very important part of our sovereignty," he says .
 National governments have the right to control the distribution of aid and the presence of foreign workers on their soil . National governments should control the amount of aid given to foreign workers in the country .
 Only occasionally is this principle violated, as when the United States and its allies provided assistance to Iraqi Kurds against the wishes of the Iraqi government following the Gulf War .
 International norms may be starting to change in this regard, with short-term humanitarian assistance starting to be seen as a human right . Humanitarian assistance should not be subject to government veto .
 Private donations provide a smaller amount of money, although sometimes a significant one . Private donations are often small, but sometimes significant .
 The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation contributes more than $1 billion annually to world health campaigns . For instance, the Gates Foundation gives more than a billion dollars annually .
 By 2008, private aid flows from DAC countries neared $130 billion, according to the OECD . Private aid flows to DAC countries from the U.S. are estimated to be at a high level of around $100 billion .
 This figure is equal to official development assistance given by state governments . This figure was equal to state-level development assistance .
 Individuals may give to charities that send money or food abroad such as the Red Cross, Doctors without Borders, or their local church . Individuals may also give to their local churches .
 Oxfam was originally devoted to short-term aid to famine victims . Oxfam America is still active in that effort . People need land, water, seeds, tools, and technical training .
 Oxfam relies on local communities to determine the needs of their own people . Oxfam's model relies on communities to carry out development projects . The distinctive aspect of the Oxfam model is that it relies upon local communities .
 Oxfam does not operate projects itself but provides funding to local organizations . Oxfam provides funding for local projects in order to support local projects .
 It calls both sides ‘project partners’—working together to accomplish a task . The project is called “Project partners” rather than “partners” in a project .
 In this model, a little outside money can go a long way toward building sustained local economic development . In this case, the money will go to building sustained economic development in the area .
 Projects help participants empower themselves by organizing themselves to meet their own needs . The projects help participants meet their needs and empower themselves .
 Oxfam did not design or organize the project; women in Addis Ababa did . The project was organized by women in Ethiopia .
 Oxfam gave the group a $15,000 grant to build a new building . The garment-making workshop became profitable and was ready to expand and employ twice as many women . Oxfam has given the group the money to expand .
 The relationship between North and South is likened to a good marriage in which decisions are made jointly and dependency does not develop . Oxfam and their project partners are likened to marriage in a marriage that leaves no dependency .
 In this model, economic development is not charity; it is in the interests of people in the rich countries as well as the poor . In this case, it's in the interest of the rich and the poor in developing countries, says the author .
 A cooperative relationship between North and South is essential for a peaceful and prosperous world . North-South-South relations are essential to a peaceful world, says South Korea's president .
 Development in the global South creates new markets and new products that will enrich the industrialized countries as well . Even in a narrow economic sense, development in the South creates markets and products that can enrich industrialized countries .
 The group's philosophy of a ‘rights-based approach to development’ has drawn praise from human rights NGOs . The group’s philosophy has been praised by human rights groups .
 Oxfam has tried to minimize the role in its projects of governments in both the North and South . Oxfam is disappointed with the political uses of foreign aid in the past, Oxfam says .
 Oxfam does not accept government funds, nor does it make grants to governments . Oxfam is not accepting government funds or accepting government grants . It does not make grants or accept government funding .
 The general goals of the Oxfam model of foreign aid are consistent with a broader movement in the global South toward grassroots empowerment . Oxfam says it is consistent with the broader movement toward empowering the South .
 Oxfam partners are organized by poor people to gain some power over their situation and meet their basic needs . Not by seizing control of the state in a revolution but by means that are more direct, more local, and less violent, Oxfam says . Efforts such as those of Ox
 The key to success is getting organized, finding information, gaining self-confidence, and obtaining needed resources to implement action plans .
 In India, local women’s groups have persuaded landowners to give them land for cooperative income-generating projects such as vegetable farming and raising silkworms . For example, in India, women's groups use only the power of persuasion and logic .
 Women working as gatherers of wood and other forest products got organized to win the legal minimum wage for 250,000 female forest workers . Elsewhere in India, women working in India also won the minimum wage .
 In this case, government action was necessary, but the pressure for such action came from local organizing . In the case, it was necessary government action, but local organizing was necessary .
 The women took their case to the public and the press, staging protest marches and getting an art exhibit relating to their cause displayed in the provincial capital . The women staged a protest march and got a art exhibit displayed in their cause .
 Such examples do not mean that national and foreign governments are unimportant, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Government policies affect millions of people more quickly and more widely than do grassroots efforts . Government policies affecting millions more quickly than grassroots efforts, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 grassroots organizing often has as an ultimate goal the restructuring of national political and social life so that policies reflect the needs of poor people . Grassroots organizing often aims to restructuring national political, social life to reflect poor people's needs .
 The successes of grassroots empowerment show that poor communities can be more than victims of poverty waiting to be saved, or passive bystanders in NorthSouth relations . But the successes show that grassroots empowerment can be a success .
 Violent revolutions aimed at toppling national governments often lead to greater suffering . Nor do poor people need to place their hopes for change in violent revolutions . Violent revolutions lead to suffering more often than to stable economic development .
 Although the model may be effective in the local communities it reaches, it would have to be adopted widely and replicated on a much larger scale in order to influence the overall prospects for development in the UK .
 Oxfam’s $12 million in contributions compares with about 50 times that amount pledged by the U.S. government . In the case of assistance to survivors of the 2004 tsunami, Oxfam's contributions are more than half that of the United States' .
 Oxfam model of foreign assistance emphasizes support for local groups that can stimulate self-sustaining economic development at a local level . It is unclear whether the principles that the model embodies would work on developing countries .
 A mutually beneficial North-South partnership is the global goal of such projects . North-south partnership is a global goal for such projects, says South Korea .
 Oxfamaffiliated group in Gambia purchased mill with microcredit from microcredit . Women in the Gambia bought mill mill with small donations from micro-credit group .
 One advantage of private aid giving, like that of Oxfam, is the flexibility with which it can be given . Private aid giving is flexible and flexible, like Oxfam .
 Private aid organizations may also be more efficient (due to their smaller size) and better able to create partnerships with local recipients . Private aid groups may also benefit from smaller size and smaller size .
 Private aid organizations’ lack of size and official government status can also be a disadvantage, experts say . Private aid groups are often smaller than government agencies .
 Private NGOs may have difficulty providing large-scale relief in times of crisis . They can be barred from entering a country (Zimbabwe recently expelled all private NGOs providing assistance)
 They may promote development policies that are at odds with government policy, putting them in conflict with other donor governments . They also may promote policies that may put them in conflicts with other countries .
 Many governments and private organizations provide ongoing development assistance in the South that is administered by agencies from the North to help meet basic needs . The politics of foreign assistance is behind the scenes in South .
 People in the North funnel resources to people in the South, but may create unanticipated problems . Such charitable programs are useful means by which people in North funnel money to South .
 Programs do not address the causes of poverty, the position of poor countries in the world economy, or local political conditions such as military rule or corruption . For example, the programs do not focus on poverty .
 At worst they tend to be exploitive and reinforce racist stereotypes of the helplessness of people in the global South . In addition, although photos of a hungry child may stare at the reader from a magazine page .
 Donor states have discovered foreign aid is also an important tool of leverage over recipient states . Foreign aid is often used to help those who are less fortunate but also to leverage the recipient .
 Many donor states try to use some types of foreign aid to create economic and political changes in recipient countries . Donor states often try to create political and economic changes with foreign aid .
 U.S. uses promise of foreign aid, or threat of cutting it off, as leverage in political bargaining with recipients . Like almost all donor states, the United States uses the promise to foreign aid as leverage . The United States is a major donor state in the Middle East .
 Pakistan proceeded in the late 1980s with a nuclear weapons program despite U.S. warnings . A sizable flow of United States aid was terminated in the 1980s when Pakistan began its nuclear program .
 U.S. aid was restored to Pakistan in 2001 after support for Afghanistan . Then when Pakistan supported military action in next-door Afghanistan in 2001, it was restored . Pakistan has been a key ally of the United States since 2001 .
 In 2004, the U.S. launched the Millennium Challenge Corporation . The corporation increases United States aid to governments with certain policies, such as rule of law .
 After potential recipients apply for aid, a board composed of government and private officials reviews the applications . The board is comprised of government officials, private officials and government officials .
 In this way, the United States hopes to reduce the aid lost to corruption and waste . The U.S. hopes this will reduce the loss of aid to corruption .
 Of course, foreign assistance is also a complicated domestic political process, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Aid advocates in the United States have fought a United States law requiring that food sent to hungry people in Africa be grown in the U.S. and shipped in United States vessels . Aid advocates have also fought a law that requires that food shipped to Africa must be grown and shipped to the
 U.S. funds would be used to buy food locally in Africa, the authors say . They say it would save a lot of money and get aid to hungry people months faster .
 The proposal was opposed by the so-called Iron Triangle of food aid . Agribusiness profits from selling the food to the government, shipping companies that profit from shipping it . United States charities fund a healthy fraction of their budgets by selling in Africa some of the grain they ship from
 Congress killed off a proposal to allow purchase of local food in Africa . The Iron Triangle’s lobbying power killed off the proposal because of its lobbying power .
 The one type of foreign assistance that is the least politically motivated is disaster relief . Disaster relief is the most politically motivated type of aid, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Foreign aid is given when poor people are afflicted by famine, drought, earthquakes, flooding, or other natural disasters . It is the kind of foreign assistance given to those afflicted by such disasters .
 When disaster strikes a poor state, many people are left with no means of subsistence and often without their homes . Many people are often left without a means of livelihood and without homes .
 Disaster relief is the provision of short-term relief to such people in the form of food, water, shelter, clothing, and other essentials . Disaster relief in the Philippines is a form of relief to those affected by natural disasters .
 Disaster relief is very important because disasters can wipe out years of progress in economic development in a single blow . Disaster relief must be very important for countries such as Haiti, Haiti .
 Generally, the international community tries to respond with enough assistance to get people back on their feet . The international community is trying to help people in need of assistance .
 The costs of such assistance are relatively modest, the benefits are visible and dramatic . The benefits of the assistance are visible, and dramatic, in the U.S.
 Having a system of disaster relief in place provides the global South with a kind of insurance against sudden losses that could otherwise destabilize economic accumulation . Disaster relief is an insurance system that provides the South with an insurance .
 International disaster relief has become more organized and better coordinated in the past decade . Disaster relief is still a complex process that varies somewhat from one situation to the next .
 Contributions of governments, private charitable organizations, and other groups and agencies are coordinated through the UN Office of the Disaster Relief Coordinator .
 In 2006, the UN set up a $500 million fund to enable it to respond quickly to disasters without waiting to raise funds first each time disaster strikes . The fund was set up by the UN in 2006, and has been set up since then .
 Typically, international contributions make up no more than about about onethird of the total relief effort . The remainder of the relief effort comes from local communities and national governments .
 Money to Help Poor Children around the World: The world’s children --2 billion people under age 18 --have special humanitarian needs . The world's children, 2 billion under 18, are under the age of 18 . Money to help poor children around the world .
 The future depends on them, yet they are among the most vulnerable members of their societies . They are most prone to preventable deaths from disease from disease . The future of them will depend on them .
 The great majority of the world’s children live in the global South, including large numbers in abject poverty . Large numbers of children in poverty in the poorest countries .
 This benefit is enjoyed by humanity regardless of how much anyone contributes to it . The benefits of humanity are enjoyed by everyone regardless of the amount of contributions .
 If too many free-ride, UNICEF will lack resources and so will needy children . If too much free-rides are given, too many children will need to be taken care of, too much .
 In 2000, the UN adopted the Millennium Development Goals for reducing poverty in the global South . The Millennium Development goals were adopted by the UN in 2000 . They are among the goals to reduce poverty among the South's poorest .
 Two-thirds of the target date of 2015 has been met to review progress . World leaders met to discuss the progress of the project .
 Some important progress had been made, but “unmet commitments inadequate resources” had led the process to fall short of goals in key areas, the report said .
 The dominance principle does not help the world’s children, who occupy the low ranks on the world's hierarchies . The dominance principles do not help children who occupy low ranks .
 Disaster relief is a positive example of international cooperation to get a job done . Despite the potential collective action problem with a large number of actors, disaster relief is an example of the identity principle to solve a collective goods problem .
 Embarrassing failures in the past were rarer in the 1990s . Groups coordinate their actions '-j more effectively in the new century .
 The devastating earthquake in Haiti in 2010 showed the progress and the limitations of international relief efforts . Haiti's earthquake in 2010 was the first major earthquake to hit the country .
 Overnight, millions lost family members, homes, possessions, safe drinking water, and ways of life . Overnight millions lost their lives, homes and possessions .
 With no functioning government or medical care system, initial relief efforts were chaotic and international aid poorly coordinated . Initial relief efforts in Haiti were chaotic .
 Many victims died as planes stacked up over the small airport, unable to deliver supplies . Many of the victims were killed when planes stacked over the airport unable to reach them . The airport is a small airport in the Philippines .
 In days, United States military forces took over the airport, and massive international assistance flowed in . U.S. military forces seized the airport in days .
 Governments pledged billions of dollars to help Haiti get back to its feet under UN guidance . Governments and NGOs pledged $1.5 billion to help the country get back on its feet .
 UNICEF relies on voluntary contributions, two-thirds of them from governments and the rest from foundations, NGOs, and individuals . UNICEf relies upon voluntary contributions from governments, foundations and NGOs .
 The identity principle works well in this situation because all the world’s people were once children and can identify with children . All the world's people are once children, and they identify with each other .
 UNICEF helped produce almost $20 million more from U.S. foundations and grants as well as $130 million from the United States Congress . More importantly, it has reinforced an identity link of Americans with the U.N. over the decades .
 The top four donors to UNICEF after the United States are Norway, the Netherlands, Britain, and Sweden . Humanitarian aid is a strong element of national identity in many countries .
 This somewhat spontaneous coordination of states, IOs, and NGOs seems contrary to the anarchical international system . This sort of coordination of state and NGO coordination is contrary to an anarchic international system, says the author .
 The relationship between disasters and economic development is complex, and appropriate responses vary according to location, type and size of disaster, and phase of recovery .
 International norms regarding states’ legal obligations to assist others in times of natural disaster are changing . International norms are changing regarding how nations should assist others during natural disaster . States should be able to accept assistance if needed, such as help from other nations .
 Some have even suggested extending the idea of the responsibility to protect to the area of disaster relief .
 Cyclone Nargis, which struck Burma in 2008, was particularly relevant in the wake of the 2008 disaster . This idea became particularly relevant after the 2008 tragedy of Burma .
 An estimated 130,000 people died in that natural disaster in Burma . The repressive government of Burma delayed or denied efforts of the international community to provide assistance to those affected by the cyclone .
 Weeks were wasted while the government denied the needed assistance for coping with the cyclone . While aid did eventually flow into Burma, weeks were wasted .
 There is a danger in providing foreign assistance, especially in large-scale governmental aid programs, that people from the North may provide assistance inappropriate for a developing country’s local conditions and culture .
 Nomadic herders in the area of Lake Turkana near the Sahara desert, the Turkana tribe, were poor and vulnerable to periodic droughts . The Turkana tribes were poor, vulnerable and vulnerable . The tribe was nomadic and nomadic .
 Western aid donors and the Kenyan government decided that the herders’ traditional way of life was not environmentally sustainable and should be replaced by commercial fishing of the tilapia fish in Lake Turkana .
 Norway, with long experience in fishing, was asked to teach fishing and boat-building methods to the Turkana .
 To create a commercially viable local economy, Norwegian consultants recommended marketing frozen fish fillets to Kenya and the world .
 In 1981, Norway finished building a $2 million, stateof-the-art fish freezing plant on the shores of Lake Turkana . A $20 million road was built connecting the plant to Kenya’s transportation system .
 After a few days, the freezers were turned off and the facility became a very expensive driedfish warehouse . The facility was turned into an expensive dried fish warehouse .
 Turkana culture viewed fishing as the lowest-status profession, suitable only for those incompetent at herding . Fishing was a low-status job for Turkana people, especially those who failed to do it .
 Lake Turkana shrinks every few decades as drought reduces inflow of water . Every few decades, the lake shrinks due to drought reducing water inflow . The lake is the source of much of the world's largest natural resources .
 Such a drought in 1984-1985 eliminated the fishing operations in the gulf . The fishing operations were based in the Gulf of Mexico .
 The Norwegians might have foreseen these problems by doing more homework instead of just transplanting what worked in Norway . Norweigians may have done more homework to avoid these problems .
 When the drought hit, 20,000 herders were left in an overcrowded environment in which every tree was cut for firewood and 23 were cut . Pelling, Mark.
 Many scholars have undertaken research to understand whether foreign aid is effective at creating economic growth and alleviating poverty in the global South . Instead of becoming selfsufficient, the Turkana people became 'l ^ totally dependent on outside aid'
 Heated debates now occur among academics and policy makers as to whether aid is effective and, therefore, whether more or less should be given .
 Scholars suggest increasing foreign assistance in order to deal with the crushing inequalities between the global North and the global South .
 Research suggests that aid does not always help poor countries develop . Because the global South cannot reliably sustain capital accumulation, assistance from the North is neces'l sary to jump-start economic growth/ Countering this position, however, is research suggesting that aid .
 In particular, unless recipient countries possess institutions that practice good government, aid will largely be wasted or fall into the hands of corrupt leaders . Aid will be wasted if recipient countries do not have institutions of good government .
 This research has been the inspiration for the United States’ MCC policies as well as more IMF conditionality . This research was used to develop the U.S.’s MCC policy .
 The flow of aid has allowed leaders in poor states to avoid difficult policy changes, critics say . They say it would pave the way for long-term economic growth in poor countries . Aid experts say aid has let leaders avoid hard policy changes .
 In some African countries, the massive infusion of foreign assistance after decolonization led to increased 'l Q poverty and dependence on charity, rather than increased wealth and independence . Sometimes foreign assistance contributes goods to third world economies with little understanding of local needs or long-term strategies .
 Free supplies including cartons of mouthwash are delivered by the United States ambassador and the captain of a United States Navy ship participating in Project Handclasp, 1989 .
 The giving and receiving of foreign assistance is political, even if the motivations for giving it are not . Foreign aid is political even if it's not, and the motivations are not, are political .
 People in the North become aware of the tremendous gap between North and South and try to address the problem . Perhaps most important is that people in the north become aware .
 Poverty can seem so overwhelming that citizens in rich countries can easily turn their backs and just try to live their own lives . Poverty can be so overwhelming it can seem to seem to be overwhelming to those in poor countries .
 The integrated global economy brings to the North products and people from the South . North products are brought in by the North and South .
 The information revolution puts images of poverty on TV sets in comfortable living rooms . It is the information revolution that has helped bring poverty to the public eye .
 Security relations have shifted in the post-Cold War era to give new prominence to the global South . Security relations and political economy alike have shifted to the South in the past .
 Study and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at MyPoliSciLab 3 Harden, Blaine . Study and review the post-test and chapter exam at MyPciLab. 3 Harden .
 Why the West’s Efforts to Aid the Rest have done So Much III and So Little Good? The West's efforts to aid the rest of the world have done so little good, he says .
 Many poor countries, led by China, have grown robustly in recent years . In recent years many poor countries have grown much faster than China .
 While the 2008-2009 recession hurt the global South, growth has begun to return, growth is beginning to return . The South's economy has been hit hard by the recession in the past decade .
 China is the world’s leading success story in economic development . Though still poor, China is still a major economic success story . China's economic growth has been a major success story for China .
 This reflects the experiences of the NICs and China as well as the theory of comparative advantage . The NICs' experiences and China's experience are reflected in the theory that comparative advantage is superior .
 The opposite theory is that authoritarian government is necessary to maintain control while concentrating capital for industrialization . But the opposite theory has also not been supported by the Chinese government .
 MNCs look for favorable local conditions, including political and economic stability, in deciding where to invest . MNC firms look for . favorable local . conditions .
 Through renegotiations and other debt management efforts, the North and South have improved the debt situation in recent years . The North and the South have managed their debt situation .
 Conditionality agreements often necessitate politically unpopular measures such as cutting food subsidies . These conditionality agreements are often necessary to avoid politically unpopular cuts .
 The Generalized System of Preferences tries to compensate by lowering barriers to exports from the global South . It is designed to reduce barriers to trade from the South .
 Such aid is often used for political leverage and promotes the export of products from the donor state . Such aid often used to promote political leverage, promote export of goods .
 Past successes depend heavily on developing a manufacturing base, which requires access to scarce capital . Past successes in economic development have depended heavily on .
 Some scholars criticize the IMF for imposing harsh terms in its conditionality agreements with poor states . IMF has been criticized for its harsh conditions for poor countries .
 Others applaud IMF for demanding serious reforms before providing financial resources . Others applaud the IMF for pushing for serious reforms .
 Billions of dollars per year in foreign aid flow from developed countries to developing countries . The U.S. is the largest source of foreign aid to the developing world .
 The amount of foreign aid from the Development Assistance Committee has fluctuated greatly over time . Yet as discussed in this chapter, the amount of aid has increased greatly over the years .
 The amount of foreign aid has steadily fallen in the past four decades . When measured as a percentage of DAC countries 7 GDP, the amount has fallen steadily .
 Multilateral agencies (such as investment banks and the UN) give nearly $12 billion to the global South . The global South is the poorest part of the world .
 Private donors from DAC countries now provide over $300 billion in aid flows as well, more than three times the official assistance provided by DAC countries . Private donors provide over three times official assistance .
 Recently, a controversy has emerged regarding the question of how much aid to give . Recently, it has emerged that the government has not been able to provide enough aid .
 Some prominent economists and political figures have called for large increases in foreign aid given by DAC countries . This is larger than the increases seen after the 9/11 attacks .
 Skeptics argue that increasing the level of foreign aid would not help to achieve the ultimate goal of much of the aid, economic development . The skeptics do not necessarily call for decreasing foreign assistance .
 DAC Countries Should Significantly Increase Foreign Aid . Foreign aid can help solve important problems . DAC countries should significantly increase foreign aid to solve problems .
 Foreign aid can be essential to help poorer states kick-start the development process . From health care crises, infrastructure maintenance, and literacy programs to food assistance, foreign aid can help poor states kickstart development .
 Higher levels of assistance would increase the quality of life for millions of people living in poverty abroad . The U.S. government says it is working to improve the lives of those living abroad .
 As the U.S. and the EU compete for influence with China in places like Africa and Latin America, increasing foreign assistance will create tighter economic, political, and social bonds between DAC countries and recipient states, potentially preventing China from gaining allies .
 By providing money and other resources to stabilize poor countries, DAC countries decrease the chances that disaffected individuals in those countries will blame the West for their problems . DAC countries also decrease the chance of disaffected people blaming the West .
 This resentment often leads to anti-Western behavior, especially terrorism . This resentment leads to support for terrorism in the extreme case, writes Peter Bergen .
 2 DAC countries should not signifiicantly increase foreign aid . Large amounts of foreign aid are wasted or stolen, says Andrew Hammond .
 Some economists estimate that half of aid packages are stolen by corrupt leaders or state officials . Other times, other times, the aid is simply wasted .
 Developing countries may get used to receiving large amounts of aid and neglect to develop internal programs to provide education, health care, or infrastructure maintenance . Developing nations may not be able to rely heavily on foreign aid to develop programs to improve education and infrastructure .
 This dependency is dangerous for developing countries since it leaves them vulnerable to the policies of aid donors . Developed countries are vulnerable to donors' policies, says Simon Tisdall .
 As a condition for receiving aid, developing states must promise to make certain changes or perform particular tasks . Developed states must also promise to perform certain tasks or perform specific tasks .
 This is a particularly egregious violation of sovereignty since it is done under the guise of helping the recipient states . The recipient states say the move is a violation of their sovereignty . The U.S. should not be allowed to take part in such a move, they say .
 These themes are inescapable in human society, from the smallest groups to the world community . The themes of this week's show include the themes of the smallest group to the smallest .
 The subject of international relations is in this sense an extension of everyday life and a reflection of the choices of individual human beings. International relations is an extension to everyday life, the author says .
 IR belongs to all of us, North and South, women and men, citizens, citizens and leaders, who live together on this planet . "IR belongs to us, and it belongs to everyone," says the author .
 This book has shown that in IR, more than other social settings, collective goods problems pose formidable challenges to successful cooperation among the large number of independent actors . It has also shown that collective goods .
 IR actors have developed three kinds of solutions to collective goods problems . With no central government to enforce order, they have developed solutions to these problems . IR's three core principles: Collective goods, collective goods and collective order .
 Characteristic solutions based on the reciprocity principle are complicated, take forever to agree upon, and require extensive monitoring of compliance thereafter . Characteristics based on reciprocity principles are complicated and take forever .
 These reciprocity-based agreements offer the basis for an international system that has moved over centuries from extreme war-proneness to ever stronger peace and prosperity . The world’s many serious remaining problems remain, but woven together, these reciprocity based agreements offer a model for peace and
 One major theme of this book is the nature of the international system as a welldeveloped set of rules based on state sovereignty, territoriality, and “anarchy”—a lack of central government . The book is published by Simon Tisdall, a Pulitzer Prize-winning
 The international system is becoming more complex, more nuanced, and more interconnected with other aspects of planetary society . Yet the international system remains more complex and nuanced, the author says .
 State sovereignty is now challenged by the principle of self-determination . State sovereignty now challenges by the principles of selfdetermination, says David Cameron .
 International norms have begun to limit the right of government to rule a population by force against its will and to violate human rights . International norms are beginning to limit government's right to rule by force .
 Territorial integrity is also problematic, because national borders do not stop information, environmental changes, or missiles . National borders are not only borders but also borders can stop information and missiles .
 Information allows actors to know what is going on everywhere in the world and coordinate actions globally . Information allows state, substate, and supranational actors to coordinate actions worldwide .
 Technological development is just one aspect of the profound, yet incremental, changes taking place in international relations .
 New actors are gaining power, longstanding principles are becoming less effective . New challenges are arising for states, groups, and individuals alike alike . New actors gaining power .
 Technology is profoundly changing the utility and role of military force . The U.S. military says technology is changing the role of the military in the world .
 Technology plays key roles on both sides in counterinsurgency wars such as in Afghanistan and the other 11 active wars in the world . Technology is key to both sides of the war in Afghanistan, Afghanistan .
 Nonmilitary forms of leverage, particularly economic rewards, have become much more important power capabilities . "Economic rewards" have become more important tools for the U.S. to use in the future .
 In IPE, we see simultaneous trends toward integration and disintegration among states . We see simultaneous . integration and . disintegration of states, we say .
 People continue to speak their own language, to fly their own flag, and to use their own currency with its pictures and emblems . People still use the language of their own country .
 People identify with their state, but they also hold competing identities based on ethnic ties, gender, and region . At the same time, people identify with state but also with ethnic ties and gender . Europe is now the most populous country in the world .
 In international trade, liberal economics prevails because it works so well . In the U.S. it's a good thing to say liberal economics is good for business .
 States have learned that to survive, they must help the creation of wealth by MNCs and other actors . States must help create wealth by creating it by creating wealth by their own actors, states have learned .
 Because of high costs, the large number of actors, and collective goods problems, international bargaining over the environment is difficult . International bargaining is difficult because of the high costs and the number of people involved . International negotiations are difficult to work on the environment .
 North-South relations are moving to the center of world politics . North-North relations are becoming a key point in world politics. North Korea and South Korea are the world's most powerful nations .
 The North continues to accumulate wealth while much of the South lags . Demographic and economic trends are sharpening the global North-South gap .
 The North will bear a high cost for failing to address the economic development of the South . Ultimately, the North must pay a high price for not addressing the economic issues of the south .
 By using computerization and biotechnology innovations, poor states can develop their economies more efficiently, sustainably than did Europe or North America . Perhaps, by using computerized technology, poverty can be more efficient .
 The future is unknowable now, but as it unfolds you can compare it to the worlds that you desire and expect . You can compare the world with the worlds you want and expect from the world you want .
 The choices you make and actions you take will ultimately affect the world you live in . Your actions will affect the future of your life and your life .
 Year by year, the information revolution and other aspects of interdependence are drawing you more closely into contact with the rest of the world . You are involved, and year by year you are becoming more closely in contact with others .
 You can act in many ways to bring the world into line with the world you desire . You can also act in ways to make the world more like you want it .
 You can empower yourself by finding the actions and choices that define your place in international relations . You can also empower yourself to find a way to define your international relations place .
 Now that you have completed the studies covered in this book, don’t stop here. Don't stop here!
 Be a part of the changes that will carry this world through the coming decades . Be a member of the world's largest social network . Join us on Facebook and Twitter to see how you can help change the world .
 acid rain is caused by air pollution that damages trees and often crosses borders . Acid rain is often caused by pollution that can be seen in the United States .
 autarky A policy of self-reliance, avoiding or minimizing trade and trying to produce everything one needs by oneself . balance of payments A summary of all the flows of money into and out of a country . arms race A reciprocal process in which two or more states build up military
 In extreme cases, poor civil-military relations can lead to military coups, civil war . A war between factions within a state trying to create a new government for the entire state or some territorial part of it .
 Council of the European Union is a European Union institution in which the relevant ministers (foreign, economic, agriculture, finance, etc.) of each member state meet to enact legislation and reconcile national interests . Some states’ currencies are nonconvertible .
 When the meeting takes place among the state leaders, it is called the “European Council’s” (p.E.C.A.J.R. J.H. A.Hermann: The meeting is known as the European Council . When the
 Doha Round A series of negotiations under the World Trade Organization that began in Doha, Qatar, in 2001 . The discount rate is set by countries’ central banks, diversionary foreign policy policies adopted to distract the public from domestic political problems .
 European Commission A European Union body whose members, while appointed by states, are supposed to represent EU interests . European Commission is supposed to be an independent body representing the EU .
 Commission's role is to identify problems and propose solutions to the Council of Ministers . Supported by a multinational civil service in Brussels, the commission’s role is .
 The European Court of Justice is a judicial arm of the European Union . It is based in Luxembourg and based in the United States .
 The court has actively established its jurisdiction and its right to overrule national law when it conflicts with EU law . The court is actively establishing its jurisdiction in the EU .
 European Parliament A quasi-legislative body of the European Union that operates as a watchdog over the European Commission and has limited legislative power . European Community (formerly the European Economic Community) and associated treaty organizations . European Parliament is a quasi-legal body of European Union .
 The EU has 25 member states and negotiating with other states that have applied for membership . The EU is negotiating with states that want to join the EU, including Germany and France .
 The rate at which one state’s currency can be exchanged for the currency of another state . See also Maastricht Treaty. exchange rate .
 Since 1973, the international monetary system has depended mainly on floating rather than fixed exchange rates . The international Monetary System has depended on floating currencies since 1973 .
 Rates determined by global currency markets in which private investors and governments alike buy and sell currencies . See also fixed exchange rates . foreign assistance money made available to third world states .
 The acquisition by residents of one country of control over a new or existing business in another country . See also Development Assistance Committee . foreign direct investment .
 The flow of goods and services across national boundaries unimpeded by tariffs or other restrictions . Free trade was a key aspect of Britain’s policy after 1846 and of U.S. policy after 1945 . See also customs union .
 Games such as prisoner’s dilemma and Chicken have been used to analyze various sorts of international interactions . Polls show women lower than men on average in support for military actions .
 Generalized System of Preferences A mechanism by which some industrialized states began in the 1970s to give tariff concessions to third world states on certain imports; an exception to the most-favored nation principle .
 Global warming is a slow, long-term rise in the average world temperature caused by the emission of greenhouse gases produced by burning fossil fuels . The use of geography as an element of power, and the ideas about it held by political leaders and scholars .
 The great power club was exclusively European until the 20th century . Also called the “bureaucratic politics model”
 Dozens of third world states have entered into such agreements with the IMF in the past two decades . See also International Monetary Fund .
 The legal protection of the original works of inventors, authors, creators, and performers under patent, copyright, and trademark law . See also misperceptions, selective perceptions .
 The longest-range ballistic missiles, able to travel 5,000 miles, are known as intercontinental ballistic missiles . Such rights became a contentious area of trade negotiations .
 International Criminal Court is a permanent tribunal for war crimes and crimes against humanity . International Monetary Fund coordinates international currency exchange, balance of international payments, and national accounts . International integration is the process by which supranational institutions come to replace national ones .
 Islamist Political ideology based on instituting Islamic principles and laws in government . Islamist Political Ideology based on Islamism .
 A broad range of groups using diverse methods come under this category . Distinct spheres of international activity within which policy makers of various states face conflicts .
 Keynesian economics used successfully in the Great Depression of the 1930s . The principles were articulated by British economist John Maynard Keynes . They include the view that governments should sometimes used deficit spending to stimulate economic growth .
 Kyoto Protocol entered into effect in 2005 and mandates cuts in carbon emissions in 2008-2012 . Kyoto Protocol is the main international treaty on global warming, which entered into force in 2005 .
 Almost all the world’s major countries, except the United States, are participants in land mines . Concealed explosive devices are often left behind by irregular armies .
 Treaty was signed in the Dutch city of Maastricht and ratified in 1992 . It commits the European Union to monetary union (a single currency and European Central Bank) and to a common foreign policy .
 Muslims See Islam . mutually assured destruction . Possibility of second-strike nuclear capabilities .
 The amount a government owes in debt as a result of deficit spending is the amount owed in debt due to deficit spending . See also deterrence. See also national interest .
 Nonaligned movement was a movement of third world states, led by India and Yugoslavia, that attempted to stand apart from the U.S.-Soviet rivalry during the Cold War . nongovernmental organization is transnational group or entity that interacts with states, multinational corporations .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization was formed in 1949 with mainly West European members . It was formed to oppose and deter Soviet power in Europe . North Atlantic is a U.S.-led military alliance .
 North-South gap is the disparity in resources between the industrialized, relatively rich countries of the West and poorer countries of Africa, the Middle East, and much of Asia and Latin America .
 The model of “bounded rationality” postulates that decision makers generally “satisfice” rather than optimize . A decisionmaking model in which policy makers or lower-level officials rely largely on standardized responses .
 Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is most prominent cartel in the international economy . Its members control about half the world’s total oil exports, enough to significantly affect the world price of oil .
 Oxfam works with local third world communities to determine the needs of their own people . Oxfam America is a private charitable group that works in third world .
 Oxfam does not operate the projects but provides funding to local organizations to carry them out . The ozone layer screens out harmful ultraviolet rays from the sun .
 Certain chemicals used in industrial economies break the ozone layer down . The ozone layer was created by industrial economies . Certain chemicals are used to break down ozone levels .
 Peacebuilding is the use of military peacekeepers, civilian administrators, police trainers, and similar efforts to sustain peace agreements and build stable, democratic governments in societies recovering from civil wars . Private creditors meet as the London Club .
 A world currency created by the International Monetary Fund to replace gold as a world standard . Currency created by IIMF to replace the gold standard .
 Critics call it an expensive failure that will likely be ineffective, See also A ntiballistic Missile Treaty . Rural communities growing food mainly for their own consumption rather than for sale in local markets .
 The United Nations was created after World War II to promote collective security . It is an organization of nearly all world states, created after WWII .
 UN Charter is the founding document of the United Nations . It is based on the principles that states are equal, have sovereignty over their own affairs, enjoy independence and territorial integrity, and must fulfill international obligations .
 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea A world treaty governing use of the oceans . UN Conference on Trade and Development A structure established in 1964 to promote third world development through various trade proposals . UN Convention is a world treaty on the law of the sea .
 U.S.-Japanese Security Treaty was created in 1951 against the potential Soviet threat to Japan . The treaty is a bilateral alliance between the United States and Japan . It was created to protect Japan from the Soviet threat .
 The United States maintains troops in Japan and is committed to defend Japan if attacked . Japan pays the United States to offset about half of the cost of maintaining the troops . Violations of the law governing the conduct of warfare are possible .
 Warsaw Pact A Soviet-led Eastern European military alliance, founded in 1955 and disbanded in 1991 . Warsaw Pact was a Soviet-backed Eastern European alliance, formed in 1955 .
 Nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons are distinguished from conventional weapons by their enormous potential lethality and their relative lack of discrimination in whom they kill . It opposed the NATO alliance .
 The World Bank was established in 1944 as a source of loans to help reconstruct the European economies . It was originally the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
 Main borrowers were third world countries and, in the 1990s, Eastern European ones . Later, the main borrowers were Third world countries, third world and Eastern European .
 Trachtenberg, Marc, Marc and Tracy, James D., 309. Ann, 105n44, 110n63 Tierney, Michael]., Illn65 Tilly, Charles, 160n20, 454n43 Tobias, Sheila, 114n71 Tolba,
 Entries for tables and figures are followed by “table” and “fig. ” respectively . Entries are then followed by the words ‘table’ and ‘fig.