 If you do not hear anything when the images change, e-mail Caryn Koplik at ckoplik@nationalhumanitiescenter.org for assistance .
 Intelligence analysts had discovered the bases as a result of a U-2 surveillance flight over Cuba on October 14 .
 The CIA used this map to brief President Kennedy about the bases, which were not yet completed, showing the radius the missiles could cover . The map was used by the CIA to brief Kennedy on the bases .
 The ExComm included officials such as the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Treasury, and the Attorney General . Dean Acheson was a member of the ExComm, which included former Secretary of State and Defense .
 They met in secret for the next six days, most often without the President . They met often in secret, often without permission .
 Most accounts credit the free-flowing deliberations of the ExComm with generating the strategy of deploying a blockade around Cuba in order to block the Soviet Union from bringing missile warheads and additional military equipment to the island .
 We now know that the Soviets actually had delivered the warheads already . The Soviets had already delivered warheads already.
 The ExComm assessed that the Soviet had risked placing the missiles in Cuba because Premier Khrushchev came away from a 1961 summit meeting with President Kennedy believing the young U.S. leader was weak . Sheldon Stern demonstrates that the President shaped the ExComm discussions to conform to the least confront
 ExComm members assumed that the Soviet leader wanted to use the missiles as a bargaining chip to have the U.S. end its support for West Berlin . The missiles were believed to have been used in a bid to get the United States to give up support for Berlin .
 The letter arrived late in the evening, and the ExComm decided to examine the proposal early the next morning . The ExComm met with the proposal the next day .
 The Soviet KGB station chief in Washington, DC, asked ABC White House correspondent John Scali to convey essentially the same proposal to President Kennedy . That evening the Soviet KGB chief in D.C. DC asked ABC correspondent to convey the proposal .
 U-2s had been flying over Cuba three or four times each day since October 16 without incident . U.2s were flying over the island without incident without incident since then .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended that the President commence an attack on Cuba immediately . Joint chiefs of Staff said the attack should be launched immediately .
 Khrushchev: “Now with regard to the question of parity.” The Soviet Union had parity parity with the Soviet Union . The USSR had parity with Russia in the 1950s .
 John the Divine said that God has seven cups of anger which he could pour out onto the earth . God said he has seven cup of anger that could be poured out of the world .
 The Soviet side had at that time only half-a-cup, according to FIFA . So, applying this analogy to us, we could say that the Soviet team had only half a cup . The match was held in the Soviet Union's first major tournament in Soviet-era Russia .
 The U.S. will increase its military budget by 15% for the next fiscal year . President Obama also announced the increase in the military budget .
 Khrushchev: “I was haunted by the knowledge that the Americans could not stomach having Castro’s Cuba right next to them.” “The Americans could . not stomach . having Castro's Cuba right . next next door to them,” says Khrush
 The Non-Aligned Movement was organized in 1961 by India, Indonesia, Egypt, and Yugoslavia to represent the Third World in East-West conflict between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . It was formed in 1961 .
 Of the 25 original members, Cuba was the only one from the Western Hemisphere . Cuba was only one of the original members of the group of 25 .
 At the time, the Soviet Union and China both claimed to be the ‘natural leader” of the Third World . At the same time, China claimed to have been the "natural leader" of the world .
 The Soviet claim would have been eviscerated if it allowed the U.S. to overthrow the Cuban government by invading Cuba, because as a founding member of the NAM, Cuba was viewed a Third World leader .
 In January, 1962, the United States succeeded in suspending Cuba’s OAS membership . The U.S. suspended Cuba's membership in the OAS in January 1962 .
 In February, 1962, the U.S. imposed a total economic embargo on Cuba that included food and medicine . The embargo was imposed by the United States in 1962 .
 The United States held unusually large military exercises in the Caribbean . The most provocative of the exercises involved a mock invasion of Vieques Island .
 The name of the island in the war game was “Ortsac,” which is “Castro’s spelled backwards . The island is called Ortsac .
 The build-up troubled US military planners, even as they concluded that the Soviets were not installing ballistic missiles . The build up troubled US planners even though they concluded it was not ballistic missile installation .
 Soldiers were told that they were going on a mission near Vladivostok . Their destination was only revealed to them only after they left port .
 Cuban leaders interpreted the action as a prelude to a U.S. attack . The Cuban government says the action is not a threat to attack . Cuban leaders have interpreted the move as a threat .
 United States strategic forces remain at DefCon 2, the highest state of alert prior to nuclear war . U.S. strategic forces remained at Defcon 2, which is the highest level of alert .
 President Kennedy ended the alert on November 20, 1962, when Cuba accepted the fait accompli that the Soviets would be taking back the bombers and patrol boats .
 Raul Castro, Fidel Castro, Osvaldo Dorticos, Raul Roa, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez meet with Alexandr Aleexev, Anastas Mikoyan and translator .