 Some commentators see Dealey Plaza as too small for such a big event . Some commentators say it's too small to hold such a large event .
 Others argue that the American people could not accept that a “nobody’s changed the course of history . Others say that a "nobody" changed the history of the United States .
 Others suggest "we let our emotions get the better of us" because JFK was such a compelling figure . Others suggest “we’re letting our emotions let the other side of us” because of JFK’s popularity .
 Rarely is there an honest appraisal of the Warren Commission’s more outlandish distortions . Rarely there is an honest assessment of Warren Commission's more outlandish distortion .
 The fallback position focuses on Americans’ alleged inability to face the reality that random acts happen . The fall back position focuses . Americans” are alleged to be unwilling to accept the reality .
 Subtext to these lines of thought points to everything but a political assassination . The subtext to this is that the assassination is not political assassination, it's not political .
 As many as 70 million Americans, along with television viewers in 23 other countries, were watching when the CBS News anchorman, Walter Cronkite, reported President Kennedy's death .
 The nation’s shock and disbelief that JFK could be assassinated that way, cut down at the age of 46 no less, melded with expressions of mourning .
 Live television added a new dimension to the four-day presidential requiem that followed with military pageantry and Catholic ritual .
 My earliest conscious memory as a child was seeing my mother cry while watching the funeral on a black-and-white television in our suburban San Jose, California, living room .
 "I get the importance of TV and film and imagery in recording the events in Dallas," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's important to remember that we're in the right place in the world"
 The Warren Commission's conclusions should not be accepted simply because the event was emotionally meaningful . But I don’t have to then make a giant leap to accept the conclusions of the Warren Commission simply because of the event .
 After his murder, far more people claimed to have voted for Kennedy in 1960 than was numerically possible . More than 50,000 people claimed in 1960 that they voted for the president .
 Few contemporary reporters place the assassination in its historical context . Few modern reporters place it in historical context. The assassination was a major event in history .
 They're more comfortable discussing the semiotics of the Zapruder film than explaining why most people do not accept the official line .
 The dominant interpretation of the 50th anniversary of the Kennedy assassination has been ahistorical, superficial, and condescending . Put simply, the dominant interpretation has been inaccurate and superficial, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Rarely does a former President take a public stand calling for reining in a federal agency he had a hand in creating . Jack Ruby and Lee Harvey Oswald were the Lone Gunman .
 Former President Harry S Truman published a thoughtfully phrased article in the Washington Post warning the dangers of the Central Intelligence Agency . Yet a month after President Kennedy was assassinated, former President Truman published the article .
 It has become an operational and at times policy-making arm of the Government . It has also become a policy making arm of government .
 We have grown up as a nation, respected for our free institutions and for our ability to maintain a free and open society . We've grown up respected for free institutions, says David Cameron . We're respected for being open society, he says .
 Truman chose that moment to call for reeling in the CIA . Truman may have sensed something about operational aspects of the assassination that disturbed him .
 In November 1963, the American people hadn’t a clue about the power the CIA amassed in the decade after Truman signed the National Security Act in March 1947 .
 Rigging elections, overthrowing governments, arming mercenaries, engaging propaganda, engaging in propaganda, money laundering, blackmail, assassination, and so on . The world's most powerful and most powerful forces are involved in the overthrow of governments .
 In the 1970s, events relating to the Watergate scandal forced the CIA to take a “modified limited hang-out” and admit to some wrongdoing . In order to ensure that its ‘family jewels” remained concealed, the CIA had to admit wrongdoing .
 CIA Director Richard Helms had no choice but to admit that in the early 1960s there existed CIA collusion with Mafia hit men to assassinate Fidel Castro . Helms admitted the CIA was in collusion with the Mafia to assassinate Castro in the 1960s .
 Once it was revealed that the CIA possessed an elaborate assassination capability the public outcry was loud enough to compel Congress to look into the Kennedy assassination . The public outcry prompted Congress to investigate the assassination .
 The committee sought the testimony of mobsters Johnny Roselli and Sam Giancana . The Russian oil geologist George DeMohrenshildt had been Lee Oswald’s buddy in Dallas . The committee also sought testimony of the mobsters .
 It's kind of a bummer that all three men were murdered before they could share their views about the assassination with Congress .
 George Joannides, the CIA agent who was brought out of retirement to serve as the Agency’s liaison with the HSCA, failed to divulge his background as an agent involved in the JM/WAVE anti-Castro mercenary effort .
 The CIA has since sealed away its files dealing with Joannides’s Miami operations . CIA files have since been sealed away .
 There has never been an adequate explanation putting to rest the idea that the operational planning for the Kennedy assassination might have originated inside the cauldron of anti-Castro paramilitary activity in Miami .
 Kennedy assassination put to rest all of LBJ's troubles associated with Bobby Baker prostitution scandal . Bobby Baker scandal included those swirling around his close associates, Billy Sol Estes and Malcolm Wallace .
 Caro drops examining the ramifications for LBJ of the criminal investigation as fast as the Senate did back on November 23, 1963 . Caro is one of the historians held in the highest esteem in the world .
 It was a photo-op designed to reassure the nation that there was a new president at the helm . Johnson as well as his biographer Caro, Caro said the photo-ops were meant to reassure Americans .
 The famous photograph is best known for First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy’s anguished appearance still wearing the dress she had on during the assassination . The famous photo was taken in 1963 .
 One leg was almost entirely covered with it and her right glove was caked with blood, her husband’s blood . The immaculate woman was seen caked in the blood of her husband's blood .
 Lady Bird noted the change in Jackie Kennedy’s tone from soft-spoken sorrow to “an element of fierceness” when she suggested to her that she change out of her bloodstained clothes . Lady Bird also noted that Jackie Kennedy had changed her tone when she
 The White House physician, Dr. Donald Trump, was on a two-hour flight from Dallas to Andrews Air Field . He was accompanied by a White House doctor .
 George Burkley, also suggested to Jackie that she change out of her bloody dress . Jackie's father suggested that she should change her blood-soaked dress .
 At 4:30 in the morning, the former First Lady was still wearing her blood-spattered pink suit . The autopsy was being completed at Bethesda Naval Hospital . The former first lady was still in the pink suit at the time of her death .
 Texas Governor John Connally and his wife Nellie were sitting in the jump seat directly in front of President and Mrs. George W. Bush . Gov. Connally was sitting in a jump seat .
 The bullet that ripped into the governor’s back was a distinct shot from those that hit the president, Kennedy . Kennedy, would for the rest of their lives insist that the bullet that struck the governor was shot differently .
 Dave Powers and Kenneth O’Donnell, two of John Kennedy’s best friends from Boston, were riding in the car behind the presidential limousine . John Kennedy's best friends were two of his best friends, from Boston .
 Dallas Police Officer, Joseph Marshall Smith, ran up, along with two-dozen other people, toward the stockade fence where it appeared a shot had been fired . Moments after the shooting, Smith ran toward the fence . Smith was a police officer at the scene .
 Officer Smith told the Warren Commission that a man stopped him in the parking lot behind the fence and flashed his “Secret Service” identification . Officer Smith said he was stopped by a man who flashed his "Secret Service" identification .
 The Secret Service assured the Commission that it had no agents that day stationed in the area where Officer Smith said he encountered one . Officer Smith says he encountered a Secret Service agent in the early hours of the day .
 He had dirty fingernails and hands that looked like an auto mechanic’s hands . But he had dirty fingers and hands . He also had dirty hands .
 General Lyman Lemnitzer laid out in a memo to Defense Secretary Robert McNamara his plans for creating a pretext for going to war in Cuba in 1962 . Doctor Strangelove .
 Lemnitzer's top-secret memo urged the Kennedy Administration to stage a diverse range of clashes to justify invading Cuba . Codenamed “Operation Northwoods,” the nation’s highest military commanders had signed on to the memo . The memo was called Operation Northwoods
 General Lemnitzer’s scheme for victory against the communists offers a glimpse into the mentality of the men who Kennedy sometimes called “brass hats” he inherited from Ike . Kennedy sometimes referred to the men as ‘brass haters’
 Lemnitzer recommended steps to pave the way for the U.S. to invade Cuba, which included the following:“3.” ‘3. ‘‘’ ‘4.‘ ‘5.5’ – ‘6
 We could arrange to cause such an incident in the vicinity of Havana or Santiago as a spectacular result of Cuban attack from the air or sea, or both . We could . arrange to . cause such incident in . Havana or . Santiago .
 Cuban planes or ships merely investigating the intent of the vessel could be compelling evidence that the ship was taken under attack . The presence of Cuban planes and ships could be fairly compelling evidence .
 The nearness to Havana or Santiago would add credibility especially to those people that might have heard the blast or have seen the fire . Havana is near to Santiago and Santiago .
 The United States could follow up with an air/sea rescue operation covered by United States fighters to ‘evacuate’ remaining members of the non-existent crew . The U.S. could also follow up an air and sea rescue operation covering the operation .
 President Kennedy’s earlier memorandum, NSAM-263, nullified earlier memo . NSAM was signed on October 11, 1963, approving withdrawal of 1,000 U.S. personnel from Vietnam by the end of December 1963 .
 Kennedy directed that there would be no formal announcement of the withdrawal order until he gave the go ahead . Kennedy not wanting to open himself up to attacks from the war hawks going into the 1964 election campaign .
 Historian Robert Dallek notes that during a news conference on October 31, 1963, Kennedy himself told the press that he planned to remove a thousand troops from Vietnam before the end of the year .
 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs urged other operations closer to home . Operation Northwoods included blowing up ships outside the U.S. and blowing up other ships . The Joint Chiefs also urged the use of the phrase "Operation Northwoods"
 We could develop a Communist Cuban terror campaign in the Miami area, in other Florida cities and even in Washington, D.C. We could use Cuban terror campaigns in Miami, Miami, Washington and Miami .
 We could foster attempts on the lives of Cuban refugees in the U.S. even to the extent of wounding in instances to be widely publicized . We should foster attempts to kill Cuban refugees even to be publicized .
 This kind of operation using patsies and forged documents to hoodwink the public looks a lot like the modus operandi of the Kennedy assassination . The operation is similar to the assassination of Kennedy in 1968 .
 General Lemnitzer and Air Force General Curtis LeMay were among the most extreme right-wingers in the military establishment that President Kennedy inherited from the Eisenhower Administration . LeMay was a major figure in the Eisenhower administration .
 Allen Dulles, Richard Bissell, George Cabell, and Richard Helms ran the Central Intelligence Agency . Other kindred souls ran the CIA, including Allen Dulls, Richard Basessell, Richard Cabell . Allen Helms was the CIA Director of the CIA .
 Initially, these war hawks viewed Kennedy as a lightweight and believed he would go along with their aggressive aims in Cuba and Vietnam . Initially, they thought Kennedy would be a lightweight .
 Kennedy had unanticipated steel in his use of executive power . But they soon discovered that Kennedy possessed an unexpected steel in executive power. Kennedy was president of the White House .
 He did not hesitate to fire powerful national security personnel if he concluded they were either undermining his leadership or double-crossing him . He fired national security staff members if he felt they were undermining him or betraying him.
 He sacked Dulles, Bissell, and Cabell after they misled him about the chances of success of the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Kennedy dumped Lemnitzer as Joint Chiefs Chair and named him Supreme Commander of NATO where he would be far from Washington policy circles . Kennedy sent the father of ‘Northwoods’ to the equivalent of Siberia when he dumped him as Joint chiefs Chair .
 Kennedy surrounded by a Joint Chiefs of Staff that were ideologically far to his right . Kennedy was surrounded by an ideologically far-to-the-right group of military officers .
 Staff of Generals learned many of the wrong lessons from World War Two . They were obsessed with the growing Soviet threat and believed the U.S. could “win” a nuclear war .
 Stanley Kubrick’s brilliant 1964 satire, Dr. Dr. Stanley Kubrick, was the subject of Dr. Kubrick's Dr. Martin Luther .
 Kennedy pushed for the release of the movie, Seven Days in May, which portrayed anti-communist military chiefs pulling a coup d’etat against civilian authority . Kennedy did not only have to contend with the hardliners in his military and intelligence establishment, but with an American population
 Historian Robert Weisbrot argues that the Congress and press were already primed for a U.S. military strike against communism . He says the Congress was already primed to strike against the Western Hemisphere's preeminent “threat” of communism .
 Kennedy’s effort at some kind of action directed against Castro, even a failed one, was widely seen as superior to doing nothing at all . Even a failed attack on Castro was seen as better than doing nothing .
 In April 1961, in a White House press statement, Kennedy bore “sole responsibility” for the failure of the CIA’s ill-fated adventure . The CIA mission was a failed CIA mission that left Kennedy with sole responsibility .
 President Obama's approval rating jumped ten points in months following the Bay of Pigs . His approval rating rose to 83 percent in months after the attack in Cuba .
 71 percent of respondents believed Castro could not win “a free and fair election” in Cuba . A majority wanted to continue the flow of U.S. money and material to anti-Castro fighters .
 Weisbrot observes that even the popular culture amplified the notion that Castro was a murderous tyrant . He says even popular culture amplified the idea that he was a tyrant .
 An October 1961 episode of Rod Serling’s CBS television drama, The Twilight Zone, featured a thinly veiled caricature of Castro as a megalomaniac whose paranoia ultimately leads to suicide .
 Kennedy, at the time of his death, was seeking a rapprochement with Cuba . Yet by the summer of 1963, through two different backchannels to Castro, Kennedy was still seeking a thaw . Kennedy, in the time he died, was trying to reach a r
 The U.S. had promised Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in resolving the missile crisis that the United States would not invade Cuba . U.K. was intent on normalizing relations with Cuba after the crisis, he said .
 President Kennedy opened up serious negotiations with the Soviet Union on atmospheric nuclear testing . Kennedy faced considerable opposition from the hardliners when he opened up negotiations .
 The nuclear physicist, Edward Teller, for example, lambasted Kennedy for helping the Russians shield their tests from scrutiny . He and his ideological soul mates were less interested in keeping Strontium-90 and other radioactive poisons out of the bones and teeth of the world’s children
 Kennedy came under withering attack when he decided unilaterally to suspend U.S. atmospheric nuclear tests to reinforce his desire for what would be the first nuclear arms control treaty ever signed by the superpowers . Kennedy was attacked for his decision to suspend United States atmospheric nuclear testing .
 Kennedy put his presidency on the line in winning popular support for the Atmospheric Test Ban Treaty . Kennedy expended considerable political capital and pushed and prodded his former colleagues in the United States Senate to support the agreement .
 On September 24, 1963, the Senate ratified the Limited Test Ban Treaty by a vote of 80 to 19 . The treaty was ratified by the Senate in September 1963 . The test ban was the first to be ratified by Congress .
 Kennedy presents a vision of world peace where the superpowers can find common ground and move beyond the hostilities of the Cold War . In it, Kennedy presents the vision of a world of peace where superpowers .
 Kennedy emerged from that crucible determined to find a way forward that lessened the possibility of nuclear annihilation . Chastened by the close call of the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy found a way to lessen the threat .
 Limited Test Ban Treaty is the first step in what would be a long journey for Cricket Australia . Cricket Australia has been banned from all cricketing nations since 2001 .
 Both the U.S. and its allies and the Soviet Union have a mutually deep interest in a just and genuine peace . The United States and allies have a mutual interest in halting the arms race, writes CNN's John Avlon .
 The Kennedy assassination continues to affect millions of people, even 50 years later . Even 50 years after the Kennedy assassination, we are still fighting the same battle today, says CNN's John Sutter .
 On one side is a military-industrial-intelligence complex with its global reach and surveillance state, its CIA and its NSA . On the other side, is a vision of an American future that values peace and values peace .
 The same corporations that made a killing on the Vietnam War, such as Brown and Root, continue to profit from the warfare state . The same corporation made a huge profit on Vietnam War .
 It appears that the conflict in which Kennedy found himself embroiled at the time when he was killed remains unresolved . Kennedy was involved in a conflict that remains unresolved in his life .