 This is a fgg|sgBsas£ document . It contains information affecting the United States . Reproduction of this prohibited except with origin .
 This is a history of Strategic Air Command's role in the Cuban crisis of October and November 1962 . National Defense of utmost security will .
 It emphasizes reconnaissance activities and the unprecedented alert generation of SAC bombers and missiles . The SAC program is based in Washington, D.C.
 The SAC staff agrees with tills distinguished historian and would add that unless it is written promptly it cannot serve the immediate and long-range requirements of SAC and the Air Force .
 It has never been the function of the Air Force historian to write Historian for history's sake . Air Force Historian: "History is not history for the sake. It's never been history for history to write for history sake"
 During the crisis a member of the SAC historical staff was on duty in the operations war room 2k hours a day, seven days a week . During the . crisis a . member of . the . SAC history staff was . on duty during the crisis 2k . hours a
 He was able to follow events through displays, briefings, briefings and informal discussions with battle staff personnel . He also examined hundreds of messages which flowed in and out of the combat reports center .
 On a daily basis he was responsible for compiling a chronology of events for the Chief of Staff . He was responsible on daily basis for compiling the chronology .
 The fuse was removed from an explosive situation when Premier Khrushchev removed his missiles and bombers from Cuba . The fuse has been removed from the explosive situation in Cuba .
 The immediate problem was surmounted, and on terms favorable to the United States. Thus the immediate problem of the U.S. being surmounted . The U.N. had to be dealt with by Congress .
 The larger issue of the presence of Soviet arms and troops in the Western Hemisphere remains . The larger question remains: The presence of the Soviet arms is still a problem .
 The island is a heavily armed Soviet bastion which threatens to become a sally port for Communist infiltration of Latin America . It is heavily armed and could become a harbinger of Communist infiltration .
 SAC U-2 aircraft still fly over the island . Diplomatic negotiations continue in an attempt to remove Soviet troops from Cuba .
 The narrative portion of this history was prepared by Eobert Kipp, Lynn Peake, and Herman Wolk . The narrative portions of the history were prepared for this week's episode .
 A footnote citation ending with an exhibit number, g., Ex 15, means that document is number 15 in the accompanying volumes of documents . The footnote citation ends with a footnote citation .
 Castro's Cuba had been under photographic surveillance for at least seven months prior to October 2 . The story was kept close to a strictly chronological pattern . InfS this way was kept in a strictly chronical pattern .
 U-2 flights by the the the defensive buildtrategiq Air Cornwit h photography . Nickname of the operation was Quick Fox .
 SAC relinquished command and control of the mission to Tactical Air Command in November . The SAC eventually relinquished control of its mission on h November .
 CubaH was assigned to the 55th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing, Forbes AF3, Kansas . CubaH is CubaH CubaH .
 During its nine hour mission, the aircraft was refueled once fby a/XC-135 Of . the 96th Air Refueling Squadron, Altus AFB, Oklahoma . Its objective was to search forj j j* During the mission, aircraft was refueled once
 All film were flown to Offutt/AFB for processing and distribution by the J^th Reconnaissance Technical Group .
 By the end of October, the 55th Wing had flown weather reconnaissance flights to support the newly begun U-2 missions .
 Weather was an important factor in planning the high altitude photo flights . Weather was also a factor for the photo flight .
 At the direction of Headquarters SAC, one or two H-hfK. aircraft a .day made a circuit of Cuba .
 18 missions were flown in October, averaging six hours a mission . Eighteen missions flew in October .
 An R-Vm* crashed on takeoff from MacDill on 11 November, killing the crew of three . No outstanding problems developed that handicapped their completion .
 A potentially dangerous situation for all R-Vfs flying near Cuba did develop in late October . J&) L^U~
 Tail chase and lock-on by fire control systems ""can be disastrous"" for the fighter, the SAC says . The SAC recognizes the need for fighters to approach for identification .
 Because of darkness, identification by an B-hj of a friendly aircraft was made only at the last moment .
 Pilot's decision to take the risk was only because of the risk that the fighter was not fired upon . Pilot: "It's only because the pilot decided to take a risk"
 To SAC, these incidents proved the inadequacy of CINCLANT procedures for timely warning of hostile intent against recon aircraft . SAC: These incidents proved that the CINELANT procedures were inadequate .
 To remedy the situation CINCLANT asked that all aircraft engaged in peripheral reconnaissance show a normal IFF/SIF recog25 nition signal .
 Warnings also went out to CONAD and Navy units to stay clear of the R-Vf tail area .
 This seemed to solve the problem because no further incidents were reported . No further incidents of this type were reported after the incident .
 J&gf"" 1 V * tn^oSh^ 1 had beSn S6nt to replace a K aircraft sent to Forbes for camera modification . K aircraft was replaced by K aircraft .
 During the Cuban crisis, brief mention should be made of a single flight by an EEEMT equipped YB-58 . J$% \y\ OU mmmmm^ nussre .
 Headquarters USAF ordered the mission; the Air Force Systems Command provided the aircraft; General Dynamics provided the crew; and SAG planned the mission . The mission was the first time the U.S. Air Force had a mission to carry out such a mission .
 The aircraft flew a mission along the northern coast of Cuba, going no closer than 35 nautical miles . Executed on 30 October, the aircraft flew on a mission to Cuba .
 CIA U-2s had been flying over Cuba since the spring'of 1962 . Most of the | j were The U.2 Over' Cuba turning now .
 The photos enabled U.S. intelligence officers to identify modern missile equipped patrol boats, operational surf ace-to-airl miss ile sites, and modern MIG-21 fighters .
 In early October the Defense' Apartment was taking steps to get the responsibility for reconnaissance of Cuba transferred to the military . There were reports of ballistic .issue sites on the island, CIA flights vera unable to verify them .
 Strategic Air Command first entered the picture when a representative froAPCIO-5 arrived at Offutt m on 3 October with a revest that this command submit a plan to the POP for photo reconnaissance of the island . The plan was approved by the POP on October 3 .
 Operations and intelligence officers immediately went to work and the next day Operations Plan 6T-63, nictate Brass Knob, was on its way to the Pentagon . The next day, the Pentagon said it was on the way to a nipetable base .
 SAC sent two experienced U-2 pilots of the 4080th Strategic Wing (4028th Strategic Eeconnaissance Weather Squadron), Majors Eichard S Heyser and Endolf Anderson, Jr., to Edwards AEB, California, for qualification in the new U-
 The craft had a J75 engine, giving it higher thrust than the J5T of the U-2A model standard in the toSoth . The craft was the first of its kind .
 The P model could climb 5,000 feet higher than the A model . It had provisions for inflight refueling, and it could climb to 75,000ft .
 Reconnaissance Squadron Provisional was stationed at that base . The two Fs at the base were stationed there .
 At a luncheon meeting with the Secretary of the Air Force the' need for Air Force photo reconnaissance over Cuba was discussed .
 CTHCSAC assured the Secretary that his pilots could he checked out in the' U-2F and overfly Cuba by Sunday . That afternoon SAC received ""'* direction to begin overflights as soon as possible .
 The wing commander, Colonel John A Bes Portes, gathered a team ' '■_ ' of 21 specialists and left for California that night .
 'Major James W; Wilson, Director' of* Materiel. Compton, SAC Director of Operations. 'Major ^""T^"" 'General James W. Wilson, . Wilson, General James W.; Wilson . Compton, . Compton and . Wilson were SAC Directors
 Any one of these .ower equipment bay hatches corresponding camera coning on the type of mission . They are designated as A-l, A-2 or A-3 .
 In addition to the main camer$. load load, a tracker camera is mounted in the aft end of each hatch .
 Reaching the Gulf of Mexico, he \ continued southeast, passing over the Yucatan Channel between Mexico and Cuba . Reaching Mexico, the ship reached the Gulf .
 He executed a left turn, and flew slightly northwest, approaching Cuba . Then some 70 miles south of the Isle of Pines, off the southwestern coast of Cuba, he executed a turn .
 Prom operating altitude a vertical photograph gives a coverage of 6. by 6. miles . A vertical photograph of the Prom may cover 6.2 miles of a building .
 Heyser had left for Florida base, accompanied by Generals Compton and Wil'~'l ■ son, even before he had left . Edwards had left *"""" Edwards for the Florida base . Edwards left with his son .
 Some 30 members of an exist""~' ~' ing WRSB-4 detachment were absorbed and the group designated Operating Location X under the command of Colonel Des Portes .
 Two missions had been planned for . the 15th, Heyser from McCoy and Anderson from Edwards . The hour was late and crew rest became a problem for Anderson . Two missions were planned for that day .
 SAC had the aircraft ferried to McCoy by a WRSP-4 pilot and There, on the morning of 15 October, he and Heyser took off on missions of about five hours each . This time, they photographed virtually the entire length of the island .
 A KC-135 of the 93rd BW was dispatched to take Anderson to McCoy . S. S. May to November was Cuba's Href-steft-H"" .
 The film from these three reconnaissance flights (lk and 15 October) provided conclusive evidence of the existence of strategic missiles in Cuba and directly precipitated action on 22 October to quarantine Cuba .
 The equipment was highly mobile, and it seemed every effort was being made to make the site operational as soon as possible . The equipment is highly mobile and the site is being made operational .
 On 15 October two Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile sites were found at Guanajay . The sites are believed to be part of the site's range .
 Each site had four launch pads and was similar in construction to a' site in the Soviet Union believed to use a highly reliable 2000 mile missile having a 3 to 6 megaton yield and a circular error of 1.5 miles .
 Brown's B configuration malfunctioned, but all reported their cameras worked well . Except for Brown, all of the cameras malfunctioned .
 A* Photography on the 17th provided further evidence of the gravity of the situation . J&g) ^A* Photography .
 At Santa Clara Airfield 39 MIC-21 and 20 MIG-15 aircraft could be counted . 28 bombers were being assembled at San Julian Airfield in California . At Santa . Clara Air .
 Heyser covered roughly the western twothirds of the island and Anderson the eastern one-third . Anderson covered roughly one third of the islands .
 The next day, Major Edwin G Emerling and Captains Gerald E Mcllmoyle and Robert L Primrose, covered the length of the island, and landed at McCoy o 51 &&f LLfi . These missions identified the third IR3M site in Cuba .
 By 20 October SAC U-2 activities at McCoy had begun to assume the aspect of a routine operation . The President established a strict quarantine of the island to prevent further offensive weapons from arriving .
 Additional crews and support personnel flown in from Laughlin brought the OL X complement to 11 pilots, k navigators, and 68 airmen . Additional crews were also flown in to Laughlin .
 The day of a U-2 pilot slated for a mission began soon after midnight when he awoke, had breakfast, and went to the Operations building for his pref light briefing . The pilot was scheduled to fly the U.2 on a mission .
 Operations planners had completed the pilot's mission folder using information received from the SAC Headquarters Reconnaissance Control Center the previous evening .
 Navigation, intelligence, and weather were the main topics of the briefing . Navigation, weather, navigation, and intelligence were among the topics of discussion .
 Two hours before takeoff the pilot had a medical check and began to don his pressure suit . The pilot had to don the pressure suit before takeoff . The plane was the first to take off in a pressure suit in the world .
 The pilot usually left McCoy about eight o'clock local time and the mission lasted two to five hours . His debriefing upon return consisted of mission information such as takeoff, landing, and. turning point times .
 Three missions .ere flown over Cuba over Cuba on the 2 0tT, 22n d, and 23rd . All eg^at worked we . u , excep1; . dur±ng captain . The S2n d „ hen hi3 c oonfig
 Weather ^ ^ t<> ^ ^ ^^ the 2tal , and although m the ^^ fey a s±ngie m the . 2tal, and although . m the. 2tal .
 A search by *avy and Air Porce rescue units failed to discover any trace of the aircraft or its pilot . Rescue teams found no trace of aircraft or pilot .
 They did not because he had been shot down and had crashed on the island . The plane was shot down by the crew and crashed in a crash landing .
 Anderson would have scoffed at the suggestion that his actions could be heroic . Anderson would prohably have rejected the suggestion . Jfief ‘fief’
 Anderson left Florida that morning and over the eastern end of the island a projectile, presumably from a Soviet manned SAM site, exploded near his aircraft . Anderson's plane was shot down over the east end of Florida . Anderson was killed in the blast .
 Several small fragments penetrated the aircraft, then ruptured his flying suit and entered his body . The fragments were small fragments of the aircraft . They were then punctured into the body of the pilot .
 He died almost immediately from the decompression and crashed on the island somewhere in the Banes -Ant ilia area . The crash is believed to have taken place in the area of the island .
 Major Anderson was the first and only combat casualty of the Cuban crisis . Major Anderson died in Cuba during the Cuban war .
 On h November, following United Nations and Swiss negotiations with Cuba, his body was returned to the U.S. Following U.N. and Swiss .
 The self-contained fortitude of men who serve in lonely and dangerous outposts unsupported by the cheers of the crowd represents even a higher valor than the shared trepidity of a nation at war . Indeed, their quiet courage — the quiet courage . — .
 The hostile action against Anderson vent .undetected ""by United States radars inevitably arose. The question of whether the hostile action . against Anderson was detected .
 The Secretary of Defense had been told that the U-2s were covered throughout their flights,"" in fact they were not . Although the secretary of defense had told the U.2s that they were covered, they were actually not .
 Flight following means tracking plus surveillance of the vicinity so friendly aircraft can be warned of a hostile act . Flight following is tracking and surveillance to prevent attacks on friendly aircraft from being attacked .
 He was ordered to be prepared to retaliate against defense installations when directed from the national level . He was also ordered to prepare to retaliate .
 Permission from JCS to resume U-2 operations in support of opera• *.j£& ...i> .'v tions in the Pacific, the United Kingdom, and Alaska came on ""the last 'the last '. ^':^i.i. Permission to
 At I528Z, 3 November, Captain Robert Spencer left McCoy for a four-hour mission .
 Routes covered the whole island with emphasis on ports, missile sites, and routes from the sites to the ports . Routes included routes from 82 missile sites to 82 ports .
 Coverage was estimated at not more than 50 per cent, however, due to weather . Coverage of the event was estimated to be only about half due to the weather .
 This was the second failure in as many attempts with this equipment, and it was not used again . This was not the first time the equipment had failed to be used in the past .
 Pilot was the first U-2 pilot to return to Cuba since 27 October . Pilot was correct to say he was returning to Cuba .
 The 4o80th SW flew from one to five missions on all but five days during the month . The SW flew between one and five missions each day .
 Primary targets early in the month were missile sites and ports; with SAM sites, airfield activity, and new construction of roads and storage areas having only slightly less priority .
 By 10 November high and low altitude photography had confirmed that all six MRBM and three IKBM sites had been dismantled . High and low altitudes photography confirmed the dismantling of the sites .
 Photos of missile launchers stowed on the decks of ships in ports confirmed that k-2 Soviet MRBMs previously identified in Cuba had left . U.S. naval vessels at sea confirmed that the missiles had left the island .
 Khrushchev's agreement to withdraw all offensive weapons from Cuba was interpreted by the U.S. to mean the Beagles as well as missiles . The agreement was interpreted to mean that Beagles and missiles were also being withdrawn .
 It was not until 20 November that Soviet leader agreed to remove bombers . The decision was made after lengthy negotiations by the Soviet leader .
 The JCS directed daily flights over key targets, but not more than two a day, and coverage of the entire island once a month . The mission was directed by the JCS .
 The Defense Intelligence Agency provided the objectives, priority, and frequency of coverage . The agency provided the objective and priority of the coverage .
 2k November flights originated and terminated 92 at the Texas base . Most of the flights originated from Texas .
 Low level reconnaissance, however, was placed on a standby alert basis on 21 November . Low-level reconnaissance is placed on standby alert, however .
 President 'satisfied that the immediate threat to hemispheric peace had been solved, but routine surveillance would continue indefinitely to insure they were not clandestinely returned .
 Before concluding this discussion of SAC's reconnaissance activities, it will be necessary to return briefly to the early days of the quarantine for a description of the special sea search mission . X&S^ ^-^
 Because it is neither ""fish nor fowl"" the historian encountered some difficulty in integrating this material . Because it was neither ""fowl"" nor ""fish or fowl" the historian faced some difficulty .
 President Kennedy imposed a quarantine of Cuba at 1000 hours Eastern Standard Time . A huge armada of ships took up stations to block the arrival of further shipments of offensive weapons to Cuban ports .
 General LeMay offered Air Force assistance in the shipping surveillance of the shipping . CINCLANT replied with a definite request for the assistance .
 SAC asked SAC to search an area in mid-Atlantic bounded by 30°N 60°W to 38°N 35°W, to 25°N kO°K to 23°N60°W . SAC is searching for origin of origin . Area in mid
 The CINCLANT required name and position of all merchant ships in this area and their 97 course and speed . The Cinclant required name, position and speed of the ships .
 Compton, directed his operations staff to begin planning a one-time surveillance mission, nickname Blue Banner, p^ LLs Initial work was completed late on 2k October . Compton, directing his . operations staff, directed . his operations . staff, began planning to begin . planning one-
 Orders to pre-pare for the mission went to the 303rd Air Refueling Squadron, Kindley AFB, Bermuda; Lajes Task Force (98th ARS, Lincoln AFB, Nebraska), Azores; and 55th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing , Forbes AFB, Kansas
 The Lajes Task Force was to launch nine tankers, also early on the 2 5 th. The task force is to launch 9 tankers also early this year .
 In case . subsequent missions were requested, the 5 5th SEW was to be prepared to fulfill them . The 5th was prepared to be ready to fulfill any mission requests .
 Search aircraft of the two tanker squadrons took off with full fuel loads early on the 25th as directed . J^f LU Search aircraft took off from the two tankers as directed. Search aircraft were carrying fuel loads . J ^f LU
 USAF contacted SAC battle staff and requested cameras be used on Blue Banner aircraft to get a photographic record of sightings .
 No further missions were •required of the refueling units . They were not used, however, because no further missions would be needed .
 Past Talk system is SAC high frequency single sideband radio system . It provides the alternate means of command and control in event land line communications fail .
 From Bermuda, the seven aircraft of the 303rd ARS vere airborne about 11:^5 minutes each each . The seven aircraft were airborne from Bermuda .
 Shortly before midnight five tankers had left Forbes for Kindley . They were prepared for refueling the jets during their search missions .
 Their mission consisted of a flight from the home base to an area near Bermuda for refueling, then search in assigned areas east and south of the island . They then refueled, searched, refueled and returned to Forbes .
 When an aircraft made a sighting, either visually or by radar, it descended to about 5,000 feet to take photographs and to determine name and registry . The aircraft descended to take photos and take photos of the aircraft .
 Film was flown to Offutt AFB for processing and hence to Washington where it was put into the hands of the National Photographic Interpretation Center . Film was then sent to Washington for processing .
 Strategic Air Command's assistance in the aerial surveillance of shipping was not to be completed with the one day search . J^ *J*J Strategic Air command's assistance was not completed . The search was not complete .
 Shortly before noon on the 25th, CINCLANT requested another mission the next day ready to continue these missions — the intimation was indefinitely . The intimation that the mission would continue indefinitely was confirmed to be completed .
 Only one returned to the home base, however; the other three had equipment malfunctions and one missed its second refueling due to bad weather . Only one of the planes returned to its home base .
 One aircraft at a time, after refueling, flew a general orbital search pattern . The search pattern was designed to find out what was going on at the time .
 Three R-Vfs failed to locate Grozny on 26 Oc next morning . The third crashed while leaving Kindley, killing all four crewmen aboard .
 Four went direct from Forbes to the search area; one, the aircraft which had the radio malfunction the day before, flew from Kindley . After making positive identification, he made • passes at the ship at all angles, photographing it„ He remained circling the target for over two
 R-Vf returned to Kindley where his cameras were unloaded and the film flown to SAC Headquarters for processing . Surface ships were following the Grozny, but out of sight .
 SAC terminated the mission and all six R-Vfs remaining at Kindley and their support tankers and maintenance personnel returned to Forbes . The mission was terminated .
 The USAF relieved SAC of contingency requirements for shipping surveillance on 29 November . The USAF officially relieved the air force from SAC in November .
 Reconnaissance operations after that date will be covered in the regular SAC semi-annual command history . Reconnaissance activities after that point will be discussed in the SAC Semi-annannual Command History .
 The U.S. needs to have modern long range reconnaissance capabilities in Cuba, author says . The Cuban government contributed "as much to the security of the United States as any group of men"
 The U-2s and their systems proved extremely reliable,/ attesting to the skill of maintenance support personnel . The U.2s were extremely reliable .
 Between Ik October and 30 November the 4o8oth.flew 91 sorties (not counting the fatal 27 October mission) over Cuba for 402:52 hours .
 The processing of raw data in the form of exposed camera film and I ^""rom ELI3ST . Although more prosaic, was as vital to fhe reconnaissance . effort af^fiying the mission .
 Major Edwin G • Emerling, Major Buddy L Brown, Major Richard S Heyser, Major James A Quails, Major George M Bull, Major Charles W Kern, Captain Gerald 2. Bull, Captain Roger A Herman, Major Roger A . Herman, Captain George . Bull,
 SAC supervises delivery and processing of all original film from the U-2 missions . Joseph V Charyk, gave SAC the responsibility for supervising the delivery of the film . SAC is responsible for the delivery, processing and distribution of original film .
 After processing, the film was again flown to the National Photographic Interpretation Center, Washington, D C, where it was interpreted and prints were made for use by government officials .
 The U-2's tracker film went from McCoy to Offutt AFB for processing during the entire period of the crisis . The tracker film was processed during the time .
 It was important that the tracker film be speedily processed and sent to the Interpretation Center in time for use in the readout of the B configuration film . The tracker film was a record of the aircraft's flight path .
 During early photographic operations, prior to 3 November, there was a broad distribution of prints and additional copies of U-2 film . Beginning on that date film began to be handled by priority .
 Between October and November 289,560 feet of film was exposed on U-2 flights . The significance of the film has already been discussed .
 Five processing centers were involved in preparing it . SAC courier aircraft maintained a nationwide pickup and delivery service .
 The SA.C Director of Intelligence, Brigadier General Robert Ef. Ef., said he was at the centre of the country's intelligence operations .
 The Air Force must continue to modernize its intelligence processing equipment, he says . But he believes the Air Force needs to continue to do so . He says he believes intelligence processing technology must be modernized to meet needs .
 Speed and sophistication in the' gathering system was of little use if the processing equipment could not match its modernity . The processing equipment was not able to match the modernity of the system .
 It was necessary to maintain a redundancy in ohis type of equipment . during normal times, despite higher costs so that the increased demands of a time of crisis, like Cuba, could be met . ''' (yff CO UMCLASStBED Chapter II BOiMBER
 SAC's buildup to an unprecedented position of readiness did not begin immediately . However, SAC has been building up to unprecedented military strength .
 Command's initial force deployment during the Cuban crisis involved withdrawal from three Florida bases .
 Air Command was thoroughly familiar with TAC requirements at the three Florida bases in support of Commander in Chief, Atlantic Cuban contingency plans . The U.S. Air Command in Florida was briefed on the requirements .
 Tactical Air Command was in fact revising its plans when the Cuban situation became a crisis . The Cuban situation was the subject of a crisis in Cuba .
 Chief of SAC Operations Plans Division, directed development of evacuation plan for Homestead, MacDill, and McCoy . Evacuation plan was developed by SAC's Chief of Plans Division .
 This plan was completed on ±6 October, 3 and approved by General Power the following day . General Power approved the plan on October 6 .
 The first assumed alert forces would remain at home, and the second called for evacuation of all SAC tactical aircraft . The first called for alert forces to stay at home .
 Air defense requirements in the Florida area became ■ as urgent as the tactical military buildup . SAC provided concerned units with these planning factors for aircraft movement if necessitated by weather or other contingency requirements .
 Plan one involved non-alert tactical aircraft at Homestead, MacDill, and McCoy . Strategic Air Command directed these aircraft to deploy as individual flights as soon as generated .
 Only SAC's alert .forces remained at the Florida bases, but even their position was not inviolated . Only alert forces remained at Florida bases .
 General Power ordered evacuation of alert forces from Homestead and MacDill on 22 October, and from McCoy on 2k October . The military buildup in southeastern United States continued unabated .
 The command had previously assigned the nickname Riders Up to the Florida base evacuation . The command also established two options for execution of evacuation plan two .
 Timing of option one, code name Gay Crowd, presumed an orderly flow; while option two, Crisp Bacon, was based on fast reaction time . Timing was based upon the timing of an option called Gay Crowd . Option two, code named Crisp bacon, assumed an orderly
 Option one timing was used for evacuation of alert forces from the three bases . The evacuation was part of the evacuation of Alert forces from three bases.
 These alert forces generally deployed to the same bases as the unit's non-alert aircraft . J^) IMS '■ These alert force members are deployed at the same base as the units' other aircraft .
 Alert tankers of the i)-07AR3. went to Seymour Johnson; and the alert B-52s of the kOk^m, whose bombers were already split between Sheppard and Turner, deployed to Turner . The kOk*m bomber team was split from Sheppard
 Another SAC installation, Barney AFB, Puerto Rico, was also utilized extensively by other forces during the Cuban crisis . Although SAC alerted its Ramey units to prepare for deployment, actual evacuation did not prove necessary .
 Selection of deployment bases for Florida units had been predicated upon maintaining WO capability with minimum disruption . Selection of bases for deployment bases was predicated on maintaining the WO with minimal disruption .
 Evacuation did not seriously degrade SAC's WO capability except during actual alert force deployment and reconfiguration . Consequently, evacuation did not damage SAC WO capabilities .
 Command readiness was enhanced when the initially evacuated non-alert strike aircraft remained in EWO configuration at the deployment bases . On Saturday, 20 October, two days before President Kennedy's address to the nation .
 General Power ordered the initial actions presaging attainment of an unprecedented level of strategic readiness . General Power said the actions were "preparable" General Power .
 First was a directive to reinstate all adjusted and degraded aircraft alert sorties . First was to immediately reinstate the sorties that had been degraded .
 This was closely followed by an order to reinstate all degraded missile alert sorties . This was followed by a order to immediately reinstate those sorties.
 SAC directed all B-52 units JHCLASSIFe 3^ UHCMSSffttD to generate two -bombers per squadron equivalent . The command specified that necessary actions in both aircraft and missile units would take precedence .
 These aircraft would be available for ground alert duty if i/8 airborne alert was directed and launched from the ground alert posture . The aircraft would then be deployed to the ground for ground duty .
 SAC directed affected units to generate and maintain on standby status sufficient tankers to replace those alert KC-135s committed to support 1/8 airborne alert operations . Simultaneously, SAC also directed affected KC-35s to generate .
 The &4C Inspector General recalled an airborne Eighth Air Force team scheduled to perform a unit inspection . However, an airborne team was recalled to perform an inspection .
 Major subordinate commands were also directed to initiate maximum security measures short of sabotage alert operations . The move was also directed by major commands .
 JCS directed SAC to initiate l/8 airborne alert and begin B-h7 force dispersal . JCS accepted General Power's recommendations of 16 October, 16 October . SAC ordered B-H7 forces to begin B/h7 forces .
 Late on 23 October, the JCS directed SAC to begin generation of its forces at llj-OOZ, 2^ October .
 During this phase of the Cuban crisis, SAC remained in/aJDefcon 3 statusj for only 39 hours . This involved establishment of pefcon 2 for SAC forces and declaration of an Athour j .
 The establishment l_of Defccn 3] had little impact upon SAC because its major provisions had been previously enforced . Actually, the establishment had little . impact upon . SAC .
 The feature of ; ^3AC Defccn 3 which most improved the command's readir.ess was the return of all degraded aircraft and missile alert soriies.fj .
 JCS also initiated airborne alert and medium UBCLASSRH) -' ******* -hu.hu.u.hu .
 JCS directed SAC to initiate airborne alert at the 1/8 level immediately, simultaneously specifying that it should be in full effect by the afternoon of the following day . In vie. of the coed's longstanding requirement for an airborne alert, the decision to Initiate this prog
 These procedures had been completely overhauled in early 1962 to facilitate rapid axta iIm e”“t of a full scale airborne alert"
 Dome indoctrination program consisted of 1.3-52 launches per day — 4 on the southern route, 6 on the northern route, and 2 on the Timle Ballistic Missile Early Warning Site monitor route . The Timle ballistic missile early warning site monitor route was also monitored .
 Major considerations in expanding airborne alert were target cover, bomber route spacing, and air refueling support . The Spanish task force provided Wo refuelings each for bombers on the southern route . The Alaskan and United States task forces each provided one refueling for northern route bombers .
 The greatest increase in B-52 traffic occurred on the southern route . Because of fuel limitations at Eielson AFB, Alaska, the greatest increase was on the south route .
 It was particularly important that Spanish authorities be promptly informed because of the very considerable increase in tanker and bomber activity in that area .
 Shortly after the decision to initiate l/8 air alert, the JCS requested the Joint United States Military Advisory Group in Madrid to make ""appropriate notification and coordination" with Spanish authorities .
 Every B-52 unit vas aware of its route assignment and the specific time it should launch into the stream . The B-2s are also aware of their route assignment .
 Initial launch into the northern route would come from the unit with the first assigned launch time subsequent to I hour plus 15 minutes . Initial launch will come from a unit that would be assigned to the unit .
 The first launch on the southern route was not scheduled until at least four hours and 30 minutes after I hour . Additional time was required to bring the Spanish task force up to strength . The launch was delayed for four hours because of additional time .
 In fact, necessary KC-135s were already in place at I hour at both Eielson and the northeast U.S. task forces .
 Shortly after I hour, the first augmentation tankers departed U.S. bases for Spain .
 The only significant changes in force structure occurred because of the Straight Pin modification program and resultant aircraft shortages in B5 2H units . Only significant changes were made to force structure .
 Initially, the 379th Wing vas the only H equipped unit committed to the l/8 alert . Initially, it was the only unit in the air force that had the H/8 capability .
 This caused minor S a P s in launch schedules and precluded assignment of the EkvS monitor progra^Jto B-52H aircraft . This caused major delays in the launch schedules .
 Command policy vas that when a unit's inventory reached 11 aircraft, of which five had completed Straight Pin or were f lyable, it would fly one Chrome Dome sortie daily .
 On receipt of a sixth modified aircraft, two sorties would be required . Two sorties needed to complete the mission .
 Strategic Air Command issued separate implementation orders for each individual sortie so added . The Strategic Air . Command issued separately implementation orders .
 By 5 November, five B-52H units representing nine sorties had been integrated into the airborne alert . The B-2H units had been deployed to the U.S.
 Eielson furnished the Thule monitors with their single required refueling, which brought the carrier's total commitment to 18 tanker sorties daily . The Thule monitor was refueled by the company .
 SAC placed primary emphasis upon maintaining the maximum number of sorties in the air . J^f) ^-K^^j As scon as airborne alert posture was initiated, .
 There were two major aspects of this program* One involved a slight relaxation of the stringent operating criteria applied to airborne alert at the indoctrination level . The other was clarification of the relative priority of airborne alert over ground alert . The relative priority was that airborne alert should be prioritized over ground
 On 2k October, at General Compton's direction, SAC issued a waiver authorizing a B-52 sortie to continue with one engine shut down . Ji-fj Ji-j
 Numbered air force commanders could also authorize additional waivers as necessary to ac•UO complish the mission .
 SAC headquarters authorized 4 -* ufiififLAdoiritu the use of manual over-ride and manual boom latching . Two days later, SAC . headquarters authorized the . use of Manual over-Ride and Manual boom latch .
 SAC reduced the time required to attain l/l6 or l/8 air alert from 72 to approximately 2h hours . SAC authorized use of designated ground alert sorties if required to meet initial launch timing .
 Further degradation of the ground alert posture was not authorized except in those units which had insufficient weapons of the proper type and model . The U.S. military said it would not tolerate further degradation of its alert posture .
 In such cases, SAC authorized weaponsubstitution on specified ground alert sorties to guarantee proper weapons for airborne alert kindies . The U.S. Air Force issued a directive to ensure proper weapons were available for airborne sorties .
 In normal operation, there is an automatic disconnect if the relative position of the tanker and receiver places the boom at an unsafe angle . The boom is automatically disconnected if the tanker's position is at an angle .
 Manual over-ride eliminates this automatic feature and substitutes therefor the individual proficiency of the receiver pilot and boom operator, either of whom can disconnect manually .
 Manual boom latching puts the refueling operation, completely in the hands of the receiver, as only he can effect a disconnect . Only he can issue a disconnect from the boom latch .
 These instructions pertained to preparation of airborne alert sorties for launch, and specif ically prohibited replacing an aborting 'Chrome Dome. sortie from the ground alert force'
 The command decreed that airborne alert maintained an unqualified priority on aircraft and weapons . However, on the following day, 2k October, 2, October, it was decreed .
 SAC further amplified its policies governing replacement of Chrome Dome B-52 aborts . Jfaf ' *-*«-' On h November, SAC . further amplified their policies governing replacing of Chrome . Dome B.52 abort .
 SAC specified that neither the ground alert force nor the non-alert force should be degraded in configuration to deliberately provide a spare for airborne alert sorties . Primary emphasis remained on the airborne alert posture .
 Any generated sortie capable of launching on time could be substituted for an aborting Chrome Dome bomber . Chrome Dome could be used to launch on time for the first time .
 SAC authorized weapon substitutions on air alert sorties when a spare aircraft was launched . The problem of weapon substitution and attendant degradation of tactics was not serious for airborne alert because of its relative priority .
 The iiCLASSIfifcO -UMCLASStFiED 1,3. ■ command vas short of the most advanced, and. versatile types . SAC had sufficient numbers of nuclear weapons .
 The ideal weapon vas one which could be dropped from any altitude and possessed r r ri ri *' 2 ■■ [^ J depending upon the situation. J depending on the situation .
 SAC had no such veapon in its operational inventory at the beginning of the Cuban crisis . Unfortunately, SAC did not have such an item in its inventory .
 Although programmed for SIOP-63, this capability had been delayed by a combination of production slippages and lack of approved safety rules . Depending upon aircraft configuration and unit equipage, internal weapons for airborne alert bombers consisted generally of four Mark 28s or two ■MK'l5
 MK 28Y1IN had air and contact burst capability, but was a free-fall weapon requiring high altitude release . The weapon was released in a free fall from a high altitude position . It was the first of its kind to be used by the Air Force .
 An improved version, the MK 28Y1RI, was a contact burst > maximum ' drogued weapon, which allowed delivery from 1,50Q feet . The weapon was released in 1996 .
 SAC did not received approved safety rules for maneuvering this weapon until early November,; 9 The 4l33d Strategic; 'Wingi ; . The first SAC . unit . equipped with the .MK 28Y1FI, the most-.desirabi^'wi
 Other less sophisticated members of this family required release from a higher altitude . The most famous member of the MC 39 Modification 2 J ___J .
 Despite command support for a continuous airborne alert, it had never previously been authorized . It would have been unrealisticto include provisions for it in SIOP 63 .
 Once airborne alert was authorized, a conflict of interest developed between the 5O-63 E-. r 0, particularly under a[Dofcor. generation pcstureJ] This applied to aircraft as well as weapons .
 A B-52 wing with 15 aircraft was committed to 15 SIOP sorties plus two on airborne alert . The result was that the wing was committed .
 Four of the weapons were loaded with four ISCLOTED ""^mmM6k» 1111 s h5 UNCLASSHED iK 2SYHB&3 and four with two MK 39 Mod 2 weapons . These weapons were obtained iron eight ground alert sorties .
 In addition, one nonalert sortie was loaded with two MK 15 Mod 2 weapons because of a shortage of MK 39s . In addition to the weapons, the plane also had two MK-15 Mod 2 guns .
 U-^ Authority to degrade specified sorties committed to the SIOP to insure an effective airborne alert did affect target coverage and damage expectancy . U-* The authority to degrade sorties did not affect targets' damage expectancy and coverage .
 Intelligence experts at SAC headquarters determined that damage expectancy of only 2k desired ground zeros dropped to an unacceptable level . The damage was so low that the SAC decided to deploy the device .
 Command assigned targets to spare Reflex and command support B-Vfs and placed them on alert . To correct these deficiencies, the command assigned targets . The targets were placed on alert.
 After approximately two weeks of airborne alert operations at the 1/8 level, SAC emphasized the need for proper scheduling to balance the flying load . Js™g) ^^
 The command suggested rotating non-alert aircraft into the Chrome Dome schedule initially . The alert force will be left intact in the air force .
 Alert force aircraft were rotated into the flying schedule . Units were expected to expedite changeover and keep degradation to a minimum .
 This aircraft rotation policy created further problems, particularly in units with a limited number of the primary weapons required for airborne alert .
 In many cases, rotation required downloading and uploading of weapons, thereby increasing demands upon loading teams and decreasing ground alert target coverage . Unclassified: "Rotation required downloading, uploading and uploading weapons"
 The spectrum of problems associated with weapon availability emphasized the command requirement for a versatile nuclear veapon . A versatile nuke veapon is a versatile weapon capable of carrying out a variety of tasks .
 J^f CO Tanker task forces supporting airborne alert performed creditably during the Cuban crisis . Tankers supported airborne alert during the Cuba crisis .
 The number of allocated tankers proved to be adequate except for the northeast task force . Tankers were allocated to the task force in the northeast .
 A minimum of IT KC-135's within the northeast task force was essential, Eighth Air Force said in November . The number of daily B-52 launches was at its peak .
 The Eighth reported that poor weather over the entire area had occasionally dictated launching three tankers to provide two bombers with planned offload and still retain sufficient fuel for landing at an alternate base .
 Eighth reasoned that four additional tankers were essential to insure effective bomber support during bad weather . Eighth reasoned it was essential that four more tankers would be needed to ensure bomber support in bad weather.
 The Strategic Air Command replied that three additional tankers were justified . Eighth Air Force authorized Eighth to increase immediately the northeast task force's resources to 16 KC-135s .
 All three Chrome Dome task forces on essentially the same tanker sortie per day rate . Strategic Air Command maintained an effective and secure airborne deterrent comprising l/8 of its B-52 fleet .
 General Power terminated the l/8 airborne alert posture effective 0600Z, 21 November . SAC returned to its normal indoctrination program .
 The numbered air forces were authorized to recall support aircraft, personnel, and equipment at their discretion . Numbers of aircraft and personnel could be recalled at any time .
 B-52 sorties recovered from airborne alert which were unrefueled in EtfO were to be reinstated to ground alert . (^f CO 3HMO refueled sorties were placed on ground alert as bomber/tanker pairs became available . j>f LL*
 SAC reinstated all operational limitations waived during the emergency . Number of aircraft previously authorized for training was unchanged . SAC reinstates operational limitations .
 Temporary policies governing engine loss, low oil pressure, priorities on aircraft and weapons . Those include use of manual override, manual override and manual boom latching . The temporary policies govern engine loss and oil pressure .
 Daring the one-month operation, 2,0-88 B-52 aircraft were launched . airborne alert flying hours totaled Vf,l68. Jrf Os Daring .
 Of even greater significance' was the secure, continuous, and immediate strike capability achieved by the program . The program was designed to provide 'immediate strike capability'
 Approximately 65 airborne B-52s and £L L f J were ""target effective"" at any given time during the Cuban missile threat .
 General Power pointed out that the threat of missiles launched over the South Pole, from submarines, or from a satellite carrier vehicle retained .
 JCS instructed SAC to implement dispersal plans' for the B-Vf force . Medium Dispersal is a medium-dispersal plan .
 Strategic Air Command specified thatj""* ""] L>» J as scon as possible after arrival at the dispersal bases . Strategic Air command specified that J as . possible after arriving at dispersed bases .
 Units almost exclusively utilized their own administrative support a±rei-aft to transport personnel and equipment needed at the dispersal bases . V^ ier y inCe thS primar ^ mission of the 301st and 376th .
 Initially, 2,053 passengers and 323,2^0 pounds of cargo were airlifted to the dispersal sites . Initially, the airlift was to transport the passengers and cargo to the sites .
 Truax Field, Madison, Wisconsin, was deleted because of extensive ramp construction and inadequate runway load capacity . The airport was closed because of the construction of a ramp and runway capacity, officials say .
 One ether dispersal site was occupied for only a few days . Aircraft of the 96th Wing scheduled for Truax were diverted to the unit's other dispersal bases .
 Eighth Air Force directed the 306th Wing to redeploy the three B-Vfs located at West Palm Beach, Florida, to Plurlburt Field, Florida .
 Timely and efficient dispersal of the medium force was the result of hard work and dedication at the unit level . J^fj CA«««» Timely, efficient dispersing of the force was primarily the result .
 The October I962 history of the 306th Wing contains especially good coverage of dispersal activities . The history of this wing's dispersal activity includes dispersal events .
 C concentrated upon such vital areas as command and control, security, personnel welfare, and logistic 'support' C. C .
 Ground rules governing security at dispersal bases were gradually strengthened . Jrf U -*' ground rules were also strengthened .
 On 23 October, SAC directed that alert areas at dispersal sites be roped off and posted with applicable restricted area signs . SAC decreed that security at all sites, military as well as civilian, would be provided from command resources .
 Close-in perimeter sentries were also required at civilian airports . In addition to point guards for each aircraft, close-in security guards were required .
 At General Power's request, the USAF Deputy Inspector General for Security for Security established an inspection tour of all SAC dispersal bases . The tour was conducted by General Power .
 By the end of October, these teams had visited 26 dispersal fields, and had rated security satisfactory or better at each one . The teams rated security at each field as good or better .
 The most significant improvement in the EWO posture of the dispersed force involved upgrading selected B-V7 sorties to first cycle status . The most important improvement was upgrading selected sorties from first cycle .
 In an EWO situation, these ""bobbers" would be provided air refueling by tankers flying their second EWO mission . Tankers would then refuel their second mission .
 SAC developed plans for upgrading 4. dispersed 3-hjs to first cycle status ""by utilizing 87 available KC-97s . To improve the reaction capability of this force, SAC has plans to upgrade the force .
 All 41 sorties selected were located at airfields in the eastern United States . J&f U.S. J&F U.
 The major consideration in effecting the change was proper positioning of supporting tankers . The change was made in place of support tankers for the first time .
 After furnishing units with a detailed listing of personnel and equipment required at the receiving task force base, SAC ordered deployment of the additional KC-97s on 29 October .
 Aircraft movement began with the departure of the first tanker at 18002, 29 October . Command emphasized that required support personnel had to be on board deploying unit tankers .
 By 31 October, 37 . dispersed B-4'fs officially assumed a first cycle capability; three more did so on 1 November; and the forty-first and final one on 2 November . J^ (j^)
 The bombers and supporting tankers enjoyed first cycle status . They remained non-alert sorties because they were not subject to immediate launch . Although these bombers and tankers were first cycle .
 The Strategic Air Command established a communication and reaction time of one hour for the first cycle dispersed B-Vfs .
 32 dispersed 3-47S were degraded and recalled to SAC stations . Tanker sorties could be ground delayed as required to insure adequate off loads . SAC suggested that the maximum tanker loiter time be computed to increase survivability .
 On 2k November, the JCS authorized C1NCSAC to terminate B-Vf dispersal at his discretion . The JCS is now in charge of dispersal .
 SAC directed return of the B-kj dispersed force and supporting tankers at Goose, Harmon, and Lajes. Effective 1800Z on the same day, SAC .
 The 306th Wing's B-l*7s deployed to Hunter, Florida . The JCS had not yet authorized the return to Florida bases .
 SAC delegated actual execution authority to the parent numbered air forces . Dispersal of the medium .force did not present any insoluble problems., but experience pinpointed areas where plans and procedures could be improved . SAC delegated actual . execution authority .
 SAC directed units to review and refine support plans while problems were fresh in the minds of participants . Shortly after initial dispersal, units were directed to review support plans .
 SAC stressed that support requirements and timing be clearly delineated and coordinated with host agencies . Although this was the first comprehensive medium dispersal operation, support bases had been periodically exercised under the Clutch Pedal program .
 Until early 1962, the command was committed to exercising assigned dispersal bases with B-Vf aircraft (minus nuclear weapons) every quarter .
 SAC recommended to USAF that the requirement be deleted . Because of the restrictive nature of the operation and its cost to the training program, SAC said the requirement was deleted .
 In May ±962, USAF approved this request, and authorized quarterly surveys utilizing non-tactical aircraft . In May 2015, the U.S. Air Force approved the request .
 If the command received only tactical warning of an impending attack, all efforts would be devoted to launching the alert force and preparing follow-on first cycle sorties .
 In such a situation, those aircraft sorties scheduled for dispersal were, in a sense, expendable . The U.S. military says the situation is "a sense of urgency"
 A hour, for SAC forces only, of 1400Z, 24 October, was declared . Defcon 2 was a function of Defcon2, the command established that posture .
 Approximately six hours in advance of A hour, SAC issued comprehensive guidance for assuming Defcon 2 posture to all units . The U.S. Air Force issued the guidance six hours prior to A hour .
 The emphasis was upon covertly attaining the maximum, state of readiness . The emphasis would be on covert, state-of-prepared .
 No EWO kk-63 deployments were accomplished, and no post-attack command control system aircraft 96 were launched or dispersed . No post-attacked aircraft were deployed or dispersed in the event .
 SAC reconnaissance operations were not curtailed . Another exception was that high priority SAC recon reconnaissance operations were continued .
 SAC recalled personnel on leaves and passes, but not temporary duty personnel required to support continuing operations . F Upon assumption of [Defcon 2,1] SAC recalls personnel on leave and passes .
 B-kj Combat Crew Training School continued operations, and its students remained in training . B-52/KC-135 CCTS at Castle and Walker were suspended, and respective commanders determined the most effective utilization .
 Force generation progressed rapidly and generally was ahead of published schedules . Force generation was generally ahead of schedule .
 Command was already in a favorable readiness position at [I hourjbecause of such prior actions as evacuation of Florida bases, medium dispersal, and airborne alert . However, the command was already .
 Defcon 2 posture provides for the return of all excess aircraft at Reflex/Airmail bases . U^ Initial guidance for the posture was provided by the Air Force .
 Lack of JCS safety rules for MK 53s delayed generation of last five £ 2lj. Later the same day, General F.wor rescinded this policy and directed that spare h-k~( aircraft be provided at ali Reflex ana Airmail locations .
 Spare aircraft were to be EWO configured and available to support any aborted sortie . Spares aircraft were also to be available if an abortive sortie was aborted .
 Crew manning of spare aircraft in alert status was not initially required . SAC emphasis upon improving its overall EtfO posture soon changed the function of these aircraft .
 The command began developing WO commitments for command support B-l*7s assigned to Sixteenth Air Force, Third Air Division, and Seventh Air Division .
 By 29 October, SAC had assigned EWO sortie numbers to all command support B-^7s and spare Reflex bombers in Europe and Africa, and had begun targeting actions .
 By 2 November, 30 spare Reflex/Airmail and command support B-^fs had become EWO capable and officially assumed alert status . Js&fl Ow Ow .
 By the first week of November, the number of generated &-5Ss had jumped to 84 aircraft . J. J.
 Initially, a very limited number of B-58 sorties were supported by first cycle KC-135 tankers . Initially, the first-cycle B-57 was supported by a very small number of first cycle tankers.
 At 2000Z, 3 November, the 20 affected B-58 sorties officially advanced to first cycle status . All tankers were in position on the following day, and all tankers in position the next day .
 Four additional second cycle B-58s assumed a first cycle capability on 5 November . Four additional B-59s assumed first cycle capabilities on 5 Nov. 2014 .
 Major General Compton attributed SAC's ability to maintain this capability throughout the crisis to the high degree of professionalism exhibited by its personnel . Compton said SAC was able to maintain its capability through the crisis . Compton attributed the high level of professionalism to SAC personnel .
 He also concluded that the Cuban crisis vali dated the command's efforts over the years to maintain a high state of readiness in its units .
 Headquarters USAF was concerned about the ability of its forces to maintain an advanced readiness posture indefinitely . Phasedown from the beginning of the crisis was concerned .
 Further extension would degrade both combat crew proficiency and inventory, says crew . Further extension of the mission would also degrade the effectiveness of the combat crew .
 J^O U D Continue dispersal of sufficient first and second cycle B->t7s to occupy all dispersal bases . J ^OU U D J ^UUU U U U . JUUuUuuu U D continue dispersal . Continue dispers
 Revocaxion of quarantine order on 20 November precipitated further posture degradations . The quarantine order was lifted on November 20, 2014 .
 At the direction of the JCS, CINCSAC terminated l/8 airborne alert at 0600Z, 21 November . General Power proposed to return the command to £tef con jj within two days .
 SAC terminated extra 3-47 Reflex and Airmail alert, command support alert, and loaned B-kf aircraft, and B-VT generated reserve .
 On 28 November, the JCS informed SAC that return movement of its evacuated forces was to be coordinated with departure of AFLAKT l40 forces . SAC was told by JCS that return movements of the evacuated forces would be coordinated .
 SAC authorized Eighth Air Force to redeploy evacuated aircraft, crews, and equipment to Homestead, MacDill, and McCoy . The following day, SAC approved the redeployment of evacuated aircraft .
 The Cuban crisis of 22 Oetober-27 November was unique in the history of the Strategic Air Command . It afforded SAC an unprecedented opportunity to test its command and control apparatus and force generation ability under stress .
 The task of bringing the ICBM force to alert provided the command a singular opportunity to determine exactly how far it had progressed .toward an adequate missile capability .
 The command learned much about the entire alert process and the many problems connected with it . In addition to bringing a large number of ICBMs to alert condition, the command learned a lot about the process .
 Through this experience, policies and procedures were changed or modified once it was determined they were lacking in some respect . This is the first time in the U.S. military has changed policies or procedures .
 This command directed operational field units to reinstate all degraded missile alert sorties on 20 October . The U.S. Air Force issued the order to restore the status of degraded missile alerts .
 Reinstated ICBMs included all those adjusted or degraded for modifications . Reinstations included all the modifications made by modifications to the missile system .
 According to SAC, this action would take precedence over all other activities and be accomplished as covertly as possible . SAC: "This • action would ... take precedence ... and be ... covertly ... possible"
 J\ T o missiles would remain in an Operational Readiness Training configuration . The missiles would stay in an OIR training configuration .
 Atlas F ORT missiles would be readied as soon as liquid oxygen became available . Atlas F orT missiles are readied to launch once liquid oxygen becomes available . The missiles would launch if liquid oxygen was available .
 On the following day, SAC's October missile alert posture was amended to include l6j Atlas D, E, F, and Titan I missiles . SAC also amended the posture to include Atlas D and E .
 The urgency SAC attached to placing missiles on alert was reflected on 21 October in an order to deviate from normal technical data procedures in bringing ICBMs to rapid readiness configuration . Lk^> The urgency was reflected in a decision to put missiles on immediate alert .
 Units would not check out systems or verify readiness, except when needed, except for personnel or equipment safety . Units not checked out systems, except to verify readiness .
 This guidance was short lived, however, however; primarily because of safety considerations, it was rescinded three days later . The guidance was also rescinded .
 ORT missiles used liquid nitrogen instead of LOX . Liquid nitrogen was used to launch shakedown* missiles in the past .
 Maintenance program was designed to correct incipient ICBM malfunctions . ORT missiles to LOX for EvTO configuration became imminent on 20 October .
 Shakedown consisted of two successful consecutive countdowns of propellant loadings and additional system checks required to verify subsystem operability . Shakedown was followed by two successful countdowns and additional checks to verify system operability.
 It became obvious that SAC bases would not have enough LOX to convert ICBMs . The decision was made after it became clear that all the LOX needed to be converted to missiles . The U.S. has not been able to convert LOX into missiles .
 A national priority for &AC was established with production from all -commercial and government plants channeled in support of the project . The project is a national priority .
 SAC directed that Atlas F and Titan I use LOX in all ORT/Shakedown exercises at operational sites . At 1300 hours, 25 October, an adequate supply of LOX had been delivered to the requisite bases .
 The use of LOX was a direct outgrowth of SAC's experience in the Cuban crisis . combining ORT with shakedown could be indirectly related to the crisis .
 Command invoked the Air Force Systems Command /SAC Agreement for Emergency Combat Capability St. J^j £ 4 -^ with the Cuban situation building to a climax following President Kennedy's address of 22 October .
 SAC would assume operational control of all AFSC launch complexes in ECC status in the event of strategic warning . UELASSiFiE ifefFIED 65 xn general, the SCC Agreement contained provisions whereb;, ., SAC. would assume control of
 The ECC condition represented that status of a launch complex in which a missile could be launched on an 2W0 mission with strategic warning . ECC was the status of the launch complex that could launch a missile on a mission with a strategic warning. ECC meant that .
 The xt should be remembered that the number of alert missiles often fluctuated within any 24 hour period . The number of missile alert missiles has fluctuated in the past 24 hours .
 ICUSSIFIEO 0KUS9Q 67 n-ccmmission rate for launch upon receipt of execution order reached maximum of Q2 per cent with an average of 89 per cent during the last .ur days of the period .
 Cuban crisis broke during the installation and checkout phase of many ICBMs . Contractors remained in place without performing any functions .
 The major consideration, according to U3AF, remained long range, i.e., completing missile c duplexes as rapidly as possible and turning them over to SAC for BJQ .
 It recommended return of Minuteman test facilities at Vandenberg in order to resume testing . It said it was "vital to the activation of the weapon system at operational sites"
 Delays could affect activation of operational missile units, according to BSD . BSD: Delays may affect activate of operational missiles .
 BSD also recommended return of three Vandenberg GST facilities, subject to aA.C.C concurrence . BSD: Operational readiness training was at a critical juncture .
 Atlas ECC sites at Vandenberg, Walker, and Pittsburgh were also included in the priority list . Atlas sites were also considered to be important sites .
 Three Titan launchers at Vandenberg were also recommended for return to AFSC for Category II testing and updating . The launchers are also recommended to return to Vandenberg .
 Atlas F Walker complexes are released to BSD on a request basis . Atlas V sitr sitr. sitr – Atlas V sitsr – is Atlas V .
 Atlas E -edifications, ""Clean rtweep, "" Atlas F ORT, and Titan I 0RT. i0 jf£) U^ Coincident with the(npdificd I^fcon 2 effective 15 reverb eri.ii,
 In the irsx.iace, shakedown would be conducted in conjunction with CRT for Atlas F missiles .
 The need for taking two missiles off alert was reduced to only one IC3M being exercised at once . This policy had previously been in effect for Titan missiles .
 Since an ICBM must be exercised In shakedown, the opportunity presented itself to combine GET with the shakedown exercise . The exercise was combined with the exercise of the ICBM .
 Atlas F ORT/Shakedown exercises would be accomplished with LQX instead of liquid nitrogen . Atlas F. ORT would also be able to do Atlas F . ORT and Shakedown exercises instead of using liquid nitrogen.
 Clearly, the need existed for rapid conversion of CRT sites to alert status . The need exists for rapid conversions .
 Both changes, therefore, were primarily aicx.ated by the desire to avoid WO degradation .
 Minimum of 10 px cpe.llant lading exercises vro-uld be conducted on each missile, rimce shakedovm called for two successful countdowns an a row . ORT would continue until shakedown requirements were satisfied .
 After 10 training exercises on a given missile, it would be released for maintenance and returned to alert . The missile would then be put back on alert for maintenance . After 10 exercises, the missile will be released to maintenance .
 The procedure called for Atlas F alert missiles to be degraded for modifications only after its replacement — with ""Clean Sweep"" modifications completed — had been brought to full E570 status . The procedure was called for . Atlas F . alert missiles only after . its replacement had been completed — with .
 The command revised its missile alert stance to lVf ICBM alert sorties required . A new complex would be on alert before this command would turn another site back .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com for next week’s travel destinations. Please submit a new gallery of snapshots of your favorite destinations .
 Cuban crisis marked the first time on alert for a new generation of ICBMs - the solid fuel Minuteman . Solid fuel Minutseman .
 On 27 October, the first two SM-80 ICBMs went on alert with the 34lst SMW at Malms trom AFB, Montana .
 The 3l*.lst inadvertently signed for the missiles, thereby irrevocably accepting them for this command prior to completion of contractor demonstrations .
 Only after receiving a launch execution order vould silos be placed in immediate launch configuration . Launch silos should be placed after receiving an order for a launch order .
 Contract demonstrations not accomplished were adequately covered by checkout tests, according to BSD . BSD says checkout tests were adequate prior to turnover .
 Technical order procedures would be followed by SAC in achieving alert with no resultant system degradation in either launch ability or safety . SAC would be following procedures to achieve alert . Launch will not be subject to any degradation of launch ability, safety or launch ability .
 Site Activation Task Force and contractor personnel continued to work with the 3 ^lst . Additional safety precautions directed by SAC could also be applied to the 39Uh SMS at Vandenberg .
 As far as BSD .as concerned, disconnecting the lid ordnance device and making the safety control switch safe by manual means was not necessary, based on BSD's technical evaluation .
 While procedures were adequate, they required refinement and improvement, they needed refinement, officials said .
 The 3 4lst was in fact on strategic alert during the Cuban crisis . Its ICBM's perhaps more nearly approached an ECC status .
 With a greater number of missiles on alert than would ordinarily have been the case, a strain was placed on SAC's combat ready missile crews, especially at bases where missile alert was accelerated .
 This unit's capability would have been marginal even without a crisis situation . This unit would have had a marginal capability even without the crisis situation. This is not the case, but it is the case that the U.S. government needs to be prepared for a crisis .
 It became clear early in October that accelerated site turnover at Plattsburgh would mean degradation of alert sorties . Additional crews were dispatched to the 556th on temporary duty during the crisis period .
 The Second Air Force was alerted by SAC on 12 October that it might become necessary to send one or more Atlas F combat crews to the 556th between 29 October and 20 November . The situation at Plattsburgh built up rapidly .
 Four more crews moved to Plattsburgh on 1 November (again, two each from Altus and Lincoln AFBs) with the turnover of additional sites from ECC OKUSSFB) 74 UNCLASSIFIED status, in order to perform necessary maintenance functions, was ordered to the 556th
 The 5T6th combat ready crew would remain at Plattsburgh until Defcon 2 in order to complete Phase II training for two 556th crews . Coverage of consoles during maintenance requiring a fully combat ready . Additional maintenance support as needed by the commander .
 The Vandenberg crew would not perform normal alert tours, but would be used as needed to cover maintenance problems on SAC-owned sites at Plattsburgh . Vandenberg would not be deployed on alert tours .
 The first four crews dispatched to the 556th left Plattsburgh on 10 November . All crews returned, by 18 November except the Vandenberg crew .
 The success of the operation could be traced at least in part to the existence of a contingency plan for this kind of situation . The operation was carried out with the help of the CIA .
 Emergency measures are usually demanded under extraordinary circumstances . Further, it illustrated the type of emergency measures that are often demanded under such circumstances .
 Special problems developed, e.g., LOX supply, acceptance of Minuteman ICBMs prior to contractor demonstrations, moving of crews to Plattsburgh, were worked out satisfactorily . Special problems that developed, .g., acceptance of . Minutemen ICbMs
 The ro'l e of SAC's missile aiert force in the Cuban crisis was both significant and instructive . SAC missile force in Cuba was a force of force in Cuban crisis .
 Overall, missile acceptance programs fell behind schedule as a result of Cuba . Installation and checkout tasks continued during the accelerated effort in bringing missiles to alert .
 At the end of 1962, it vas difficult to determine whether final acceptance dates would be met as planned . At the beginning of 1962 it was difficult to see if acceptance dates had been met . The U.S. government announced plans for the project in 1962 .
 Training which would have resulted in EWO degradation was cancelled . Since the major objective was readying ICBMs for alert, training was canceled . Training would have led to EWO degrading .
 All Phase III or hardware training for Atlas F in the field and at Vanderiberg stopped on 22 October . Atlas F will be the first time Atlas F has been deployed to the Atlas F mission .
 Delay in training of replacement ORT personnel, especially in Atlas D RORT, is estimated at approximately two months .
 J units instructed to accomplish and record all possible tasks while on alert or performing maintenance exercises . During JDefcon 2, J units were instructed to complete tasks during on alert .
 Piatt s burgh AFBs, the Strategic Missile Evaluation Squadron, cancelled its recurring visits . In general then, t:uimpact, upon ICBM training was significant .
 There were no major changes or adaptations, therefore, to be made in a crisis situation . There were 'no major changes' made in the crisis situation.
 At the end' of 19^2, there was little likelihood of major recommendations in missile training based upon the Cuban experience . At the beginning' of this year, the U.S. missile program was based on the experience of the Soviet Union .
 Because crews were well adapted to alert, no degradation to crew proficiency occurred . No degradation of crew proficiency was recorded .
 Despite postponement in ORE and perhaps as much as a 30 day delay in Minuteman test launching at Vanderiberg AFB, several major facets of the Cuban operation predominate .
 The primary goal of bringing ICBMs to alert status was eminently successful . "The primary goal was to bring ICBM [Imitas] to alert alert status," the official says .
 It marked the first time on alert with a completely new generation of missiles . The SM-80 Minuteman missiles were the first to be deployed with a new generation .
 SAC, AFSC and contractors in bringing the ECC agreement to fruition . Another highly important ""first"" was the excellent cooperation between SAC and AFSC . ECC is a highly important "first"
 Difficulties were encountered for example, acceptance of SM-80 missiles at Malmstrom AFB prior to contractor checkout .
 On 29 October, of 5b Titan I missiles required on alert, 56 were in alert status . Nevertheless, much was learned in the successful implementation of the plan .
 The shakedown program, initiated early in 19o2, proved valuable . It should be remembered, of course, that Cuba posed a special situation .
 Because of the length of the crisis, a slow phasedown was possible for Eefcon 2 to a modified Bofcon 2 and then to Defco n 3 . Slow phasedown could be possible because of length of crisis .
 The chances of an exact duplicate of Cuba in the future were exceedingly dim, but undoubtedly, SAC would be called upon to adjust to other perhaps radically different situations .
 Several highly significant implications for communications resulted in SAC's actions in the Cuban crisis . It was hoped that new challenges would result, like Cuba, in successful conclusions .
 Problems developed which clarified the need for different cr more expanded measures in the future . But problems developed which . clarified which clarified . need to be different measures .
 Among the circuits supplied by SAC were emergency voice and duplex, and full period duplex . SAC supplied the circuits .
 SAC allocated and emergency on-ca.Ll circuits were called up . Defcon 2 was declared .
 Defcon 2 instituted whereby teletype and voice traffic was restricted to specified priorities . Also with implementation of Defcon2, ""Minimize" was instituted . Teletype was also restricted to specific priorities .
 For voice traffic, priority h and higher was established, with ""priority"" and higher being the restriction for teletype . For teletype traffic, the restriction was set at h and h, with "priority" and "priority h" being higher .
 Prior to Defcon 2, STN circuits were called up from the nearest STN grouping point . STN circuit is called up to the nearest grouping point at Defcon2 .
 Direct distance dialing to dispersed bases had proved timeconsuming and operitively unsatisfactory . Direct . distance dials to dispersed . bases proved time consuming .
 Difficulties encountered in determining installation locations lent credence to the suggestion that AT&T keep a permanent list of dispersal bases . Significant aid was given by the Government Communications Management Group .
 Dispersal base surveys should also in the future include information on local AT&T facilities, such as AT&Ts facilities .
 An average time of eight hours was required to complete a new circuit 6 J& ^ over an extended distance .
 With implementation of ""Minimize,"" teletype traffic was handled without a backlog . Teletype traffic could be handled without backlog .
 Jtf) It has heen mentioned that a^ong the early measures ta*en hy co ra cnicanons-electronics were those Mediately strengthening co,.unica-ns under attach conditions .
 The original plan called for the vans to return to MacDill AFB after the Pacific tests for instrumentation removal . The vans will return to the base after the tests .
 Both vans were specifically built for the Project Dominic test series . They were deployed without modifications because of the urgency of the Cuban situation .
 Vans were semi-trailer type, over 26 feet long, eight feet wide, with a height of 8-1/2 feet . This radio facility could be used to augment the SAC Short Order or Fast Talk systems** in the event of loss . Vans are semi
 Fast Talk system is a SAC high frequency SSB radio system . It provides an alternate means of command and control in the event landline communications fail . Fast Talk is a radio system providing an alternative means of control .
 Approximately 43 hours were needed for complete integration of the Collins station with 20 hours required for the establishment of procedures after the initial decision .
 A code word has been assigned for complete integration of the Collins station . It was recommended that a standard procedure be adopted with an execution code word .
 SAC provided military backup to Bell Telephone operators at AT&T air/ground sires at Red Oak, Iowa, and North Bend, Nebraska . SAC also provided a military backup for Bell Telephone .
 Command personnel were in place at Red Oak and North Bend on 23 October . Command personnel remained in place in the area .
 J^ U^f A requirement for survivable communications with dispersed forces existed during the Cuban crisis . J^ J^f The Cuban crisis was the Cuban government's first major crisis .
 Survey was conducted of all dispersed base communication support facilities designed to establish backup communications through locally available MARS facilities . It will be recalled .
 The Air Force Ccmmuni cations Service and ADC provided support . A lack of uniform facilities and distances* from SAC command posts dictated discarding the MARS plan .
 A proposal to dispatch SAC-owned MARS equipment to dispersed bases was also vetoed . The proposal was also rejected .
 High frequency SSB at dispersal sites monitored broadcasts from the Offutt AFB Short Order station . Offutt Air Force Short Order broadcasts were broadcast from the station .
 Beginning 28 October, ""broa.dca.ctf. originated from the airborne command post, thus exercising high frequency control of dispersed aircraft . The operation began 28 October and ended 28 October .
 Numbered air forces polled dispersed locations in order to determine whether messages were received and to establish quality of reception and frequency . Air forces poll dispersed locations to determine if they received messages .
 Results were reported to the augmented battle staff at SAC Headquarters . Results were then reported to SAC headquarters .
 Polls were taken during each 2k hour period within one hour after a ""Noah's Ark"" message had been broadcast from the airborne command post over Short Order quencies .
 This procedure, originally designed as a ""one time"" effort, continued until 2k November since unsatisfactory results were achieved on 29 October . This procedure was originally designed to be a one time effort .
 Acceptable results were reported on 30 October and continued improvement developed through termination on 2h Novemberp&)' As far as execution messages were concerned, dispersed crews would follow the same procedures prescribed for a unit command post .
 A ""Looking Glass"" message would be challenged by monitors as if received by telephone . The message would challenge monitors as as if they had received a telephone call .
 Following reception of an execution message, the crew would communicate with the next higher -headquarters up to and including SAC Headquarters . Should no ground contact be available, the airborne command post and/or any PACCS aircraft would be contacted .
 Should all efforts to confirm the message prove abortive, crews were directed not to launch . Crews were directed to stay away from launch .
 It can readily be seen that laeh of a deployment plan hindered rapidly establishing an SS3 ability at dispersal locations . A *-*lira is a reference to the deployment of the U.S. Army's SS3 .
 Maintenance spares and difficulties with radio accent also plagued the operation . The operation was completed in 2010 .
 An adequate deployment plan covering all aspects of high frequency operations at dispersed locations is recommended . L hi i i ^^ ^J An adequate deploy plan is also recommended .
 Despite problems, however, the operation proved successful, especially considering the t*ne in which it was accomplished and the adverse conditions encountered . j# (j^ In general, no operations orders existed for dispersal of communications . In fact, the operations orders had not been established .
 Crews follow instructions from the communications annex of the dispersal plan . Crews followed instructions from an official communications annex .
 This procedure, however, was not adequate for positive control of dispersed units . This procedure was not enough to control dispersed units, it was said . The operation was successful, but it was not sufficient, it said .
 It was recommended that an operations plan with a current communications annex be published and kept current .
 ADO informed SAC that a plan had been prepared, using a radar test facility at Moorestown, New Jer. sey. On 25 October, ADO told SAC the plan was being prepared .
 The plan was expanded on 27 October to include long range radars at Thomasville, Alabama, and Laredo, Texas . The plan has been expanded to include radar sites in Alabama, Alabama and Texas .
 Approximately eight minutes warning would be available in the event missiles were launched against SAC Headquarters . SAC HQ would have eight minutes of warning .
 Thomasville and Laredo radars possessed no computer ability and had little value in detecting launches except to confirm detection by Moorestown and to provide an approximation of the number of missiles fired . However, the Thomasville radars had little computer ability .
 On 27 October, a ""hot line"" voice circuit from Moorestown was installed in the SAC Headquarters command post . J^T""\ The circuit was installed on 27 October .
 This command requested that WORAD immediately inform SAC should the Moorestown tracker and/or reporting facilities become inoperable . Despite improvisation of a Southern Missile Warning System, it became apparent that a serious gap existed in missile detection and warning from the South .
 One of the paramount requirements, in the aftermath of Cuba, was that of a complete radar system providing omni-directional warning against missiles . Thus, one of the primary requirements was that .
 Electronic interferenceto bombing-navigation radar systems on Chrome Dome sorties particularly plagued the ""Black Goat"" refueling area in the northeast .
 The increase in interference reports coincident with the Cuban crisis pointed directly to Communist Bloc activity . The increase of interference reports coincided with the Cuba crisis .
 A strong possibility existed that jamming emanated from Communist bloc shipping in the New Brunswi ckNewfoundland area . The jamming was believed to originate from the Communist bloc .
 Chrome Dome sorties challenged the transmission and the station was unable to reply . Chrome Dome kindies challenge the transmission .
 It seemed that overt attempts were being made to collect intelligence and test communications security . It seemed . overt attempts to collect . intelligence .
 In the wake of these incidents, all Chrome Dome crews were briefed on necessary security requirements and the need for reporting violations . The Chrome Dome is now being updated with necessary security measures .
 Crews were warned not to initiate unscheduled transmission to airborne or ground stations unless required for air traffic control or flight safety . Crews have been told not to transmit to ground or airborne or airborne stations .
 A Soviet-Cuban intercept unit in Havana was reportedly attempting to intercept all radio communications, of American forces in the Caribbean, Mid-Atlantic, and Gulf coasts . The unit was reportedly trying to intercept radio communications .
 SAC took measures to reduce the volume of electrically-transmitted ""plain language"" messages and conversations . SAC also took measures .
 The large number of reports concerning interference, jamming and spoofing inundated the SAC Warning Center . A special communications analysis team within the DOCE emergency staff .
 If necessary, data was forwarded to the SAC Battle Staff and flying crews . Data was sent to the Battle Staff .
 This experience indicated the need for special ability in electronic phenomena analysis that could be used in an emergency situation . Thus, this experience indicated a need to special .
 A great deal of effort was devoted to improving communications for dispersal locations . Efforts were made to improve communications for dispersed locations .
 The Cutan crisis taught that dispersal demands solid, reliable communications . The crisis in the 1980s also taught that dispersed dispersal needs solid communications .
 Radio transmission to dispersed sites is also mandatory in order to provide ""go"" notification should land lines be interdicted . Radio transmission is mandatory to provide "go" notification if land lines are interdiction .
 Warning and mobility are additional necessities under crisis situations . Warning, mobility and warning are also necessities under emergency situations .
 The Southern Missile Warning System devised during the crisis was inadequate . The Southern missile Warning System was devised in the 1980s .
 The Cuban experience showed that predictions of the exact nature of war and crisis are more often proved wrong . The Cuban crisis is more often than not proved wrong, says George Bush .
 OSCUSSRB) 92 DKUSSBB1 . Neither could it rely upon stop-gap communications, e.g., MAES, amateur or reserve transmission capabilities .
 There was no question that SAC communications-electronics performed remarkably well in the Cuban crisis . SAC Communications-Electronics worked remarkably well during the crisis .
 During the Cuban crisis, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, Mr Arthur Sylvester, controlled the release of information to the public concerning participation of the military services .
 He directed that no information, including pictures and films, would be released without his approval . No information would be allowed to be published without the approval of the president .
 SAC notified all its field units to comply with the following DOD guidance in dealing with the public news media . SAC has been briefed on the guidance .
 All press inquiries related to specific Cuban operations will be referred to Washington, D.C. Reporters will be directed to Washington .
 Transportation of media representatives in ships or aircraft not authorized . Media representatives are not authorized to travel with media .
 Access to bases authorized on a normal basis, but access to operations areas may be restricted in order to safeguard operational information . Operations areas may also be restricted to protect operational information from the public .
 Identification of individual units in staging areas or in transit not authorized not authorized . Identification of unit in transit or staging areas is not authorized. Identification of units is not permitted .
 There will be no identification of type of aircraft used for aerial reconnaissance . No identification of aircraft will be given to the U.S.
 Newsmen will not be permitted to participate in flights aboard SAC tactical aircraft . Until further notice newsmen won't be allowed to fly aboard tactical planes .
 This restriction applies to any requests for flights previously approved by this headquarters but not yet completed . Restrictions apply to those requests that have not yet been completed .
 Media visits to alert facilities and missile sites will not be allowed until further notice . Media visits and normal community relations tours will also be banned .
 General Power sought to have the DOD's position modified in order to strengthen the nation's current and future security in dealing with incidents of a similar nature . General Power said the change would strengthen security in the country .
 General Power requested the Secretary of Defense to release the information on the basis of three main considerations . Advised of DOD's disapproval, on 7 November General Power asked for the information to be released .
 It would lessen partisan attacks on Presidential policies, increase morale of military service personnel, and apprise the enemy of the nation's strength . The bill would lessen attacks on President's policies and increase morale .
 Secretary of Defense never replied to CINCSAC's letter . Secretary of defense never replied . CINCAC: "In spite of the strong appeal, the Secretary never replied"
 CINCSAC's proposals outlining the command's significant contributions to national defense were included in a November DOD news release after the Cuban crisis ended .
 During the Cuban crisis SAC prepared and retained ou alert a force that unquestionably represented -he most powerful instrument for destruction ever assembled . The Cuban crisis was one of the most powerful instruments for destruction in the world .
 The U.S. tried to prevent war by convincing the aggressor that nothing would be gained, indeed all might be lost, by expanding a limited conflict into a nuclear war . Yet its primary mission during the crisis, as in the past, was to avoid war .
 LeMay, reflecting on the lessons of the Cuban confrontation, saw it as deterrence in action . LeMay: "It was an excellent example of the credibility of our nuclear delivery capability"
 Only under the protection of the strategic nuclear force could the forces policing the quarantine operate with confidence . Only under . protection of . the . nuclear force would be needed to ensure the security of the quarantine .
 The nature of the crisis afforded SAC an opportunity to take advantage of warning time and thus to bring its forces up to an unprecedented state of readiness . SAC: "SAC's forces were prepared to be ready for the first time in decades"
 A'' houTTsAC had 1436 bombers and lk5 missiles generated . Twenty-four hours after ^clarati on of A'' . of A,'' hou TTsAC . had 14 36 bombers and 1436 missiles generated.
 Jits.lwea^n'systems'Vithin }uCho'ur2 |Nbt enough tankers were available to support the rest of the rest . Jits.'systems’vithin was able to use the remaining tankers to
 In addition to the high state of readiness maintained over about a month period, several other ""firsts"" were recorded . PS^ PS^ In . addition to . the high . state of ready maintained over . about a . month period .
 The ei rmw Dfj dispersed lS3 of its second cycle B-47s to 32 alternate military and civilian airfields . LS3 was dispersed to 32 different airfields across the world .
 For the first time, new Minuteman solid fuel missiles, of which there were none ready at the beginning of the crisis, went on alert .
 T^K* Certainly the salient feature of SAC's role in the crisis was its accelerated generation -of strategic nuclear power . reconnaissance also paid an important role in determining Soviet intentions .
 Still, Cubans a uai^e situation and the cohddtdtdons^er which SAC generated its forces .ere unicue unicue. The situation is still unicue, but Cubans have a right to live in Cuba .
 Ihe zoauor and atacf ar.ani.nous problem encountered by B-J2 organization* .conceded weapons availability. Ihe .concedes-concessed weapons available .
 SAC Plane consignee proved of good temper . Although they had to make spot decisions on situations not specifically covered .
 Some vera temporarily accepted and attacked after the co^and returned to no^al operations . Some prohW recuired Mediate attention and some vera attacked after it was brought back .
 No GAM-77s were carried ""by units participating in the indoctrination program on 21 Oct 62. 1962" "No GAM-77 were carried "" by units participating . in the . indoctrination . program" "By the end of October 62.
 The number of GAM-77s required on airborne alert increased from 20 to 28 by 2 Nov, and' remained at that level until 21 Nov. Thus, the number of 'GAM-77's required to be on alert increased to 28 .
 This briefing, vith its accompanying, photographs, is included in the photo volume of this history . It constitutes the pictorial record* of Soviet military accomplishments in Cuba .
 The best unclassified summary of .the introduction of Soviet arms into Cuba that has appeared to have appeared to '""-••date was made to the House Armed Services Committee by SecDef McNamara on 30 Jan. 63 .
 The historian has been able to include only a bare outline of this mission . Due to the sensitive nature of this Security Service mission, the historian was able to . This mission was the first of its kind .
 JCS 2324-62: JCS to SAC, I27230OZ Sep 62. Msg, J CS 2324 -62 . Msg: Jcs 2324: 'SAC' Sep 62: "SAC"
 Msg, Zippo' IO-698, SAC to 2AP, 28/0322Z Oct 62; See Ex 3 for >l mission recaps . Msg. Msg,. Msg . IO- 698, Msg., SAC . SAC,
 Sec.Bef McNamara made a statement before House Armed Services Committee, 30 Jan 03 . See also Sec. McNamara's statement before the House of Representatives .
 Powell, Ch, ;occn Br, DO, 20 Nov 62 . ---:-■ The historian in this early period has been forced to rely ^-^■U i^erviev -i lieu of documentation .
 The basic Operations ^ree^stating Brass Knob requirements and some 20 other documents were at the time ■if their preparation placed iri a special sensitive category and :-.ave not been downgraded . The basic . Operations .
 Interview, John Bohn, Ch, DXIH, with General Thomas S Power, CINCSAC, 15 Nov 62. Interview with General Power, General Bohn .
 T-ate-view, Robert Kipp, Historian, with Maj Richard S Heyser, 27 Nov 62. T-at-view .
 Maj Heyser with several other reconnaissance specialists and General LeMay were called to meet with President Kennedy . On 29 Oct Oct Maj. LeMay was called to President Kennedy for a meeting .
 McCoy to AFSSO SAC, Ij/lSk^Z Oct 62, 3-lkl6k; Msg, 4080S¥ Laugnlm 10 AF SSAC, 17/1953Z Oct. 62, B-i4l66
 Msg, SCO 62D 1444, AFSSO SAC ro AF SSO McCoy, 18/IOI5Z Oct 62; Msg. Msg . Msg: SSOM-19-10-01, SSOM -19/1001, AF
 McCoy to AFSSO SAC, 22/l6l8Z Oct 62. xo vas the only time thiu camera was used in October . ST SSQM 2210 .
 Los Angeles Times, 5 Nov. 62. See also photo alleged crash scene .
 The order had no douoo oeen received oy telecon earlier because SAC sent a Zippo SS S 0ct°62 ^ W±nS CanCellin g fli ^* on 28/ 68. The order was sent to SAC from SAC on 28
 Compton > Letter of Transmittal, "" 15 Nov 62, to T/oi'r v v V n Dessert . Compton: "AFCIG69. Blanchard, IG, 2 9 Oct 62"
 Report ""OLX Flying Time Nov 62]' Ex 2, Hist of 4080SW, Special Operations Nov-Dec 62; also p 18 same history. Report ""O.S. F.W.F. 62: Special Operations November-December 62 . Report: "OLX
 Hist of 55SRW Dep Comdr for Ops, Oct 62, B-89856. li0 "So^f IS^O^f 3 T^ ^ 2T/ ° 3 °5 Z Oct 62; Msg, _. u-o 50J.,
 DPL, to DXIH, ""Historical Coverage of Cuban Crisis,"" 9 A ov c2. 3f tcll ^f-' , ^ hronolosicai L -3ting of Major Actions,"" to IOM, DOPIM to DXx
 I0M, Col George Matsko, Ex DPL, to DXIH, "Historical Coverage of Cuban Crisis,"" 9 Nov 62. 1962 . Col Matsko was DPL at the time of the Cuban Crisis .
 Schva^ztrauber, Ex IG, to DXIH, "Historical Coverage of Cjban Crisis/' 2 S cv 62.2 S Cv 62 . Schva*. Schva*trauber: "Cjban crisis"
 IcAF sent C 1361, 16AF to SAC, ""Fran General-Wade to General Power,"" -■':■:■■■/ 0930Z Oct 62. 1962 .
 Statistics taken from Control Center display panels by SAC Support Battle Staff historian . Msg, JOPREP 11-lSO, SAC to JCS arid DIA, I7/23HZ Nov 62 .
 Memo, ""Proceeds of SAC Readiness Committee Executive Session,"" "" by Lt Col K. K. hi. Memo: "Proceedings of the SAC readiness committee Executive Session"
 Msg, JCS 7o00, J CS to CINCLANT, 28/2249Z Nov 62, Ex 74.2, Ex 75 141.2; Msg. JCS 7601, Jcs to SAC, 28-2314 Z Nov 62
 Report: ""Liquid Oxygen/Liquid Nitrogen Conversion ,"" by BM3F, 26 Oct 62. Report, ""Liquid . Oxygen and Nitrogen conversion ,"" was published by BMF on October 26, 2012 .
 IO-385 for MACS, SAC to MAAMA, 24 Oct 62; Msg, DM 99016, . 99016 to MAMA, 2o Oct 62 . Msg. 99016 is Msg., DM 9901, . SAC 9901 to MAama
 Malrnstrorn 43. Jlcg, 3SQ-30-10-26, BSD to SAC, '''Technical Evaluation of Malrnstorn 43''
 Pane ti oris, [-'■ extracted from SACM 55-7, 'H May 62. Px-Lctior;3,| extracted from . SacM 55.7, 4 May 62 . Pane oris .
 S AFSC/SAC Agreement for Emergency Combat Capability Capability of Ballistic Missile launch Complexes, 4 May 6l. A. L.A. missile launch Complexs will be launched in the near future .
 "Teamwork, Missile Force Generation,"" 19 Nov 62. A Schriever, Comdr APSC, "teamwork, missile force generation,"" A Schrieever .
 Msg, DO/DM 8519, SAC to BSD & 15AF, "Technical Evaluation of Malmstrom Flight 'A, 'A," 2o Oct 62. 2k. Msg" Msg: "SAC to . BSD and 15AF"
 Msg. Msg, BSQ-30-10-2o, BSD to SAC, ""Technical Evaluation of Malms tram Flight A,"" 0111Z 31 Oct 02.
 Chapter IV 1. xOM, DOCEPP to DXIH, ""Circuit Activation-Deactivation Schedule Cuban Crisis,"" 29 Nov 62, w/Atch 1, ""EMC and. e.C and . e.O.C. "Cuban
 Msg, DOCS 8507, SAC to AFLC, "Return of SAC Mobile Multiplex Equipped Communications Vans,"" 2302Z 26 Oct 62.
 Msg, DCCE 98476, SAC to Alfa Two, "HF SS3 Monitor Requirement At -s-47 Dispersal Bases,"" 2010Z 25 Oct 62. Msg . Msg: "SAC to Afa Two"