 The United States and Cuba marked the beginning of their 52nd year of broken relations in 2011 . The U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for 52 years .
 The arrest and trial in Cuba of USAID worker Alan Gross strained relations with Cuba again . Alan Gross was arrested in Cuba on suspicion of espionage . The case has strained relations since the collapse of Soviet-style Communism .
 Many Southerner wanted to annex the island as a state to increase territory where enslavement was allowed .
 In the 1890s, while Spain was attempting to suppress a Cuban nationalist rebellion, the U.S. intervened on the premise of correcting Spanish human rights abuses .
 In truth, American neo-imperialism fueled American interests as it sought to create a European-style empire of its own . The U.S. was trying to create an empire of own, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The United States bristled when a Spanish ""scorched earth"" tactic against nationalist guerrillas burned out several U.S. interests .
 The United States began the Spanish-American War in April 1898 . By the middle of July, the U.S. had defeated Spain .
 Cuban nationalists believed they had achieved independence, but the U.S. had other ideas . The United States had other plans for Cuban independence .
 Not until 1902 did the United States grant Cuban independence, and then only after Cuba agreed to the Platt Amendment, which roped Cuba into America's sphere of economic influence . Cuba was granted independence in 1902 .
 The amendment stipulated that Cuba could not transfer land to any foreign power except the United States . It would allow American intervention in Cuban affairs whenever the U.S. thought it was necessary .
 Cubans added the amendment to their constitution to speed their own independence . The amendment was added to the Cuban constitution .
 Cuba operated under the Platt Amendment until 1934 when the U.S. rescinded it under the Treaty of Relations . The United States rescinded the amendment in 1934 .
 The treaty was part of Franklin D Roosevelt's Good Neighbor Policy . It was intended to foster better American relations with Latin American countries .
 The treaty retained the American rental of the Guantanamo Bay naval base . The treaty also retained the U.S. rental of Guantanamo Bay .
 In 1959 Fidel Castro and Che Guevara led the Cuban communist revolution to overthrow President Fulgencio Batista's regime . Fidel Castro's Cuban government overthrew the Batista regime .
 The United States' policy toward Communism was ""containment"" and it quickly severed ties with Cuba and embargoed trade the island . The U.S. policy toward Cuba was "containment"
 In 1961 the American Central Intelligence Agency orchestrated a failed attempt by Cuban emigres to invade Cuba and topple Castro . In 1961, the CIA orchestrated an attempt to overthrow Castro .
 In October 1962, the Soviets began shipping nuclear-capable missiles to Cuba . The missiles were sent to Cuba by the Soviets in 1962 .
 President Kennedy warned Nikita Khrushchev to remove the missiles or face consequences . Most of the world interpreted the warning as nuclear war .
 Cuban relations with the United States remained cold but not warlike . While the Soviet Union continued to back Castro, Cuba's relationship with the U.S. remained cold, not war-like .
 Castro told Cubans they could leave if they did not like conditions at home . In 1979, faced with an economic downturn and civilian unrest, Castro told Cuban citizens to leave .
 Between April and October 1980, some 200,000 Cubans arrived in the U.S. Between 1980 and 1983, 200,00 Cubans came to the United States . Cubans were among the first Cubans to arrive in the country .
 Under the Cuban Adjustment Act of 1966, the U.S. could allow the arrival of such immigrants and avoid their repatriation to Cuba . Under the act, the United States could allow such immigrants to arrive and avoid repatriation .
 Cuba suffered another economic downturn after losing most Soviet-block trading partners with the collapse of Communism between 1989 and 1991 . Cuba lost most of its Soviet block trading partners in the fall of Communism .
 In 1996 the United States arrested five Cuban men on charges of espionage and conspiracy to commit murder . The U.S. arrested the men in 1996 .
 The United States alleged they had entered Florida and infiltrated Cuban-American human rights groups . The U.S. alleged they entered Florida to infiltrate Cuban-Americans groups .
 The United States also charged that information the so-called Cuban Five sent back to Cuba helped Castro's air force destroy two Brothers-to-the-Rescue planes returning from a covert mission to Cuba, killing four passengers . The U.S. says the information the Cuban Five
 In 2008, after a prolonged illness, Castro ceded the presidency of Cuba to his brother, Raul Castro . Castro's illness led to him relinquishing the presidency to Raul in 2008 .
 Some outside observers believed that would signal the collapse of Cuban Communism, it did not happen . While some outside observers thought it would signal that it did, it was not the end of Communism .
 In 2009 after Barack Obama became president of the U.S., Raul Castro made overtures to talk to the United States about foreign policy normalization . However, in 2009 after becoming president, Raul . Castro has been critical of Obama's foreign policy .
 Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said that the 50-year American foreign policy toward Cuba had ""failed,"" Clinton said . Clinton said Obama's administration was committed to finding ways to normalize Cuban-American relations .
 In 2008 Cuba arrested USAID worker Alan Gross, charged with distributing U.S. government-purchased computers with the intent of establishing a spy network inside Cuba .
 Gross, 59 at the time of his arrest, claimed no knowledge of the computers' sponsorship . Cuba tried and convicted Gross on March 2011 . Gross claimed he did not know of the sponsorship .
 Former U.S. President Jimmy Carter traveled to Cuba in March and April 2011 . Carter traveled on behalf of his Carter Center for human rights .
 President Obama says he believes Cuban 5 have been jailed long enough . He stopped short of suggesting any type of prisoner exchange for Gross .
 Gross case seemed capable of halting any further normalization of relations between the two countries until its resolution . Gross case was seen as a major stumbling block to normalizing relations with the U.S. The Gross case seems likely to be the last thing to happen .
 Jones, Steve. Jones is the author of a new book, "Chicago", "Chicago" The book is published by Chicago-based LaPrairie, Illinois, at the University of Chicago, Chicago .
 ThoughtCo, Aug., 2020, thoughtco.com.com . ThoughtCo.com: "us and Cuba have history of complex relations"