 The World of Eric CarleBlueyLlama Llama is a collection of children's favorite books . The Last Kids on Earth, The Last Children's on Earth and Mad Libs are also available .
 The World of Eric CarleBlueyLlama Llama . The Last Kids on EarthMad LibsNarwhal and Jelly. The Last Kid on Earth .
 Matrix Staff Picks from Fareeda Bullert . See What She's Loving, From Romance Reads to TV Shows .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev beat back hotheads in their own councils . In detailing the disastrous miscalculations of the two superpowers, this book chronicles the Cold War’s most frightening encounter .
 Max Frankel is one of America’s preeminent journalists . Read an Excerpt from his new book, "Max Frankel"
 Scholars and participants debated the main questions surrounding this sensational event . Yet over the decades, even the most attentive scholars and participants kept debating the key questions . And most recently, their views have been augmented by voluminous government records .
 Khrushchev, the wily old peasant ruling the Soviet empire, and John F Kennedy, the jaunty young president leading the Western democracies. And they have still not overcome the popular misconceptions about the motives and conduct of the two Cold War antagonists.
 The evidence now available, though still debated, shows that it was to offset a debilitating weakness, not to imperil America, that Khrushchev careered into the crisis . As I slowly learned in covering Kennedy's Washington, the imperative of protecting himself politically inevitably shapes a president's perception
 Though haunted by domestic critics, he nonetheless weighed every move with respect for his adversary and showed a decent regard for the opinions of other affected nations and the judgment of history . Luck played a role in averting disaster, in preventing events from racing out of control .
 Read the latest book reviews from iReporters and other notable authors . Visit CNN.com/Heroes for a new look at the best books in the world .
 We are experiencing technical difficulties . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Back to the page you came from .
 TASTE an online magazine for today's home cook . Use this recipe to help you make the most of the best things you know .
 Members of the U.S. Senate will vote for the first time this year . The Senate will hold a vote on whether or not to hold the vote on the next year .
 The author of this week's iReporter's weekly book reviews is featured on CNN iReport . Visit CNN.com/Heroes for more information about upcoming book releases .