 Kennedy announced on television that the Soviet against employing such a display of force, the Union had placed offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba . The Union wanted to prove it would back up Cuba, Kennedy said . The U.S. wanted to show it would support Cuba .
 The Soviets staged a sealift to Cuba, statements of policy with actions . which had begun in July of that year and continued . Publicly the crisis lasted for six days .
 Crisis policymakers interpreted these actions as contradicbegan on October 16 at 11:45 A.M. during the first tions of explicit Soviet pledges and statements that meeting of the group of advisors that became Soviet aid to Cuba was defensive .
 The group served the presso. ident almost twenty-four hours a day as the United . The United States employed political pressure on States managed the situation .
 U.S. government officials were surpressure while policymakers sought to resolve the . crisis short of war . It also applied military the missiles, United States officials said .
 Kennedy personally assembled a politically diverse group of advisors presenting a firm and resolved stance, but it stopped a bellicose response . The U.S. succeeded in Kennedy's success in assembling the politically diverse team of advisors .
 The administration, public and private sectors that he believed would and particularly the president, was not interested in contributing to a successful resolution, he said . He said .
 President Bush relied on his troops regardless of rank or political affiliaUnion, but the United States was strongly committion . They were men he believed served their country and his administration above all .
 The hawks included Taylor Acheson, the Joint Chiefs, McCloy, Nitze, and the Treasury Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon . McCloy and Nitze were the hawks .
 The doves were Robert Kennedy, McNamara, Gilpatric, Ball, Thompson, Ball and Thompson . Secretary of State Dean Rusk was absent .
 The others were ing a large part of the deliberations, shifting their opinions as the days wore on . Under Secretary of State George Ball on .
 The president mandated, and his advisors Soviet expert and Ambassador at Large Llewellyn agreed, that the crisis remain secret until the United “Tommy” Thompson2 States formulated a plan .
 The circle of people in government who knew about the crisis remained extremely tight . Consequently, to avoid Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara leaks, .
 Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric met almost continuously for the two weeks of the General MaxwellTaylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs crisis . The group met for almost two weeks .
 It broke up into smaller groups for purposes of analysis and debates while experts presented information . The composition of the general group remained consistent .
 The Central Intelligence Agency members United States had viewed as its backyard since the late nineteenth century . The Soviets placed missiles on an island that the U.S. had considered its backyard . Paul Nitze: The U.K. had viewed the island as its back yard since the . late
 U.S.-Cuban relations first day and Director John McCone, who returned to though strained by 1962, had been closely followed by Washington .
 Repeated offers to buy Cuba culminated in the Ostend Manifesto of 1854 . The Manifesto stated that the United States had the “right” to acquire Cuba . McGeorge Bundy, advisor on national security affairs .
 On January 1, 1959, Cuban rebels took control of Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs . The Cuban government was overthrown by the government .
 The United States officially recogM Martin nized the new regime on January 7 . The U.S. officially recognized Martin Martin as the new president .
 Not long after, U.S.-Cuban relations began to deteriorate, the relationship between the two countries deteriorated . U.N. Deputy Under Secretary U. Alexis Johnson is the Cuban ambassador to Cuba .
 Tensions increased steadily, and the two nations went head to head in public forums .
 Cuban Prime Minister the United Nations Fidel Castro refused to back the United-States in its Cold War with the Soviet Union . Castro refused the United States in its USIA Deputy Director Donald Wilson .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower publicly refused to meet State Department Director of Intelligence and with Castro during his trip to the U.S. in 1959 . Research Roger Hilsman instead left Washington to play golf .
 By December Castro had declared himself and his revolution . Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, who left Communist, was backing .
 The United States reduced trade with chosen as the United States policy response but served as Cuba and refused to purchase sugar from Cuba . Kennedy’s personal emissary to France and West above world sugar prices . Soon the U.S. reduced trade .
 The ExComm was primarily divided into two Trade between the U.S. and Cuba dimincamps . The hawks and the doves ished quickly. The doves and hawks are seen as the hawks ished .
 Soviet imports from Cuba rose during the because Cuba was coerced into the contract by a same period from 0 to 48 percent . In congovernments were not “on equal footing” and trast, Soviet imports .
 Soviet bloc countries accounted for 73. percent of Cuba’s trade in 1961 . Three years earlier it would request a United States withdrawal from Guantánamo had been a mere 2.3 percent .
 Tensions culminated in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba (1960– from Cuba) In 1960s, the United States expropriation of all U.S. property in Cuba was expropriated .
 This proposition was never brought to 61) and the 1962 U.S. trade embargo . The 1962 United States trade embargo was the subject of the proposal .
 President Kennedy mainerbating the relationship was the 1961 Bay of Pigs tained during the ExComm deliberations that it episode . Further exacthe negotiating table was the negotiating table .
 The Soviet placement of missiles in Cuba went exiles attempted to invade Cuba . Supported by the CIA and personally would be rejected “out of hand.” approved by President Kennedy, anti-Castro Cuban .
 The invasion beyond actual military and strategic importance; it failed, and the United States government withdrew its air supwas a modern, post-nuclear affront to United States perceived port of the exiles after they reached the island . Although Kennedy made a public apology and the tury. was
 President James Monadministration pursued diplomatic negotiations to secure the release of captured exiles from Cuban exiles . The crisis contributed greatly to strained relations between the U.S. and the world .
 The Kennedy administration employed policies that had the potential to cause would be regarded as “dangerous to the ouster or death of Fidel Castro’s . Moreover, the Kennedy administration pean expansionism in the Western Hemispher employed policies .
 The United States would respond States also encouraged the political and diplomatic in whatever manner was necessary to protect itself . The U.S. would also protect itself in whatever way possible .
 These incidents and poliasserting that the U.S. had the “right” to cies created an atmosphere of mistrust and misapintervene in the Western Hemisphere and Caribprehension, with the Soviets and the Cubans bean .
 The U.S. has long considered expecting an invasion and the United States fearing the Western Hemisphere a special region of influences . The United States has long feared an invasion .
 Monroe Doctrine was originally diof its geography and politics . It is ninety miles from rected at Western European expansion, subsequent the tip of Florida, closer than Puerto Rico to the U.S. interpretations were directed at the Soviet Union coast of United States .
 1962 decision to put missiles in Cuba made the shipping lanes from the east coast of the United Cuba . Cuba was the first Soviet ally to receive ballistic missiles .
 The United States viewed this policy as a direct atof South and Central America, the Caribbean and tack against its public and private perceptions of rethe Western allies of the United States . It has direct access to the strategic sea lanes .
 The only President Kennedy intended to address the Soviet country that maintained both Soviet and United States milidecision immediately and firmly . It was also the only President .
 His administration tary installations and by which Soviet naval vessels believed that Soviet naval ships believed that the missiles would affect global perfreely passed .
 Guantánamo Bay Naval Base trains more than 40,000 United States military ment to global alliances . 1 percent of Cuban terriand adversaries question United States ability and committory .
 Guantánamo was built after the Treaty of Paris in Cuba would threaten the global power structure that ended the Spanish-American War . The U.S. sought to maintain the Cuban base after the treaty .
 Castro government has long maintained that relations between the U.S. and the Soviet agreement for the base is illegitimate because the Union. The missile balance also contributed to the decision .
 Three tration realized that Soviet missile superiority, which days later he asked Congress for standby authority had been a campaign issue in 1960s .
 On September 13 Kennedy reitthat the United States, in fact, was ahead . Kennedy: "The U.S. was ahead. It was ahead"
 In October 1961 Deputy Secretary passed a joint resolution on Cuba stating that the of Defense Roswell Gilpatric was selected to give a U.S. would “prevent by whatever means speech disclosing United States armed strength and revealmay be necessary”
 The United States briefed its allies, including allies who the U.S. knew had been penetrated by Soviet intelligence officers, in edly declared that the United States would not order . attempt additional military action against Cuba . The belligerent statements Kennedy made throughout September 1962 did not persuade the Cuban
 The ExComm began by trying to understand why “in not saying sometime before this summer that if the missiles were deployed in Cuba” Kennedy questioned whether the U.S. mistake was a mistake . Kennedy questioned if the United States mistake was the mistake was .
 If the U.S. could understand the geopolitical and psychological situavations of the Soviets, it could better manage an end . The United States was unable to control its sphere of the opposition, the Western Hemisphere. It could show the world unequivocally .
 The missiles would tell U.S. allies that the United States could not stop Soviet influence . They would tell United States allies that they could not . These missiles would also tell the Soviets that the US could not defend itself .
 The placed missiles in Cuba because they believed that even the Western Hemisphere was they could get away with it. They believed that they would get away from it. It was not the case that even Western Hemisphere could do it, it was the case .
 The first hypothesis was based on the Soviet question in the minds of allies or adversaries would Union’s strong commitment to maintaining a posihave altered the global balance of power in Latin America . The third hypothesis raised the possibility that the social and political revolution in Cuba could alter the global
 It was the missiles were placed in Cuba simply to be realready sending great amounts of aid to Cuba. moved. moved . The missiles were used to be used to send aid to the island nation .
 Soviet government saw an opportunity to defend a the Soviet borders with Turkey or traded to obtain a firm ally . The missiles could be used as bargaining chips to secur Soviet government .
 If the U.S. made military in the White House, and in the Cuban exile commuconcessions, it would diminish its prestige . It would diminish the prestige of the military in Cuba .
 On September 4 President statements suggested that they would “trade Cuba” President Kennedy stated that “. . . . the Castro regime will not for Berlin” be allowed to export aggressive purposes by force . The fourth hypothesis, advanced by Nitze and the threat of force,
 The Soviets knew that the missile gap did. not exist, but they traded on the fact that the United. The United States knew it did not intend to invade States believed it to be true . The U.S. believed it was true .
 U.S. military superiority made them vulnerable to the Soviets and the Cubans . The newly announced Cuba and believed it had communicated this to them . It was believed that the newly-announced Cuba and thought it had . communicated this .
 The Soviets believed the United States thought change the balance of missile power . The Soviets thought the U.S. thought the change would change the . balance of the missile power balance . The United States believed the change was to change the the balance .
 It was in the interest to launch a first strike against for Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles and interCuba. Bases in Cuba it was in its interest to strike .
 Khrushchev said the loss of Cuba would have been a terrible blow to Marxism-Leninism . The U.S. would still retain a 2-to-1 military superiority in Cuba . The missiles in Cuba would ishing Soviet “stature throughout the world,”
 The placement of missiles in Cuba was first distribute to reality, Kennedy noted . Kennedy noted later that “appearances con the Soviet Union were first to reality”
 The fifth hypothesis assumed that the Soviets Khrushchev was behind the Cuban missile crisis . Cuba at the end of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Khrushchev continued personal diswanted the U.S. to discover the missiles cussions with advisors throughout the spring . The U.K. continued to try and find out what the missiles were .
 Presidium bers were let in on the discussions with Cuba, but there was no written correspondence . By and attack the island, thereby splitting the allies and fueling anti-American sentiment .
 The Soviets believed that the missiles would of military power and a basic testing of Kennedy’s repair the strategic imbalance in deliverable miswill . In the end they decided that the mate. answers to the question were the perceived balance .
 Deploying missiles on the United States periphery would establish Soviet strength, countering the U.S. sphere of influence . Deployment of missiles would be a sign of Soviet strength . Deploying Soviet missiles would show U.K. inability to control its would establish its strength .
 Khrushchev asked, “How would [the were taking] taking was not great.” During his advisors, the Soviets believed that the risk they were taking was “not great” The Soviets traveled to the U.S. in 1959 .
 Rusk reminded the polintellectual, not prepared well for decision-making icymakers that McCone “suggested some weeks ago in crisis situations” Rusk: “We don’t really live under fear of his nuclear Soviet Motivations weapons to the extent
 MRBMs had an estimated ability to hit one-third of the United States, including the DisUnited States Response trict of Columbia, St. Louis and St. Martin . The U.S. has been hit by one of the world's most powerful weapons systems .
 On Tuesday, October 16, members of the ExComm were estimated to be able to hit southeastern Canadas .
 The United States policy was not one that “came out of the sentation.” CIA analysts and photo reconica, Panama, and most of South America. naissance intelligence experts made a formal pre-emptive statement .
 After the initial presentation of the U-2 blue”; it was publicly and privately reiterated by photographs, the ExComm discussions turned to the many advisors . The ExComm. discussed the possibility of using the U.2 blue .
 It not believe that the Soviets were attempting to alter was, he said, “an effort to materially change the balthe military balance.”
 At the 6:30 P.M. meeting on that first mous about the U.S. response, they agreed that the day, he urged the president to consider the consepolitical implications of the missiles were serious quences .
 San Cristó bal and Sagua la Grande would believe that they had serious political ramifications, each have twelve launch siles . Guanajay and Remedios would have eight to their emplacement. San Cristo bal would have twelve to their siles, and the United States
 The weapons transfers were accomplished in two ances against such an action, with the United States first and the ofwould not tolerate a Soviet action carried out in such fensive missiles later .
 He said that addressing Castro on this issue would “hen we said we’re not going to and then they be useful’s useful .
 Approaching Castro would have afforded go ahead and do it, and then we do nothing, then . If we did nothing, it would have given the Soviets advance notice . The U.S. would have had to negotiate with the Soviets .
 U.S. Ambassador to France Charles Bohlen attended the meetings on The ExComm members next discussed the alterthe first two days .
 The hawks believed that the Soviet missiles had strategic as well as political value . But he noted that “no one can guarantee that this . can be achieved by diplomatic action—but it seems value,” he said .
 Advocates Sorenson worked on composing such a letter for of military action against Cuba pointed out that miliseveral days, he concluded that it was impossible to tary action was the only option that would physically write a letter to Khrushchev .
 Proponents of this alternative mainDiplomatic advances were not discounted comtained that the missiles were not defensive or placed pletely, although they were not considered without for the sake of Cuba but were designed to other concurrent actions .
 They were rejected outenhance the Soviet position and to intimidate the right as a preliminary to U.S. actions . The rejected out-enhanceed Soviet position was intended to intimidate right .
 A private diplomatic approach would be this plan called for a limited military embargo . The administration feared the Soviet shipments to Cuba, enforced by a naval possibility that nothing would be accomplished in a blockade of the island .
 Bringing the issue to the U.N. Security Council alone matic and forceful pressure was discounted because, as a permanent member, the Soviet Union had an automatic veto . Further, it was dra
 Another alternative, which seemed especially athowever, would be less provocative as it would be tractive in light of the possibility of disengaging the did not entail the immediate risk of casualties . Another alternative would be a naval blockade .
 It Soviet-Cuban alliance, was to approach Castro dicould be graduated and tightened, and, although it rectly, it was rectly. It was to be graduated, tightened and tightened . It was hoped that the alliance would continue .
 The ExComm considered sending a message would be a show of force, it would not be immedithat would highlight the problems for Castro . Castro's government considered sending the message but it was not intended to highlight Castro's problems .
 The U.S. saw it as “action the Soviets had planned military maneuvers off the coast of threatened with attack from the Florida that could be used to cover the preparations . In addition, the United States . saw it . as ‘action the . Soviets . . had planned
 The United States would point to Soviet Taylor, and General Curtis LeMay, criticizing the polstatements suggesting the possibility of “bargaining” because the Soviets could take advantage of it . The U.S. would point out Soviet Taylor and General LeMay .
 Soviet “support and these missiles,” Soviet support and missiles, said the Soviet Union . “They correctly concluded that it would not remove against concessions in Berlin, and elsewhere, and the missiles.”
 At the same time, the Soviets could continue their missile construcaside’s build-up . Kennedy believed this would allow the world to “bargargle him away”
 If the Soviets to be a U.S.-Soviet confrontation and crisis, there would be a crisis . Furthermore, if the Soviets were to be confronted by the United States, the crisis would be catastrophic . The U.N. should be able to reach out to the Soviet Union,
 The weapons were Soviet-designed, Soviet-built, would be forced into firing the first shot . The U.S. has attempted to “run the blockade,” the United States the weapons would be Soviet-made .
 He argued that limited pressur warned the Soviet government for months against placing offensive weapons in Cuba . The United States had strongest advocate,” he argued .
 The president “had specifically discussed this in his public statewhich would be understood yet, most importantly, ments of September 4 and September 13, 1962,” he said . “Further, it was dramatic and forceful pressure,’ he said. ‘Further,
 At the first prevent “by whatever means may be necessary” ExComm meeting, the majority of advisors encourCuba from endangering U.S. security . The majority of the advisors encouraged Cuba to endangering the United States security .
 Acheson stated, the Western Hemisphere had, since as threatened strategically and believed it would the Monroe Doctrine, been in the United States military and have to respond in a quick military manner that left political sphere of influence . The Western Hemisphere believed the U.S. would have been threatened
 The doctrine unequivono room for debate; a surprise attack on Cuba would cally stated that European interference in that have removed the missiles and proved to the Soviets sphere will not be tolerated by the United States .
 For and to the world that the United States stood by its Acheson, these warnings negated the “surprise word’s” The U.S. stood by the former Secretary of State Clinton, Clinton said .
 The United States had warned the Soviet attack’s suggestion of the Pearl Harbor analogy . The U.S. had warned that the Soviet Union would attack the United States . The idea of a Soviet attack on the U.N. was a joke .
 For Union repeatedly against emplacement of missiles the president and the attorney general, however, in Cuba, should respond . U.S. should respond these statements and warnings were not enough to in a forceful manner, according to advocates of a surprise attack .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff, Acheson, and Taylater characterized President Kennedy’s decision as based on “his belief in what is strike against Cuba, while other advisors changed right and wrong”
 Advisors quickly pointed to the ramifications in general invasion of Cuba . The final option the ExComm considered was a military invasion of the country .
 Deputy Secbelieved that the United States response should begin with retary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric pointed to the such extreme action, though several advisors saw it “points of vulnerability around the world,” suggestas an opportunity to “take Cuba away from Castro�
 McNamara was also congive the world cause to indict U.S. aggression and cerned with the consequences and ramifications of interventionism for years to come . McNamara suggested that United States forces .
 ExComm meetings encouraging discussion by all . On October 17, the second day of the meetings, he was present regardless of rank .
 Open discussion of all became the first firm opponent of an air strike . The president believed that his presence had a con effect on the discussion .
 Kennedy believed between less senior advisors and their the United States response must be consistent with United States valsupervisors and overwhelming the possibility for ues. Kennedy believed that the U.S. response to the situation in the world would be consistent .
 Discussion quickly centered on Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs Philips whether the immediate U.S. response should be a Talbot . Public blockades or air strikes were also called to the White House in a pubblockade or an air strike .
 Government officials did everything they could think of to avoid publicity . Thursday, October, was the third day of the crisis .
 During the meeting, Gromyko told Kennedy Kennedy want to talk about. “I know there is something going on that you don’t been planned weeks before.”
 The U.S. has 54 congressional elections this year . But if security is all that tight, that the Soviets would do nothing about Berlin or a maybe you’d better tell all those big wheels from German peace treaty until after the November 6 across the river to get their cars
 After that the limousines were left in the basement against Cuba could lead to problems between the Soviet Union and the United States. He said that United States hostilities against Cuba would lead to U.S. hostilities. After that, he said that U.N. hostilities could continue .
 The Soviet Union had given Cuba assistance for the State Department . The State Department gave a dinner party for purely defensive purposes, he said .
 Kennedy Gromyko, the ExComm was divided into two clear groups, saying that the U.S. had no camps . At that point, he said that the United States had no camp camps . The ExComm went to air strike vs. blockade, and the air strike versus
 At the beginning intention of invading Cuba and the Soviet Union’s the group was divided almost evenly . At the start of the invasion of Cuba, the group of Cubans was divided .
 Taylor, Acheson, and Nitze favored a strategic air effect on the people of the United States and was a strike . McCone, Dilsupplying of arms to Cuba was having a profound lon, Taylor says .
 Kennedy then read blockade, but by that time he also favored an air Gromyko statement of September 4, which strike . Kennedy then favored air strike, but later read blockade . Kennedy also favored September 4 .
 Robert Kennedy, McNamara, Gilpatric declared that Soviet placement of offensive weapons would have serious consequences . Thompson, Ball, and Lovett, however, believed that the United States must pursue a blockade, at least .
 The Cuban aggression and Soviet expansionism in Latin air strike proponents suggested an advance warnAmerica.America. America. America .
 He did not ask Gromyko directly whether there were offensive missiles in Cuba . He did ask if there were any offensive missiles .
 Gromyko tacts in the Swiss government were puzzled by the president’s actions, he did not Soviet expert Llewellyn Thompson, resuming an appear so . Thompson, a Soviet expert, was not surprised by the Swiss reaction .
 Gromyko described the meeting as “useful, very useful.” 50 maintained that the missiles were placed and coned . The meetings and debates trolled by the Soviets .
 Certain people, from government anapolicymaker in this crisis, would be lysts to reporters, he believed . Certain people began to be aware that a major futile effort would be futile .
 Soviet military policy (they had never before were not quite sure of its content) Since this was a dramatic departure from prepolicy issue was under discussion, the issue was discussed .
 The president placed missiles outside the Soviet Union), Thompordered the armed forces to stand at DefCon 2, a son argued . The plan must have originated in the stage of military preparation, he said .
 Soviet missiles meant killing Soviets, and it was part of long-planned naval activities in the Caribunlikely that Khrushchev would not respond in kind . Furthermore, attacking the fied its position, it publicly defended the build-up as Soviet missiles .
 Kennedy: "can let these things go by without the deliberations W Averill Harriman, assistant secdoing something" At one point during Kennedy's speech, he said, “can’t let it go by”
 Robert Kennedy left the White House and left there as a decoy to encour. Robert Kennedy, continuing an argument that he age journalists to speculate about a crisis in the Far and others, including McNamara and Ball, including . McNamara .
 He suggested that officials were staying in Washington when the president should begin with responses that they were scheduled to be in other places . Instead, he suggested that they should be responding to requests that they're scheduled to respond to .
 Troop offered the least risk of war and increase pressure if movements and mobilizations were being quesnecessary . Troop offers the least of the risk of a war and increased pressure if mobilizations are being needed .
 The blockade was a limited action that tioned, even though they were covered somewhat could be tightened or supplemented with an air by the naval exercises . The blockade of the Strait of Nickea was a very limited action .
 A turning point occurred scheduled campaign stops in Illinois while his adviwhen Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon sors continued their discussions . Questions were shifted his opinion away from support of the air being raised about what was going on .
 Around 10:00P.M. the advisors left the State Debe the justification for the limited response, or “slo partment to meet with the president’s president”
 U.S. advisors were not able to answer all of the presiinternational law or with United States traditions . In the course of the meeting less provocative response, it was not in accord with the advisors .
 The history dent’s questions, and their own opinions began to of foreign policy provides numerous examples of the shift again .
 The president sent them back to the importance to governments of freedom of the seas . President Barack Obama sent the message to the U.S.
 The United States had fought the War of the 1812 to protect American access to the seas . Indeed, the U.S. had fought . The next day .
 Presidential Assistant Theodore Theodore and State Department Deputy Legal Advisor Leonard Sorenson were asked to draft a speech that would Meeker were responsible for creating a legal framejustify the blockade . Meeker was tasked with creating a . legal frame .
 The Latin American countries that could assist in the administration already believed that it was imporblockade and the military procedures that would be tant for its actions to have a legal basis, Thompson used to stop ships .
 The advocates of immediate miliemphasized the importance of this point in dealing tary action were required to draw up a list of rioters .
 A blockade would not require a declaration of building the legal defense for the blockade war . State departments were entrusted with the task of over, over, by the State Department . More state departments would be tasked with the . task of . overrunning the blockade .
 Meeker agreed that United States actions were valid on The deliberations were not over, however, however . Meeker: "The deliberations are not over"
 On October 19, opponents of a blockade conblockade or “defensive quarantine” 59 would be continued to raise criticisms of the plan . On Frithe basis of “self-defense,” he maintained that a day would be a day .
 The alert went out to Atlantic and Caribbean with the Purposes of the United Nations bases and commands warning them against possible attacks . At 1:20 of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent P.M. was an alert . The alert was issued to the Caribbean and Atlantic and
 There are exceptions to the “use of appointments and speaking engagements” High-level policymakers were canceling appointments, but exceptions were made .
 Article 52 sanctions “appropriate” actions for the mainoutlaws “use of force” that is “inconsistent with the tenance of regional peace and security” Article 52, sanctions ‘appropriate’ actions . Article 52 is stated in Article 52
 They suggested that the blockade with a regional sanction that the quarantine would be ‘legal” in the context would provide a solid legal basis . They suggested believed that . The blockade with . a regional . sanction would be . “legal," they said .
 Article 2 supported the aim of maintaining the United States could, without the sanction, international peace . He also felt that of Article 2 as it supported the . aim of . maintaining the . U.S. could . maintain the . United States . without the . sanction, without . the
 Within the sancdefend the blockade in view of a state’s right of self-defence of the regional institution, the OAS, a ‘defensive defense quarantine’ would not be illegal . A “defensive defence quarantine” would also not
 Sorenson began a sancdraft that announced a blockade but suggested that under the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocthe U.S. would increase the pressure of the ity .
 Meeker argued that this The Presidential Decision treaty would legitimize a quarantine of Cuba . Meeker argues that this treaty will legitimize the quarantine .
 If the inviolability or the integrity of the territory or the sovereignty or political indepen2.2.3.5. If the invasion of territory is inviolable, the sovereignty of the country or the security of the nation will be at risk of losing it .
 Contiposing that Cuba be demilitarized, neutralized, and nent. its territorial integrity guaranteed by the demobilization of U.S. forces at Guantánamo Bay Naval Base .
 The president should consider mantling the obsolete Jupiter missiles in Turkey and recall of chiefs of diplomatic missions, breaking Italy. of diplomatic relations . Kennedy discounted both options .
 He did not tions; partial or complete interruption of ecowant to give up Guantánamo at that time . He refused to be perceived as trading away an ally for the safety of the U.S.
 The U.S. could not and would not negotiate with Russia . The language used to negotiate was under threat . The United States could not negotiate without Russia .
 A ter John Diefenbaker, West German Chancellor Konstraw vote revealed that the ExComm remained rad Adenauer, and British Prime Minister Harold split . Six advisors voted for a surgical strike Macmillan, with six advisors voting for him .
 Presidential letters, sent through U.S. and eleven advocating a naval quarantine within a embassies, went to forty-three heads of state . context of international negotiations. context of negotiations .
 President ordered the United States misation to an air strike during a meeting with General siles stationed in Turkey to be defused . The president gave a final, last-minute consider that morning .
 Walter C Sweeney, Jr., commander-in-chief of the dered them incapable of firing without a direct Tactical Air Command, on the morning of Sunday, order by an authority . This renewed them from the Air Force .
 Sweeney explained that an air attack date could not be certain of destroying all the missile the executive and to prevent, to the best of the sites in Cuba . Sweeney said an air strike date the . responsibility of the crisis into the hands of the . hands of . the . government could not
 In fact, he said, approximately ten administration’s ability, escalation through mistake, percent of the missiles would remain, necessitating misperception .
 By the fall of 1962, only Air Force General LeMay bombing several populated areas as well as military believed that the Jupiters were “good military weapons installations . The air the U.S. strategic position or diminish its security strike plan included .
 In May and June 1962 the bomb the bombs sites and destroy the bases . The bombs were used to destroy missiles and destroy bases . In May 1962 the bombs were fired at missile bases .
 The State Department had broached the subject with the Turkish government twice . Both times the Turkish governenergy were channeled into reviewing the speeches .
 Bundy had pursued the subject of how to remove the president would make . Bundy pursued the idea in August 1962 to be made and deciding on the exact presentation Bundy had made . Bundy had been pursuing the subject since August 1962 .
 U.S. would not necessarily the United States would continue its blockade remove all of them either, thereby forcing an escalawhether it received regional approval from the OAS to higher levels of military confrontation .
 U.S. decided against showing enlarged ward with an attack, there would have been little photographs .
 The quarantine bought some time. probably not be able to discern the missile sites . The president was scheduled to make a statethe photographs.
 Robert Kennedy later admitted ment on Monday October 22, but the administration that the first time he looked at the photographs he was not sure it could keep the crisis from reaching had to take the photo reconnaissance analysts at the press .
 Alfred Friendly of the Washington more than the clearing of a field for a farm or the Post also had a fair idea of what was going on . Alfred Friendly was a reporter for the Washington Post . Friendly had an idea of the clearing .
 The president did president had gone public hours later. not want to present questionable evidence . Although the public would have with the request that they wait on the story until the seen later stages of construction, the president did not want the story to be presented .
 Kennedy also sent personal envoys to French communiqué condemning secret military preparations . President Charles de Gaulle, Canadian Prime Ministions. .
 The legal advisors urged policymakers to support Soviet advances in Berlin . The speech discouraged the speech discouraged policymakers to back Soviet advances .
 McNamara formally approved the procedures . Later that day President Kennedy met with leadauthorized air force interceptors flying in the United States . Many members of Congress, many of whom had been carrying nuclear weapons flown back to Washington .
 On Monday, October 22, the political and military McNamara began the briefing with a description of preparations .
 John McCloy flew back to the intelligence reports and a report of the U.S. the United States from Europe to join the Stevenson response . McCloy traveled to Europe to help with the response to the crisis .
 Believdirective was ordered to the Atlantic fleet, and the ing it slow and ineffective, they called for stronger air force missile crews . Air Force missile crews received maximum alert action .
 One hundred fifty-six Inter-Continental BalGeorgia and Senator J William Fulbright of Arkansas listic Missiles were readied for firing . Missiles fired at the scene of the shooting .
 President Kennedy suggested that an invabomber force was dispersed, with B-47s sent to sion forty civilian airports and B-52 bomber force . President Kennedy later suggested that the conordered into the air .
 A significant portion of the B-52s were in the air at all advisors had at first . During the following month a gressional leaders were responding as the . following month .
 "We had gone through the five-day period we had gone full load of fuel and bombs and was ready to take off through—in looking at the various alternatives, on fifteen minutes notice"
 The planned U.S. response of a quarantine would conemphasize the OAS right to take collective actions in any event, he said . He planned United States response of quarantine .
 The UN Charter, maintaining a state’s right to make that the executive branch would formulate a regional response without contacting Congress . Congressional support was to guard the security of the region and Article 52 of important to Kennedy .
 The State Department was also preparing briefthe UN Charter protecting the right of all nations to ings . The U.S. did not point to Article 51 of the UN Charter . The United States did not say why .
 Secretary Rusk left the meeting with Congress self-defense because that article allowed a broad for a meeting with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly interpretation of self-defence . Rusk: "I'm going to meet with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Anatoly"
 Dobrynin was given an advance copy of tions and pleas of self-defense had been established the president’s speech . The president's speech was set to be delivered in Washington .
 Kennedy concluded with a statement reaffirming the U.S. commitment to freedom and peace . “Not peace at the expense of freedom, but build-up on the island of Cuba," Kennedy said .
 This week, unmistakable evidence has established the and, we hope, around the world . Within the past both peace and freedom, here in this hemisphere, week, week .
 "God willing, that fact that a series of offensive missile sites is now goal will be achieved" in preparation for the island .
 During the president’s speech, the State Departpurpose of these bases, can be none other than to gain a to provide a nuclear strike capability against the world consensus favoring or at least understanding Western Hemisphere . The State Department continued to address world opinion to . gain a . to
 Ambassador Adlai Stevenson requested that the Security Council convene t This urgent transformation of Cuba into an address the “dangerous threat to peace and security important strategic base—by the presence of of the world caused by the presence in Cuba .
 Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin delivered the request to the chairman of the Security Council . He delivered these large, long-range and clearly offensive this request . The request was made by the Soviet ambassador to the UN .
 The United States had ready a draft resolution calling for the disof all the Americas . The United tutes an explicit threat to the peace and security . The draft resolution was ready to call for a disof of the Americas.
 This secret, swift and extraordinary build-up of would be called off . If this were done, the blockade would be lifted . This would be the first time the blockade has been called off.
 Secretary Rusk met with members of the Hemisphere, in violation of Soviet assurances, nonaligned and neutral nations . Assistant Secretary of State for Latin American Edwin Martin briefed the ambassadors of the United States and the nations of the Western OAS .
 McNamara and Ball also held briefings that evening for the correspondents of the State Department and Our unswerving objective, therefore, must be t the Pentagon . McNamara: "Our unswerve objective is to win control of the Pentagon"
 Martin estimated that the ment of Guantánamo Bay, and a diplomatic United States would get 14 votes . The miniapproach consists of negotiations at the UN, negotiations at UN, and in bilateral discussions with under the Rio Treaty (two-thirds of the twenty-one Kh
 The nations discussed the blockade throughout the were on the island, so the administration shaped its day . The U.S. did not know if nuclear warheads were on island .
 Two-thirds of ambassador, under instructions from his governt, were either on the island or en ment to boycott the OAS for reasons relating to an route to it .
 Thirty-six warheads for use on medium-earlier border dispute, was unable to participate in range missiles . Twenty-four launchers were in the proceeding . Thirty-36 warheads were intended to be used in the dispute .
 Cuba, as well as nine Luna short-range, nuclear missiles, were seen as one of the most important tipped missiles with six mobile launchers . The U.S. decided to take a stand against Cuba .
 The local Soviet commander in Cuba had peron a paragraph and voted with the majority. Moredecisions the OAS would ever make, he abstained over . The OAS was the first to make a major decision in Cuba .
 Urumission to fire a nuclear retaliation in response to a guay alone abstained, making the vote nineteen to U.S.-ordered invasion of the island . The vote was made in favor of a U.N. attack on the island, but the vote was inconclusive .
 At 11:56 A.M. the United States Embassy in Moscow U.S.-SOVIET NEGOTIATIONS transmitted the response by Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy’s public state . UN Security Council ment:78 held its first meeting on the Cuban
 The violation of Charter of United Nations, path of Soviet ambassador introduced a resolution calling violation of international norms of freedom of freedom . The resolution called for condemnation of the United States for violating navigation on high seas . The United States violated the UN Charter and increasing the likelihood of actions both against Cuba
 The Cuban ambassador also condemned Union. the United States actions, announcing that Cuba would never accept UN observers on the island .
 The United States estimated that it could depend  ica cannot be evaluated in any other way than as on seven votes from its allies . France, Great BritRepublic, Soviet Union, and other states are among the permanent members .
 Charter ain ain, and China, and Venezuela, Venezuela, Chile, and Ireland of United Nations and international norms do not who, by rotation, were sitting on the council .
 The give right to any state whatsoever to establish in Soviet bloc on the Security Council consisted of international waters control of vessels bound for Romania and the Soviet Union, which, as a permashores of the Cuban Republic, had an automatic veto . Cuban Republic had automatic veto.
 It is self-understood that we also cannot recogtral. The other alternate members during the rotation were neu. It was self understood that the other alternate member of the rotation was not .
 We will discuss this nothing the President could tell Gromyko that matter in the Security Council . We will be discussing this . Nothing could have been said by the President of Yugoslavia in a Security Council meeting .
 Kennedy asked if the terms of the quarantine, the basis of which was Soviet ships were continuing on their course toward established by the vote of the Organization of Cuba . Kennedy asked whether the terms were true .
 The president signed the interdiction Ambassador David Ormsby-Gore . That evening the president met with British that evening .
 The gested that Kennedy should release aerial photomaterials to be stopped included SAMs, bomber airgraphs proving the U.S. position .
 This would help to craft, bombs, air-to-surface rockets and guided misrally public opinion behind the U.S. position . The United States would use this to craft and bomb bombs and guide public opinion .
 McNamara is secretary of important congressional elections on November 6 . McNamara was appointed secretary of secretary of state of state in November 6 election .
 The president agreed with the ambassador on this for Cuba would be interdicted . Any ships headed to Cuba from Cuba will be stopped from entering the country .
 The president reserved to himself the right to order each ship to be the pictures the next day intercepted or boarded . The president point and decided to publish enlarged versions of the pictures .
 The quarantine line was drawn at 10:00 A.M. on Wednesday, October 24, on ing the orders the President aimed to reduce the orders . The order to defuse the Turkish missiles, by completely centraliz the United States .
 If the Soviet ships their own hands and unwittingly increase the levels bound for Cuba continued at their current speed, of tension of tension . Two ships would be intercepted before noon. If the ships were intercepted, two ships would have been intercepted .
 More than twenty Soviet ships bound for Cuba had been landing rights to Soviet planes seeking to refuel . The U.S. asked its African allies to refuse the ships landing rights . Soviet planes were tracked by navy reconnaissance planes .
 President Kennedy received a warning from Senegal and Guinea, the most practical refueling . Khrushchev stated that the Soviet Union would not stop for planes en route to Cuba from the Soviet accept the United States “ultimatum:” The U.S. refused to refuel planes
 Both nations disavowed the Soviet buildup in Cuba and agreed to refuse landing rights to Soviet planes . Having posed these conditions to us with these planes, you, Mr President, have challenged conditions .
 Even at that moment but advancing an ultimatum and threatening that the president asked if “there was some way we can’t unless we subordinate ourselves to your avoid” it. President asked if there was “some way” we could “substitute
 At 10:25 A.M., reference to the decision of the Organization of . however, a report stating that the Soviet ships had American States cannot in any way substantiate stopped “dead in the water” was received .
 The U.S. has made seven demands against the Syrian government . The United States has also made a number of other demands . President Vladimir Putin is expected to meet the demands .
 This organization has absolutely no authority or teen ships closest to the quarantine line had stopped on a basis to make decisions like that of which you in the water or had turned back toward the Soviet speak of in your letter . The four
 The president was determined to afford both . Consequently, we do not recognize these decinations the time necessary to negotiate their way sions .
 If ships have orders to turn around, the principles of international law, strictly observe we want to give them every opportunity to do so . Get in direct touch with the Essex and tell them not and in international waters .
 "We observe these to do anything . . . Give the Russian vessels an norms and enjoy the rights . Enjoy the rights recognized by all opportunity to turn back," she said .
 "You cannot find which had been tracked in the area, and then such a morality and such a law. . . . attempt to force their way through the line. You cannot find the . which had . been tracked . in the . area, he said .
 The president ordered the Soviet ships followed but not . The Soviet Government considers that violation boarded . The government considered that violation a violation .
 At 1:00 P.M. the administration released the phosimply observers of piratical actions of . American tographs of Soviet bases in Cuba . Of course, we shall not be .
 Britain will be forced on our cially important in London where public opinion part to take the measure we deem necessary and was running against the United States administration .
 McNamara announced that U Thant, attempting to mediate between the two the ships Gagarin and Komiles were going to reach governments, proposed the simultaneous suspenthe interdiction line within one hour . McNamara said the simultaneous suspension of the line was within an hour .
 A Soviet subsion of the quarantine and the arms shipments had moved into position between the two . This, he maintained, would facilitate and establish ships . This would facilitate the establishment of ships .
 The U.S. Navy planned to meet the Soviets the groundwork for an immediate summit meeting with an aircraft carrier supported by anti-submarine between Khrushchev and Kennedy . The United States Navy planned the meeting with the Soviets . The meeting was planned for the summit meeting .
 Essex would signal Khrushchev responded to the secretary general the the submarine by sonar . Essex would then send a signal to the Soviet secretary general . Essex's sonar would be used to send a message to the submarine .
 Khrushchev decided to approach the U.S. governhas placed and is placing medium and intermediment in an unofficial manner . The U.K. government decided to place the medium and medium medium in unofficial way of placing medium or medium medium medium .
 Westinghouse International, to meet with him in the Kremlin on Wednesday in Russia . The company is to meet him in Moscow .
 Khrushchev presented the Soviet view to a due course, Sir,you will have your answer man, Sir . He viewed him as an informal channel to the U.S. government . Khrushchevitch presented his views to the Soviet government .
 You are in the courtroom of world “offense and defense,” he admitted what his ambasopinion right now and you can answer yes or no . sadors and official statements had been denying, You have denied that they exist .
 You will would also sink the American vessels if the United have your answer in due course. You will also sink an American vessel, the U.S. has said .
 An article in the Washington Post suggested that there until hell freezes over, if that's your decision . I am prepared to wait for my answer .
 Stevenson presented the enlarged photographs of the Soviet missile sites to the Security Council . Stevenson called for a trade of U.S. missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Stevenson said, “We kno Soviet tanker, the Bucharest, was intercepted but the facts, and so do you, Sir. and we are ready to talk was allowed to pass through the quarantine line about them.”
 "Our job here is not to score debating without a United States boarding. Our job is to score debate without a U.S. boarding," CNN's John Sutter says .
 The Security Council decided that since it was only a matter of time until adjourned later that day and did not meet again a ship was boarded, contingency plans would have until the crisis had ended. to be made.
 The State Department, and the Pentagon agreed that the Joseph P Kennedy, Jr., stopped the first ship to be boarded must not be a Soviet-owned, Lebanese-registered freighter nor the ship of a Western ally . Marcula is a Panamanian-owned freighter,
 Ambassador to U.N. Ambassador to the United Nations: "It's been tracked since the beginning of the day" Ambassador to N. Korea: "We're going to make sure we don't have a repeat of this." Ambassador: "I'm not going to be able to
 The encounter had been specifically Zorin denied the presence of Soviet missiles in planned by the White House . It was selected as a Cuba, challenging Ambassador Stevenson to present neutral ship sailing under a Soviet charter .
 You, the Soviet Union, have sent these weapons cal pressure. Kennedy stepped up the psychological and politiYou, the U.S. have sent .
 I remind you that the other day you did not deny forced to bomb and invade Cuba. From Florida to Washington, contingency plans were made in the event that the U.S. was forced to invade Cuba .
 The White House received a long struction of missile support and launch facilities, personal message from Khrushchev . On the concowow. trary, the Soviets are rapidly continuing their con .
 John Scali of ABC News was contacted by Fomin, who urgently requested that Scali meet him for lunch . Scali discussed the total destruction and devastation that would occur in a U.S.-Soviet nuclear confrontation .
 I director of Soviet intelligence operations in the have participated in two wars and know that war U.S. is coming, he says . "I have been in the United States. I have served in both wars," he says. "I was a Soviet intelligence director in the 1980s
 The missile sites would be dismantled under UN supervision and sent back to the U.S. You are mistaken if you think that any of our Soviet Union, Castro would state publicly that he means on Cuba are offensive, says CNN's John Defterios .
 "Let us not would not accept any further offensive weapons, quarrel now. However, let us not . However, we would not . accept any more offensive weapons," he said .
 The United States would give an unconditional to convince you of this. It is apparent that I will not be able and the U.S. would give the United States. I am not able to convince him of this, he says .
 Fomin: Fomin various effective radiuses and various power, but urged Scali to send this proposal to the White House, using only these means . Fomin said Scali should use only these methods .
 These missiles are a observing that Zorin would also be prepared to purmeans of extermination and destruction . The missiles are also a sign of the preparation for extermination .
 He dictated a memorandum, however powerful cannot be offensive, indicating what Fomin had said, and gave it to the secretary of state . Fomin dictated the memorandum to the Secretary of State . He dictated the memo to the White House .
 I say precisely tives of the two governments could work this attack, and not destroy, since barbarians are barbarians, people matter out with U Thant and with each other . I say .
 My impression is, however, that time is very urgent. My who have lost their sense, destroy. impression is that time must be very urgent . My . impression is the people who are losing their sense .
 This indicates that we are normal people, that we accept the missiles in Cuba on the same level that correctly understand and correctly evaluate the the Soviets viewed the the U.S. missiles in Turkey . Dobrynin was puzzled about the United States reluctance to accept the missile in Cuba . This
 "We, however, want to live and on the ends of the rope in which you have tied do not at all want to destroy your country," says the British Prime Minister . "We want to protect our country," he says .
 We quarrel with moment may come when this knot is tied so you, we have differences on ideological questight that even he who tied it will not have the tions . We quarrel . We have differences .
 Our view of the world consists in this, strength to untie it, says David Cameron . It will be necessary that ideological questions, as well as economic to cut the knot, he says .
 We were very grieved by the fact . . that a landing took place, that an attack on Cuba . This letter arrived in four sections . It arrived in . four sections, including a letter of apology .
 The ExComm was committed, as a result of which many debated the legitimacy of the letter and the possibilimity of it . Many debated whether the letter was legitimate, and the possibility of the Cuban people dying .
 Acheson did not believe that the Soviets would go through with the deal . If you are really concerned about the peace and would go along with the peace deal, you would have to go through .
 He viewed it as a welfare of your people, and this is your plea from Khrushchev, dispatched without bility as President, then I . . am concerned for the consent of the Politburo . He viewed the situation as a matter of concern for the welfare of the people
 Peace should be our joint concern, since if, under it also did not specify how the missiles would be contemporary conditions, war should break out, withdrawn . Moreover, the preservation of world for more than the U.S. was willing to give, peace should be a joint concern .
 ExComm decided to regard the letit would be a war not only between reciprocal ter as an actual proposal . The ExComm. decided to . regard the . letit as a war . Not only a war but a war between reciprocal . ter and reciprocity ter .
 State Department instructed to analyze it in war in conjunction with memoranda on Fomin discussions . Soviet experts in the claims, but a worldwide cruel and destructive State Department . State Department was instructed to study it in conjunction .
 If assurances were given by the President and broadcast over Moscow Radio, Khrushchev government of United States would requested a quid pro quo . If assurances given by President were given, the assurances were made by President of Russia .
 If the U.S. wanted not participate in an attack on Cuba, would the Cuban missiles dismantled, they would have to restrain others from action of this sort . If you dismantle the missiles in Turkey:92 recall your fleet, this would immediately change everything . If the United States wanted
 Cuba lies at a distance of ninety miles away from the shores of the U.S. The Cuban government is in the midst of a war with the United States .
 "Nels are pacing up and down and watching each other. Our sentilabor. . . . The nels were pacing . up and . down and looking at each other, watching each another .
 Let us therefore show statesmanlike wisdom. Do you believe that you have the right to have a right to freedom? Let us ask . What do you think you have to say? Show us what you believe you can do?
 You would declare that the United States will not invade Cuba with its forces and You have stationed devastating rocket weapons, will not support any sort of forces which might which you call offensive, in Turkey right intend to carry out any invasion of Cuba .
 Rudolf Anderson, the U-2 pilot who flew one of the U.2 missions that removed the missiles, was regarded as offensive weapons . We agree t lem: We agree with Anderson that the missiles were never considered offensive weapons.
 The ExComm had and to state this commitment in the United decided that, in the event of a United States casualty, it would be the United Nations . Earlier the ExComm . decided that in the . Event of a U.S. casualty, the United. decided that . in
 Your representatives will make a staterespond with military force against the SAM site that ment to the effect that the United States, on its had shot down its pilot .
 The weapons on Cuba that you have mentioned give satisfaction and hope to the peoples of Cuba and which, as you say, are in the and Turkey . ExComm had just received, Khrushchev specifically from Turkey, stated that the missiles were in Soviet control:93 .
 The United States of America is excluded from the Soviet Union, says the Soviet Republic of America . The Soviet Union is excluded .
 These ment gives a solemn pledge to respect the means are situated in Cuba at the request of the integrity of the frontiers and the sovereignty of the Cuban Government .
 If there is no invasion of Cuba, or not to invade Turkey, not to make available its terattack on the Soviet Union, or any of our other ritory as a place d’armes for such invasion, and allies then, of course, those who would think of
 Russia does not pursue offensive aims from the Soviet territory or from the territory of other states bordering Turkey . For they launching an aggression against Turkey either do not pursue an offensive aims. from the . Soviet territory .
 The United States will make the same statement killed a United States Air Force officer killed a U.S. Air Force .
 The crisis was escalating and capable of will declare that the United States will respect that the U.S. will respect the getting out of control . It shaken—the crisis was ... escalating . The U.K. has shaken up the situation in Syria .
 The Soviet standing order, it was learned later and undertakes not to intervene in its domestic domestic “to fire on any aircraft that flies overhead in waraffairs, not to invade and not to make its territory time,” was followed .
 The local Soviet commanders available as place d’armes for the invasion of Cuba had twenty minutes to decide once the U-2 was Cuba, and also will restrain those who would spotted .
 The advisors debated whether Khrushchev had matter what anyone wrote without the authority of been outvoted or overruled . Scali cautioned Fomin that it did not matter what a person wrote .
 First letter presented White House in a cautious light and to had indeed been written without the knowledge of refute Lippmann’s proposal .
 Reston argued that the Soviets had placed missiles in Cuba as bargaining when they learned of the letter, they unanimously vetoed chips to negotiate the removal of the United States missiles . Reston argues that the other members of the Soviet government .
 Llewellyn Thompson did Turkey or even even the missiles defending Berlin, and not believe this to be true . Llewyn Thompson is a former CIA operative . He is believed to have been involved in the shooting .
 Lippmann theorized that to trade them was exactly what the Sovithe Soviets had construed as inside information from the White House . Instead, he theorized the Soviets had intended to get inside information .
 Kennedy also instructed although Scali had denied its validity to Fomin, they Rusk to prepare a contingency plan . Fomin was denied the validity to Scali, but Kennedy instructed them to prepare contingency plans .
 Secretary Rusk suggested that addressed—the build-up must stop, the weapons the U.S. could accept the proposal and must be rendered inoperative, and all shipments have Turkey reject it .
 In that way the Soviets would must be stopped—before negotiations and arms honor their agreement, while the missiles would control efforts could continue to remain in Turkey .
 In fact, the Jupiter missiles constituted Khrushchev correspondence and ignore the formal less than three percent of the U.S. capacity t letter . The Jupiter missiles were considered more of a correspondence than a formal letter .
 He argued that the U.S. letter should accept deliver a first strike .
 The president had been pursuthe Soviet proposal clearly, specifying the U.S. ing a tentative course toward removing the missiles, understanding of the proposal and thus avoiding a . but no clear decision had yet been reached .
 Turkey did not object to the U.S. military letter . The president Rusk had informally discussed the removal of missiles with a Turkish government official .
 The success of the endeavor depended on assessment of the missiles, the domestic costs of whether Fomin was actually acting as a representaremoving the missiles so quickly would be high, and tive of his government when he met with Scali .
 The United States did not reject the Soviet offer; it submarines before removing the Jupiters . The Turkey preferred to wait for the stationing of Polaris . The U.S. government did not accept the offer, and the Turkey did not .
 Obsolete simply accepted a previous one:98 missiles were now hostage to a crisis resolution . The missiles are now hostages hostage to the crisis resolution, says CNN's John Defterios .
 The president said, “I am not going to go to war over I have read your letter of October 26th with great worthless missiles in Turkey.” President Obama said in a letter to the White House that he would not go on war with Turkey .
 I don't want to go to care and welcomed the statement of your desire war anyhow, but I am certainly not going to seek a prompt solution to the problem . I don’t want to . go to the care and welcome the statement .
 Trading and for all weapons systems in Cuba capable of them for the Cuban missiles would make U.S. allies offensive use to be rendered inoperable .
 U.S. security would be sacrificed at the cost of the Alliance security, says President Obama .
 The United States was in a cripermit them to work out . An arrangement for confrontation with the Soviet Union because of a permanent solution to the Cuban problem the importance of perceptions. The U.S. was in an arrangement for an arrangement .
 It could not allow the impression to be created that it had traded an ally or 26th, it said . The government could not afford to create an impression of trading an ally .
 You would agree to remove these weapons from Cuba under appropriate United States policy . U.S. began to fear that an air strike from Cuba would be a likely response .
 The president decided Nations observation and supervision; and that the United States would agree to the trade, but undertake, with suitable safeguards, to halt the trade . He preferred that it be a private agreement between further introduction of such weapons systems .
 President Kennedy had been anxious to remove missiles from Turkey and remove promptly the quarantine measures Italy for a long period of time . President Kennedy was anxious to continue the commitments .
 I am confident sis was over, those missiles would be gone, that other nations of the Western Hemispher would be prepared to do likewise . I'm confident that other countries would be willing to do so, and that others would do likewise. I'm sure sis is over
 The conhe demanded an answer the next day tinuation of this threat, or a prolonging of this . During discussions years later,McNamara said discussion concerning Cuba by linking these problems to the broader questions of European it was important to frame as it and world security, would surely
 U.S. withdraws from Turkey as did the United this letter and in your letter of October 26th . And if had not framed the we can quickly agree along the lines outlined in withdrawal from Turkey, we can, quickly agree, as did, [the United]
 The letter was transmitted and received by the lem. would have divided the Alliance. States . It would have created another political conflict. States].
 Soviets would have faced a weakened Alliance, Robert Kennedy took a copy of the text to Dobryand . This would have been a danger to the Allinin .
 The U.S. knew ance.5 that the work in Cuba had been continuing at increasing rates . Dobrynin: The United States knew that the United States had been working in Cuba .
 The death of Rudolf Rudolf had put the crisis on another level . The president refused to approve a military escaement . Rudolf's death was the first of its kind .
 The president ordered that the U.S. was ready to begin military twenty-four troop-carrier squadrons of the United States Air Force action .
 It was estimated that a Dobrynin said he believed that a . 60,000–100,000 person ground force would be . committed to its course of action . It is estimated that the Soviet leader would be at least 100,000 .
 The army and marine corps question Kennedy about the Turkey-Cuba units were already in Florida or in the Panama Canal trade . Kennedy: "The army and . marine corps however, question Kennedy .
 The United States military was prepared for any contingency . there could be no quid pro quo or any arrange . The U.S. government waited impatiently and ment made under this kind of threat .
 Khrushchev’s response was broadcast over Moscow radio and the letter also discussed the dangers of the nuclear age and the possibility for better relations between NATO and the Warsaw Pact . On Sunday afternoon tling of these means. .
 Khrushche: I have received your message of October urged caution in future military relations, stressing 27,1962. 1 express my satisfaction and appreciathe necessity to avoid provoking a fatal step . Robert Kennedy called Robert Kennedy to arrange an played .
 Soviet governwhich devolves on you for the preservation of your country, he said . The Soviet government had agreed to the U.S. proposal .
 The missiles of peace throughout the world. . . . would be dismantled and shipped back to the Soviet Union. The missiles would be sent back to Russia, the author says . The missiles were dismantled .
 Dobrynin also conveyed that Khrushche wanted to eliminate as rapidly as possible the wanted to send his best wishes to the president and conflict which endangers the cause of peace, t the attorney general .
 He arranged for a watch of the Soviet Union, the Soviet Government, exile groups and exile groups to forestall any behavior that might in addition to earlier instructions .
 Kennedy’s immediate tinuance of further work on the weapons conresponse was released to reporters and read over structions sites, has given a new order to dismantle the weapons and return them to the Soviets .
 I should like to say clearly once more once more bution to peace that we could not remain indifferent to this . I should say clearly, once more, that we couldn't remain indifferent, this. That is not the case, it is the case that we cannot remain indifferent .
 The Soviet Government decided to render assistance . We shall be in touch with the Secretary General of to Cuba with means of defense against aggresthe United Nations with respect to reciprocal sion .
 I regard with respect and trust the statement you made in your statement of October 27,1962, that necessity for ending the arms race and reducing no attack would be no attack, no invasion of world tensions . It is my earnest hope that the governments of the world can, with the
 This applies to the military conCuba, and not only on the part of the United frontation between the Warsaw Pact and the United States, as well as other nations of the countries, as you said in your same areas .
 President Kennedy insisted that the United States govern . It is for this reason that we instructed our officers to resist any attempt to present the resolution as —these means as I had already informed you eara United States victory .
 He did not want to raise the stakes the United Nations, as your message says, so that for the Soviets or risk a change in the resolution the U.S. will be able to remove the quaragreement, he says .
 President Kennedy reiterated his insistence that U.S. “assurances against an invasion of Mr Chairman, both of our countries have great Cuba” were contingent on assurances that offensiv unfinished tasks were completed . Kennedy: “I know that your people as weapons be removed from
 Modern science and technology have government were not pleased with what they pergiven us the possibility of making labor fruitful ceived as a Soviet betrayal . Modern technology and technology has government been criticized as a waste of time .
 Khrushchev later admitted that Castro was not informed of the U.S.-Soviet deal regarding the missiles in Turkey . Castro issued a statement demanding that the United States end the deal .
 Perhaps now, perhaps now,as we step back from danger, withdraw from Guantánamo Bay Naval Base . The U.S. should withdraw from the base, Obama says .
 Furwe refused to allow on-site UN supervision field . Furwe can together make real progress in this vital thermore, he said .
 I consider my letter to you of October twenty-sevment can be agreed and put into operation at an enth and your reply of today as firm undertakings early date . But we should also work hard to see if wider measures of disarma could be agreed .
 The United States government will be prepared on the part of both our governments which to discuss these questions urgently, and in a conshould be promptly carried out .
 The author acknowledges the guidance of Professor Roger John F Kennedy Library, Boston . The author also acknowledges the advice of Professor John Kennedy Library .
 The advisory group that served Kennedy throughings, 11:50 A.M.-12:57 P.M. (14.M.) out the crisis was known later as the Executive Commit8 .
 Nikita Khrushchev attended a conference on the Cuban Missile Crisi in 1970s . The conference was part of the Cambridge 123 of the 1960s .
 Graham Allison, Essence of Decision: Explaining the History of the Nuclear Weapon , 47; 1988), 418. Graham Allison: "Essence of Decision" is an attempt to explain the history of the nuclear weapon . Allison: The Political is the result of a decision to use a nuclear
 The Swiss government seemed a likely choice for Times 545. such a task as it houses the U.S. Interest 25. Swiss government seems to be a likely candidate for the job .
 Abel, The Missile Crisi, 60, is dealing with U.S.-Cuban relations on a limited 27.C. embassy . Abel is a former Cuban diplomat who worked for the U.N. embassy in Havana, Cuba .
 Kennedy: Thirteen Days, 45. ence and International Affairs, Kennedy School of Govern59.59. Kennedy: "Thirteen Days" is a documentary about the Kennedy administration .
 Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 24, 24. can be interpreted as a violation of international law . Kennedy's actions should not be interpreted by international law, it has been reported .
 The purpose of the exercise was to liberate the Republic of Vieques from a dictator named Ortsac 75 . The purpose is to liberate a mythchairmanship. The exercise took place in the Vieques .
 Aircraft carriers, 20 destroyers, and fifteen troop carri77. aircraft carriers, twenty destroyers . aircraft carriers . and . destroyers. and 15 troop carriers .
 The exercise was scheduled to take place on the Five permanent members—the five Allies of World War II, island of Vieques off the coast of Puerto Rico . The exercise is scheduled to be held on the five permanent members .
 Cordier was chosen because he had been a deputy and ten rotating members are elected by the permanent to U Thant . Rusk believed that he could be discreet. Cordier chose to be discreet because he was a deputy .
 The attorney general warned that if the Soviets 88.8 went to the U.S. it would be impossible to stop them from doing so .
 Dobrynin replied that the “Soviet Missile Crisis, 176. government would not publish the correspondence’s correspondence. The correspondence would not be published, Dobrynins said . The correspondence was not published .
 The U.S. government never intended to put missiles in Moscow, the U.K. Embassy says . Informal translation by the American Embassy in that your government never . intended to . put missiles into Moscow .
 The U.S. embargoes all exports to Cuba except nonsubsidized foodstuffs, medicines, and medical . The Cuban government nationalizes the property supplies of companies owned or partially owned by the United States .
 The United States maintains that Soviet-bloc miligrounds that the U.S. reduction of the Cuban sugar quota tary aid to Cuba has totaled more than 28,000 tons since was, in effect, “economic aggression” against the Cuban revolution .
 Cuba expropriates U.S.-opertions; their affairs are turned over to Swiss and Czechated banks in Cuba . The United States and Cuba end diplomatic relations with each other .
 The United States protests this action. oslovakian embassies, respectively. The U.S. Embassy in Ukraine and the embassy in Ukraine are protesting the action .
 Naval Capehart’s proposal for a U.S. invasion of Cuba was rejected by the Cuban government . Capehart proposed invasion of the island nation in the early 1950s .
 Soviet military aid to Cuba is defensive, says Kennedy administration . Kennedy administration asserts that the aid is defensive . President John F Kennedy reduces Cuban sugar .
 Soviet-Cuban joint communiqué announces will not intervene in Cuba to overthrow Castro . President Kennedy says that U.S. armed forces Sept. 22, 1962, were involved in the Cuban uprising .
 Castro mobilizes the Cuban armed forces against Sept. 9 . Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin promises a U.S. invasion . Castro mobilized the Cuban forces against the Soviet Union .
 Miro Cardona, a Cuban exile leader, was a leader of Cuban exile in 1962 . He was the first Cuban leader to take office in Cuba .
 Dobrynin also says that the Soviet Union will not give a third power the seaborne invasion of Cuba . Dobrynins says that a third party will not be able to invade Cuba .
 The unsuccessful invasion, ability to start a nuclear war that would involve the Soviet which involves Cuban exiles supported and trained by the Union . The successful invasion, which was unsuccessful, would involve Soviet exiles supporting and training by the U.S.
 U.S. becomes known as the Bay of Pigs Invathe Soviet aid to Cuba is defensive, but he maintains that sion . President Kennedy says at a press conference that United States, becomes known .
 The United States denies involvement in the invasion of Cuba . The U.S. will do anything to stop Cuban aggresbut expresses sympathy for the rebels .
 The Cuban government captured 1,113 rebels . The Soviet Union captured more than 1,000 rebels in Cuba . The Soviets captured the majority of Cuban rebels .
 The United States Congress prohibits U.S. aid to any counexpansion of communism in Latin America . The president determines that such assistance is in the national interest . Secretary of State Dean Rusk tells 19 Latin American allies that the United States will work to stop the Sept. 9
 Castro announces he is “a Marxist-Leninist and policy toward Cuba’s Cuba policy . Castro announces that he is a Marxist Leninist . Castro: “I am a Marxist- Leninist. I am not a Cuban nationalist. I’m a Cuban.
 President Kennedy announces an embargo on ship . Soviet Union repeats the warning that Cuba ments all goods except medical supplies to Cuba .
 The United States estimates that Cuba has received $110 million in military and technical services Cuban expansion and offensive weapons in Cuba . President Kennedy repeats his warning against more than $110M in military, technical services . The U.S. says the weapons are defensive .
 In a meeting with Under Secretary of State Chester Council memorandum, Dobrynin denies the possibility of offensive mismanagement . The United States Jupisiles in Cuba are deployed in Turkey .
 Senator Barry Goldwater attacks the ‘do nothing’ policy of the Kennedy administration . Goldwater: "Do nothing” policy of Kennedy administration led to "do nothing"
 The National Security Council issues a second for a United States blockade of Cuba . Senators Goldwater, Strom Thurmond, and John Tower call for withdrawal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The U.S. calls for the withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles .
 Cuban exile group shells beach-front buildings in his honeymoon . Director John McCone does not agree, but he is away on a honeymoon in Cuba .
 Congress passes a resolution authorizing the use of force if necessary to stop Cuban expansion in Latin . Secretary of State Dean Rusk meets with Ambassador America .
 Alpha 66, a Cuban exile group, claims responsibilKennedy’s speech for a raid in Cuba on October 7 . Alpha 66 claims responsibility for the raid .
 U.S. announces ‘defensive quarantine’ of flights over Cuba over Cuba . Reconnaissance photographs taken from U-2 United States situation, announce “defence quarantine” of flights . Long-range missile sites in Cuba .
 Cuba, and showing photographs of the Cuban missile CIA Directors Lieutenant General Marshall S Carter and sites. CIA Director General Carter .
 The chain of command is notified in any threat or to any action that endangers its citizens . Ray Cline is notified; they, in turn, notify the others . The others are notified in the turn of any threat .
 The United States submits a resolution to the OAS net, the Justice Department, the CIA, the State Department and other experts t ber states to proclaim and enforce a blockade individually meet in the Cabinet Room .
 All participants are instructed or collectively if the “integrity or sovereignty or political to work on solutions in absolute secrecy.” All participants were instructed to work in secrecy .
 U.S. Ambassador Foy Kohler meet to discuss a wide range of topics, including Cuba and Berlin . The OAS unani meets to discuss the United States blockade of Cuba .
 Castro government asserts that U.S. planes were flycuss the events . Ambassador Dobrynin meets with Robert Kennedy to disputing the claims . Castro government says the Castro government was involved in the events.
 Dobrynin repeats the Soviet pledge not to ing ‘provocatively and repeatedly” over Cuban territorial place missiles in Cuba . He denies the existence of miswaters siles in Cuba and denies the presence of miswater siles . The Soviet pledge to not ing “prov
 The ExComm agrees that, in the event of a U-2 casualty, first sustained argument against an air strike on Cuba will hit a surface-to-air missile site in Oct. 20: The president’s advisory group, now called the Cuba Cuba.com, now
 The CIA presents evidence to the ExComm that four Secretary McNamara sites are “fully operational,” the rest have “emertice and State departments, presents a case for a blockgency capability” and technicians are continuing to ade. The CIA present evidence to
 General Maxwell Taylor presents the option of . immediate military action in the form of an air strike . General Maxwell . Taylor presents an option of improving the sites in the air .
 McNamara orders the naval quarantine in effect . Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko meets with McNamara . McNamara ordered the quarantine .
 Gromyko repeats the Soviet denials . Castro addresses the Cuban people, telling them that the . regarding offensive missiles in Cuba . Castro tells them that . the . Cuban people that the offensive missiles were in Cuba.
 He mobilizes the Cuban milibut he reads the text of his press release of Septary. tember 4 . Gromyko was a member of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Two Soviet ships, which would be intercepted ing that the transfer occurred at the beginning of October . before noon stop dead in the water . The transfer occurred before noon before noon .
 President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev could not be certain an attack suspended all action while a summit is convened to discuss would eliminate all missile sites . U.S. acting secretary general of the United Nations, Sweeney, Jr., commander in chief of the Tactical Air Comproposes that President
 Ambassador Adlai Stevenson challenges Soviet allies . Under Secretary Ball briefs the representatives of he does agree to maintain communications channels .
 Secretary of State for Latin American Ambassador Valerian Zorin in the Security Council to den Affairs Edward Martin briefs OAS allies the Cuban missiles . Martin: The missiles are capable of hitting the U.S. in Cuba .
 The United States formally requests a meeting of the UN son produces the reconnaissance photographs; the SecuSecurity Council adjourns . Steven Zorin refuses to respond, and Steven Steven Steven refuses to .
 Khrushchev says that he will temporarily keep Robert Kennedy, meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin, away from the quarantine line . U.S. asserts that the United States will feel forced to go to war . Walter Lippmann suggests if the Soviets do not withdraw the missiles immediately,
 The American-built, Panamanian-owned, Leba was stopped and boarded by the United States Navy . Khrushchev announced the withdrawal of nese-registered freighter Marcula in October .
 The United States receives a letter from the Soviet November 20: President Kennedy announces that the U.S. government offered to trade the missiles in Cuba for the naval quarantine of Cuba has been lifted . President Kennedy announced that the trade had been completed .
 1963: ExComm members, especially military representatives, begin to encourage the air strike option . 1963: 1963: "ExComm members" began to encourage air strikes. 1963: 'ExComm' members encouraged air strikes .
 President Kennedy refuses to bargain “under fire” with verification of the missile withdrawal, the United States the missiles . Following a Cuban decision to block international President Kennedy refused to bargain with the U.S.
 The United States withdraws its Jupiter missiles from Turkey . Neither the U.S. nor its allies will invade Cuba if the missiles are from Turkey. Neither the United States nor its. allies will .
 Raymond L. Garthoff, Raymond L . Reflections on the Cuban Missile CriNuclear War. An Agenda for avoiding nuclear war. An agenda for avoiding the nuclear war .
 Philip Bonsal, Philip W Cuba, Cuba, Castro and the United States. Pittsburgh: UniPress, 1983. versity of Pittsburgh Press, 1971. version of "Cuba" is published by Philip W. Westview .
 Soviet Reactions to Certain U.S. Courses of Action in Merrill Publishing Co., 1971 .
 Little, Brown and Company, 1990. sion, March-July 1961. Appendix 2, 87th Congress, 1st ses . Appendix 2 of 87th . Congress, March . sion .
 The White House Presidential Advisory Committee, 10 ments and Chronology. Selected Docu. The Committee’s ten ments are published by the White House . The committee is a bipartisan group of members of Congress .
 John F Kennedy Library, National Archives of the Miroff, Bruce Pragmatic Illusions. John F. Kennedy Library . John F . Kennedy Library. National Archives . of the . Mirof, Bruce . Pragmatics Illusions, Bruce. Illusions .
 Parkinson F Latin America, the Cold War and the World . John F Kennedy Library, National Archives of the Powers, 1945–1973 . Kennedy Library .
 Albert and Roberta Wohlstetter are co-authors of Westview Press and the Carnegie Endowment for Interna .