 Use these images to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Visit CNN.com/newsquiz for more information .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy agreed to compromise after several exchanges . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The confrontation happened from 16 October to 29 October 1962 . Also known as the Missile Scare, the confrontation was known as 'The Missile Scare'
 The escalation of tension between the U.S. and USSR was considered to be the closest event towards another world war . Despite the short time frame, the escalation of tensions was considered the closest to a possible war .
 At the time of the crisis, Cuba was ruled by Fidel Castro, whose governance was supported by Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev . Fidel Castro ruled Cuba during the crisis .
 Following the end of the Second World War, the U.S. and its allies in Europe had grown concerned with the expansion of Communism . The Bay of Pigs invasion was the first American invasion of Cuba .
 In Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union had expanded its sphere of influence . The Soviet Union was expanding its influence in Eastern Europe .
 China was under a civil war, and French Indochina was in chaos . Meanwhile, the country was under civil war and under chaos .
 Fidel Castro led the attacks against the government on 26 July 1953 . After a series of corrupt presidents and uprisings since Cuba’s independence in 1902, Fidel Castro was the leader .
 The revolution was completed on 1 July 1959, when Fulgencio Batista fled the country and was overthrown . The revolution began in 1959 .
 As Batista’s regime grew more repressive, support from the United States started to waver . The U.S. support for the Batista regime began to wane in the 1930s .
 The United States had stopped sending him weapons and he was finding it hard to equip his army . The U.S. stopped sending weapons and it was hard to get him weapons .
 Following the successful coup of Castro against Batista, the US, under President Dwight Eisenhower, began to allocate additional funds to the Central Intelligence Agency for the disposal of Castro .
 The United States had planned to out Castro using Cuban exiles in Miami, Florida . The U.S. had hoped to use Cuban ex-Cuban exiles to get him out of Cuba .
 By the 1960s, tensions between the U.S. and Cuba gradually escalated due to Castro’s nationalisation policies and counterrevolutionary bombing raids . The Cuban government was overthrown by Castro's government in 1959 .
 The U.S. cut off diplomatic relations with Cuba in January 1961 . This resulted to the United States cutting off diplomatic ties with Cuba . The United States cut diplomatic relations in 1961 .
 Premier Nikita Khrushchev began to solidify Soviet-Cuban relations . Meanwhile, premier Nikita was in charge of the Cuban government .
 Composed of 1,400 Cuban exiles, the brigade was divided into five infantry battalions and one paratrooper battalion . The brigade was part of the Cuban Air Force Brigade .
 On 17 April 1961, newly elected U.S. President John F Kennedy launched Operation Mongoose, also known as the Bay of Pigs invasion . The invasion was launched by newly elected United States President Kennedy .
 As a result of the failed invasion, Castro’s rule over Cuba was solidified . Castro was able to take control of Cuba in Cuba .
 From 4 June until 9 November 1961, the Berlin Crisis ensued between Soviet-controlled East Germany and Allied-occupied West Germany . JFK's response to crisis in Berlin was JFK’s response to the crisis .
 Khrushchev released the Berlin Ultimatum which demanded the withdrawal of Allied armed forces from Berlin . The ultimatum was released by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 The crisis culminated the building of the Berlin Wall which physically divided East and West Berlin . The crisis ended with the collapse of the Wall in 1989 .
 On 13 August 1961, the Soviet-supported East Germany began the construction of the Berlin Wall . The Berlin Wall was built in 1961 .
 The Soviet Premier viewed him as young and intellectual, but too weak to decide in a situation of crisis . He was viewed as a weak leader, but not a strong leader in a crisis .
 According to U.S. intelligence, the Soviets produced about 75 ICBMs by October 1962 . According to United States intelligence, about 75 were produced by the Soviets .
 For the total number of warheads, the United States had 27,000, while the Soviets had around 3,600 . The U.S. also had around 30,000 warheads, according to CNN.com .
 The United States was also leading in terms of missile defensive capabilities, naval, and air power . The U.S. is leading in missile defense capabilities and naval, air power, experts say .
 Soviets had considerable advantage in conventional ground forces including field guns and tanks . However, the Soviets had much more of a conventional ground force than the Soviets .
 Following the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, the U.S. had been deploying U-2 surveillance over Cuba .
 Analysts observed surface-to-air missile sites in Cuba arranged in a Soviet pattern . In September 1962, analysts from the Defense Intelligence Agency observed the pattern .
 On 9 October 1962, United States reconnaissance missions over Cuba resumed . The U.S. continued to fly over Cuba .
 The report was strengthened by the CIA and MI6’s double agent to GRU, Oleg Penkovsky . The CIA and GRU's double agent said the report was stronger by the double agent .
 The following day, McGeorge Bundy, National Security Advisor of the United States met President Kennedy and reported the U-2 photographs . Bundy reported the photographs to President Kennedy .
 EXCOMM was composed of nine members of the National Security Council and other five advisers . ExCOMM is a bipartisan group of advisers from across the world .
 Kennedy notified his brother and U.S. Attorney General, Robert Kennedy, about the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . On the same day, Kennedy notified Robert Kennedy's brother about the Soviet missiles .
 Robert Kennedy contacted the Soviet Ambassador to the US, Anatoly Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy was responding to the request of the Soviet ambassador .
 As instructed by Khrushchev, Dobrynin responded that the missiles were purely defensive in nature . As instructed, he said that the missile system was purely defensive . The missiles were launched in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev also assured the Kennedy administration that the Soviets had no intention of disrupting the US-USSR relations . The Kennedy administration said the Soviets were not going to disrupt relations with the U.S.
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff agreed in the full scale invasion of Cuba and overthrowing Castro . Do nothing .
 He assumed that attacking Cuba through an airstrike would give the Soviets a green signal to invade Berlin . He assumed it would give them the green signal that they would invade Berlin if it attacked Cuba .
 JFK met Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrei Gromyko, who reiterated that the missiles had no offensive purpose . On 18 October, JFK met with Soviet minister of foreign affairs Andrei .
 The following day, 19 October, U-2 spies confirmed four operational sites in Cuba . The U.S. U.2 spy agency confirmed four sites in the country .
 U.S. Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, supported the naval quarantine . United States Secretary of Defence, Robert . McNamara supported the navy quarantine .
 The Kennedy administration used ‘quarantine’ to not impose an act of war . Instead of using the term ‘blockade’, the Kennedy administration called it a quarantine .
 Before Kennedy’s speech, U.S. delegations met the leaders of Canada, United Kingdom, West Germany, France, and France .
 Before his televised speech, Kennedy called former president Eisenhower . Kennedy called Eisenhower before his televised address .
 At exactly 7 pm, Kennedy addressed the American public about the discovery of missiles in Cuba and the U.S. response . Kennedy spoke at exactly 7pm .
 His speech placed the United States under DEFCON 3 or defence readiness condition . The U.S. is now in a state of state of emergency .
 USS Newport News served as the flagship of the quarantine, supported by USS Leary . The quarantine was the first to be quarantined in the world .
 The United States Ambassador in Turkey, George Wildman Ball, informed Turkey of the possible trade off of nearly-obsolete U.S. missiles in Italy and turkey in replacement of Soviet withdrawal from Cuba . Turkey was informed of the possibility of a possible trade-off .
 On 25 October, Castro reiterated that all its weapons were defensive and that Cuba had the right to self-defense . Castro reiterated on 25 October that all weapons are defensive .
 On the same day, the People’s Daily of the PRC declared that they support the Cuban people .
 In West Germany, newspapers revealed that they feared Soviet retaliation in Berlin . West Germany feared retaliation in response to the threat .
 On the same day, 25 October, an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council was conducted under the request of United States Ambassador to the UN, Adlai Stevenson .
 Also in the morning of 25 October, Soviet tanker Bucharest crossed the quarantine border to Cuba . The ship was also sent to Cuba in the same day .
 USS Essex and USS Gearing did not stop the tanker after confirming the absence of military material . The two ships were not stopped by the tanker .
 The U.S. intercepted 14 ships presumably carrying weapons . The quarantine was imposed during the quarantine .
 On 26 October, the United States passed a massage to the Brazilian government to inform Castro that there would be no invasion if the missiles were removed . The U.S. told the government that the missiles would be removed .
 The following day, the CIA reported that four missile sites at San Cristobal and two missile sites in Sagua la Grande were operational . The CIA reported the following day that the sites had been operational . Castro and Khrushchev in 1960 .
 The Soviet would remove its missiles from Cuba, if the U.S. removed its Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey . The United States would remove the missiles if the United States removed them from Italy, Turkey .
 Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2F was shot down by a SA-2 surface-to-air missile launched from Cuba on 27 October . Anderson was the first to be shot down in the U.S. on that date .
 Later on, the Soviets claimed that the act was an isolated decision of the Cuban military . The Soviets later claimed that it was a decision made by the Cuban army .
 JFK was almost persuaded to take Khrushchev’s proposal . After a series of negotiations, JFK almost agreed to take the proposal .
 JFK drafted a compromised letter despite opposition of the EXCOMM and repeated plea of the Turkish government . JFK drafted the compromised letter in response to the opposition of EXCOMm and the government of Turkey .
 The letter included the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba under the supervision of the US . The letter also included removal of United States quarantine measures, and non-invasion of Cuba .
 Without involving the Politburo, Khrushchev drafted the acceptance letter and had it delivered over Radio Moscow . The acceptance letter was delivered over radio Moscow .
 After deliberation between the United States and USSR governments, United States missiles in Turkey and southern Italy were removed . The missiles were removed from Turkey and Italy .
 The Soviet broadcast announced the dismantling of missiles from Cuba . Meanwhile, the Soviet broadcast said the missiles would be dismantled .
 Through aerial reconnaissance, the dismantling of missiles was observed by the United States government . U.S. government observed through aerial reconnaissance .
 On 20 November 1962, the United States announced the end of the quarantine . The quarantine was declared in November 1962 .
 At that time, the United States removal of Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey was not made public . The removal of the Jupiter missiles was not revealed .
 Many Soviets were under the impression that Khrushchev had lost the conflict . As a result, many Soviets believed Khrushchevitch had won the war . Many Soviet leaders were under-appartured .
 We provide high-quality teaching and revision materials for UK and international history curriculum . We also provide high quality teaching materials for students .