 "I’ve always believed that the best way to tell the future is to understand what has already happened and why," he says . "The best way of telling the future will be to understand the past and why"
 History has a way of illuminating the darkness ahead with the light of lessons past . History will continue to be illuminated by lessons from the past, says historian .
 We as a species mastered the function of collective learning long ago which led to our avoiding problems, pitfalls and pain from learning the stories of those around us . We avoid problems and pain by learning from stories of others around us.
 I would suggest that it’s not just our advantage to learn from those who have gone before, it's also our responsibility as human beings . I would say that it's not just . our advantage but our responsibility to learn . from the past, he says .
 In 1962 America opened the lids on her Nuclear Missile silos, put the finger on the trigger and stood ready to assure mutual destruction through the creation of hell on earth .
 For decades, tensions had been growing between the two major world superpowers, the United States of America and the Soviet Union . U.S. and Soviet Union had been at odds for decades .
 For years the U.S. had held the upper hand because they were the only country in the world with possession of an Atomic Bomb . For years, the United States had held on to the advantage because of the atomic bomb .
 Soviet scientists were not far behind and it wasn’t long before they acquired the technology . However, it was not long before the Soviet scientists acquired it .
 The weapons on both sides had grown in sophistication and explosive weight over the years to a point where, if used, they would threaten civilization itself . If used, the weapons would threaten society itself, experts say .
 The Cold War went on for decades in a string of strategic moves and satellite wars, but only once did the two sides directly threaten each other with nuclear war . Only once was the Cold War directly threatened each other .
 Fidel Castro feared hostilities with the United States when he led a communist revolution in Cuba . The United States led several operations bent at removing Castro from power . Fidel Castro was justified in his fears because of the U.S.
 1,400 Cuban exiles were used for the beach landing . WWII B-26 bombers were painted black for two air strikes . The beach landing was a beach landing in Cuba . It involved using exiles and WWII bombers .
 The plan was to inspire the people with an initial foothold so that the civilian populace would join forces with the exiles to retake Havana . The plan is to inspire people with initial foothold .
 In 1962, Cuban leadership approved a Soviet plan to build missile sites in Cuba capable of launching nuclear warheads . One Mans Mistake, Tensions Mount in Cuba . The Cuban government approved the plan .
 The Cubans were enthusiastic to do so because they believed it might be the only way to avoid an invasion from the U.S. The Cuban government was enthusiastic to carry out the operation . Cubans believed the move might be a way of avoiding an invasion .
 Under the cover of elaborate war games, the missiles were sent from Russia to Cuba . The missiles were launched under the cover from Russia under the guise of Russian war games .
 The military leaders in charge of the ships carrying the cargo didn’t know their destination until they were at sea to avoid an information breach . The cargo was transported by the military to the U.S.
 It wasn't until a U-2 reconnaissance mission captured imagery of the warheads on October 14, 1962 that the United States became alerted to the situation . The U.S. became aware of the threat of nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet compromise was due to one man on watch who forgot to cover the silos before the sun rose that morning . I think that it's important to add that it’s important to remember that it was due .
 Without his mistake, the U.S. may not have come to know the missiles were poised and ready until much later . The mistake may have saved the United States .
 After the discovery, the Soviets still believed that President Kennedy would show weakness and eventually come to terms that the strategic nature of the Cold War had changed .
 The President immediately convened his top advisors in a security council to discuss what action to take next . President Barack Obama is in the midst of a crisis in Washington .
 The two world superpowers were now on the edge of nuclear disaster as tensions grew to an all time high . The two superpowers had been on the brink of nuclear war .
 The United States scrambled to put a plan together on how to deal with the new threat . The U.S. scrambled to scramble to put together a plan .
 No plan had been in place previously because the U.S. didn’t believe that the Soviet Union would make such an offensive move .
 The options laid before the President consisted of either using diplomacy and warnings to pressure either Castro or the Soviet Union to remove the missiles, or take more aggressive action . The options included using diplomacy .
 The United States could use a blockade to keep any more missiles from entering Cuba but this wouldn’t remove the threat that already existed . The U.S. could also try to keep a blockade of Cuban territory .
 President Kennedy's advisors agreed that using an air strike to disable all known missile sites with a follow on invasion was the only way to achieve any long term results . President Kennedy’s advisors agreed to use the strike as a means of disabling missiles .
 Kennedy was hesitant because he believed that this would force Khrushchev to react with force and possibly a declaration of war . Kennedy was reluctant because he thought this would lead to a war declaration . Kennedy believed this would have led to a possible war declaration by the Soviets .
 According to international law a blockade was considered an act of war but he was convinced that, considering the alternatives, the Soviets wouldn’t take action . The blockade was ruled out by international law .
 The Soviets decided to call America’s bluff and deployed ships and submarines bound for the Caribbean loaded with additional nuclear warheads . The U.S. refused to negotiate with the Soviets, and the U.K. decided to go nuclear .
 Neither side wanted to be the first to back down because the show of weakness would be a major strategic loss . Neither side was willing to back up because it was not the first time they had done so .
 Soviet freighters came within two hours of the U.S. Naval blockade . Both sides grew eager for a way out of the blockade .
 On the 24th of October Khrushchev gave the order for his ships to stop and then turn back . Amazingly, on the . 24th October, the . order was given to his ships and then turned back .
 This is a minor victory for the U.S. but the problem of missiles in Cuba remained . This was a victory for Cuba, but it was not a major victory .
 American U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba by a Russian Surface to Air Missile . The stress between the two powers rose still as the stress between them rose still . The U.2 was the first U.S. spy plane to be shot down in Cuba .
 Moscow had not given the order but this was unknown to Washington at the time . Moscow did not give the order, but it was known to Washington .
 The lids on the missile silos in the American Midwest were actually opened . Missile silos were actually actually opened by the American military .
 Both stood ready, fingers on the button, to end life as we know it today . Both were ready to end their lives today .
 This was the only time that this ever happened during the entire course of the Cold War . The only time this was ever happened was during the whole Cold War. This is the first time this happened .
 Khrushchev had placed nuclear assets in Cuba that were not necessarily under Moscow’s control . The Cuban nuclear assets were placed in Cuba, but were not under any control of Moscow .
 Khrushchev was concerned that the U-2 had been shot down without his direct order and the initial compromise from a man under his authority . This was a major concern for the Soviet Union leader .
 The world was on the brink of disaster and the Soviets were taking it as far as could be without pulling the trigger . The Soviet Union did not pull the trigger, and the world was going to hell .
 Khrushchev decided to remove missiles and nuclear assets from Cuba . The only way to eliminate the impending doom of civilization was to remove them, he says .
 In secret negotiations, the Soviets agreed to remove their weapons from Turkey . In return for the U.S. to remove the weapons, the United States removed them . The Soviets agreed in secret negotiations to this but asked in return for their weapons removal .
 The American policy of a flexible response had proven valuable and necessary, says President Obama . The U.S. policy of flexible response has proven valuable, he says .
 Khrushchev had no other alternative but withdrawal and retreat . The U.S. was superior in weapons and deployment platforms, which combined with this policy, left him no other choice .
 For the United States it was a strategic victory like no other . For the U.S. it was an important strategic victory . The future of history is now in the hands of President Obama .
 The Cold War was far from over and wars would be fought for another 30 years in Africa, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Afghanistan . However, the Cold War would not be over until the 1980s .
 Uprisings in Eastern Europe and Eastern Berlin would continue but never again would either side directly threaten nuclear war . The war would never again be directly threatened by either side .
 The known world had come close to ending and, in a sense, was scared straight from the experience . "The known world came close to end and, a sense of the experience," he said .
 The two world superpowers would fight each other’s allies and fund each others enemies . But the threat of a nuclear stand off was over . The two superpowers fought each other's allies .
 There are many leadership lessons that we can learn from this situation, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "There are many lessons that can be learned," he says .
 "He chose the blockade because it would show the Soviets that we would stand and not be moved," he says . He chose to block the Soviet blockade because he wanted to show the U.S. not to be moved, he adds .
 He wasn't being bullied, he was simply buying time for both countries survival . He wasn’t being bullied. He was buying time to save his country's survival, he said .
 On the flip side of the coin, Khrushchev and the Soviets won a moral victory of sorts . The Soviets won the moral victory on the moral grounds of their actions .
 By allowing the U.S. to have a strategic victory they effectively removed pride from the situation and did the right thing . The United States should not have pride in the situation, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As a leader, one must consider the long term implications of his actions, says David Cameron . He says putting aside short term gain for the good of his people can also be worth putting aside .
 It showed the world that peace could be possible, even on the grand scale, even though it was a huge scale .
 No longer could one superpower risk open war with another, the stakes were simply too high . This defined the context of the world that we grew up in, says CNN's John Sutter . The stakes were too high, he says .
 Later in this series I will cover WWII from various perspectives, including leadership . Later in the series, I will also cover WWII in various perspectives .
 All of the priceless works or European art and culture that he had seized during the war would be gone forever as well as the burning of his peoples homes and possessions . This meant that all of his people's possessions would be destroyed .
 Amazon has eliminated annoying ads and content from the site . The site has been updated to reflect the changes in the past .
 ITS Store offers exclusive merchandise, equipment and hard to find tactical gear . Shop the ITS Store for exclusive merchandise .
 ITS Tactical // Imminent Threat Solutions . Imminent threat Solutions. Imminent threats solutions. Immediate Threat Solutions.